Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 25 February 2010 .
Statements by the President
I have several things to say at the beginning of the session .
In opening this plenary session of the European Parliament , once again I have to inform you of several tragic natural disasters which have occurred in recent days .
Today , there was an earthquake in Turkey in which at least 57 people died .
Last week , there was also an earthquake in Chile , which claimed nearly 300 victims , and storms raging across Europe caused the deaths of over 60 people , most of whom were citizens of France .
Furthermore , we should not forget Haiti , where the latest toll of victims of the earthquake in January is now in excess of 300 000 people .
In all these cases , I have sent condolences and expressions of sympathy , on behalf of the European Parliament , to the victims ' families .
Every unexpected and premature death is , more than anything , a tragedy for the families concerned , but when victims are numbered in tens or hundreds of thousands , it is also a tragedy for entire nations and the whole world .
Let us join in solidarity with the families and also send expressions of solidarity to the countries which have been hit by such a tragedy .
Thursday , 11 March marks the 20th anniversary of the restoration of Lithuanian independence .
Lithuania was the first country of the Soviet bloc to declare independence from the USSR .
Among the Lithuanian Members of the European Parliament , there are four signatories of the declaration of independence of 1990 .
Congratulations to our fellow Members from Lithuania .
( Applause )
Also , on 11 March 1990 , the Congress of Estonia , a democratic , provisional parliament , adopted a declaration of reestablishment of the state after 50 years of Soviet occupation .
We also congratulate our fellow Members from Estonia .
( Applause )
Wednesday , 10 March marks the 51st anniversary of the popular uprising in Tibet .
As a result of the uprising , the Dalai Lama and 80 000 Tibetans had to leave their country .
We continue to hope , and we regularly appeal to the authorities of the People 's Republic of China , to change their attitude to the Tibetan nation and to begin a fruitful dialogue with its representatives .
( Applause )


In relation to remarks made by Mr Farage during the last plenary mini-session and pursuant to Rule 153 ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have spoken to Mr Farage and have decided to penalise him by withholding his daily subsistence allowance for a period of 10 days .
( Applause )
I would also like to inform you about something else , about another theft which has taken place .
The theft was suffered by a Member in the proximity of the European Parliament 's premises .
For quite some time now , I have been engaged in talks with representatives of the authorities in Brussels , and also with the Belgian authorities .
Our fellow Member , Mrs Durant , is acting as go-between in these talks , because she knows the situation in Brussels and in Belgium very well .
Our current plan , together with the Commission and the European Council , is that we want to create a special zone around the premises of all three institutions , in which security will be provided not only by the authorities in Brussels , but also by the Belgian Government and the central authorities in Belgium .
Intensive talks are under way on this matter .
Meetings were held about it last week , straight after the theft , and more will be held in the next few days .
An official meeting with the police has been arranged for 22 March . I would also like to tell you that we are working very hard to improve security around the premises of the European Parliament , as well as other European institutions , not just Parliament .
We are treating this as a matter which concerns us all .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft agenda drawn up on Thursday , 4 March 2010 by the Conference of Presidents pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Monday :
No changes .
Tuesday :
No changes .
Wednesday :
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left have made a request to add a Commission statement on the ' Amflora ' variety of genetically modified potato .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have once again moved for the subject of the licensing of the genetically modified potato Amflora to be put on the agenda for various reasons .
After the Commissioner for Health became responsible for the licensing of genetically modified organisms , in my opinion , citizens thought that we would now approach the licensing of such GMOs with greater care .
The opposite is the case .
So soon after the Commission took office , I consider it a scandal that by licensing the potato , the Commissioner for Health has explicitly ignored the concerns of the World Health Organisation .
Moreover , in the previous legislative period , time and again , there was great disagreement between the Council and the Commission on the licensing procedures , because many Member States did not agree with the licensing offensive that Commission President Barroso himself promoted .
We had agreed to develop another prudent procedure for licensing .
Where is this procedure now ?
Since the majority of citizens are against these genetically modified organisms , we have a duty to hold a debate this week on this licensing and the offensive that is perhaps still trundling towards us .
( The President cut off the speaker )
I would like to ask for a roll-call vote on this .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , apart from any possible assessments by individual Members or political groups , I believe it is appropriate that we should be able to deliver an opinion on such an important issue .
We often discuss issues that are a very long way from the European Union , although they are relevant .
This is an issue that concerns us and concerns our voters , and for that reason , I believe we should put it on the agenda .
( DE ) Mr President , I share the concerns of my fellow Member , Mrs Harms , and in many Member States , we are having an extremely heated debate on this issue .
For that reason , as early as last week in the Conference of Presidents , I said what I would like to repeat now ; there is no point in having a rushed debate now without a resolution , which then fails again .
It makes much more sense to call on the competent committee to appoint a rapporteur to deal with the process and also the technical background of the approval procedure .
The approval of the Commission has an eight-year lead time .
Eight years was spent on this issue .
The decision was made in the Commission on the basis of European law with decision by majority .
The question we must now consider is whether decisions with such a scope should be subject to a right to opt-out by Parliament and whether , in the end , there is the opportunity for Parliament to retract such a far-reaching decision .
For this reason , a rapporteur should be appointed to check the mechanisms and , if necessary , present a report , with the goal of reaching a legislative majority in Parliament which forces the Commission to table a legislative proposal within a year on the basis of our interinstitutional agreement .
I consider this far better than such a rushed debate .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Please keep to the rules .
In accordance with the Rules of Procedure , these are one-minute statements , and this applies both to statements in support of the request and to statements against .
Please do not speak for longer , because this disrupts the order of business and contravenes the Rules of Procedure .
Please remember this .
I have received a request from the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , and also from Mrs Harms , for a roll-call vote .
We will take the vote now .
( Parliament rejected the request )
( The order of business was thus established )
International Women 's Day
The next item is the statement by the President on International Women 's Day .
Women 's Day in Europe is , today , a different day from the one we remember , at least in Central and Eastern Europe .
Nowadays , it is not only a matter of giving flowers to women we know .
Today , Women 's Day is also an opportunity for important debates on equality , support for mothers in families with many children and ending violence against women .
The European Parliament is actively involved in these debates .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality is an extremely important committee .
In November 2009 , we adopted a resolution on the elimination of violence against women in which we call on the European Commission and Member States to establish consistent programmes of action against this form of violence .
It is our ambition that the European Union will be able to set an example to the whole world in this matter .
Women deserve more , today , because we do want , after all , to save Europe from demographic collapse , but this must not be done at the expense of women .
Mothers of three or four children must have the possibility of employment and promotion on the same principles as men .
Widely available nurseries and kindergartens , as well as jobs , are only one of the ways of achieving this objective .
On the other hand , however , mothers who wish to remain at home with their children should also have the opportunity to do this , for example , by a suitable system of taxation based on the whole family , and not only on the two spouses .
Our objective is to achieve full equality where this is possible and where this is essential , in other words - everywhere .
Discrimination at work and in society must become history .
In the European Union , women and men are of equal dignity and have equal rights , and defence of these rights is a job for us , too , for the European Parliament .
My wish for all ladies present in the European Parliament is that every day could be their day , so that they would never feel victims of discrimination , and that there would be more and more of you ladies and fellow Members in the European Parliament .
Mr President , as you have said , today is International Women 's Day .
It is the hundredth anniversary of that occasion .
Is this cause for celebration ?
We have achieved a great deal , but we still have a long way to go ; and we can only do this if all of us - women and men - work together .
This year , one theme of International Women 's Day is women 's solidarity and assertiveness the world over : an important theme at a time of economic crisis .
It provides guidance for men and women to work together towards a better future for ourselves and our children , as only together can we ensure that women and men are equal not only before the law but also in their day-to-day lives and in economic and social life .
After all , women make up approximately 50 % of the world 's population but their earnings account for only 10 % of worldwide income .
Only 5 % of world leaders are women .
Women account for 75 % of the world 's poor .
This can , and must , be greatly improved .
Yet this is not just about poverty .
Looking at other parts of the world , in particular - large parts of Asia , for example - boys are more highly regarded than girls ; they yield more for the family .
This results in daughters being abandoned and even female foetuses being aborted .
Sadly , trafficking in women is also a familiar and frequent phenomenon .
In Africa , many young women and girls are victims of war and rape .
There are many underlying cultural causes and these too must be accorded great importance if the position of women is to be improved .
Women and girls suffer oppression , particularly in Muslim countries , where there are underlying religious causes .
That is why it is important that we , the European Union , also highlight equality between girls and boys and between men and women in our aid programmes and our international relations .
Therefore , this is about not only poverty reduction but also the dismantling of cultural prejudices .
Herein lies an important task for the High Representative , Commission Vice-President Ashton , and also for Commissioner Georgieva .
Yet there is also a great deal of work still to be done closer to home , and indeed even in our group , particularly with the support of our Chair , Mr Daul .
I should like to devote my closing remark to ourselves here in the European Union .
It all starts at a young age , during a child 's education , and access to education is still not guaranteed for girls in Europe .
The access rate should be 100 % in our civilisation .
This should be an important objective of the new EU 2020 strategy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a society in which men and women do not have equal rights in work and life is not a democratic and humane society .
The basic prerequisite for justice in society is that it is administered regardless of a person 's gender .
That is something we men take for granted , not so women , even in Central European societies , not by a long shot .
That is seen most clearly in one of the greatest scandals which I believe we must rid ourselves of as soon as possible .
As Parliament , we could make a significant contribution to this .
Really , how can a society rightly maintain it is equal if men and women receive different pay for the same work in the same place ?
Nowhere is the discrimination of women in this society more frequently accepted without comment than in places of work , where women do the same work as men , to some extent , under far more extreme living conditions , and receive largely 30 % or 40 % less pay for it .
We must rid the EU of this shame .
If we here in Europe are to send out a message on International Women 's Day , let it be equal pay for equal work in the same workplace , for both men and women .
That is a central requirement of social justice .
( Applause )
We have acknowledged that the Commission is making an effort .
We can see that today , the European Charter on Women 's Rights is about to get off the ground .
That is good and we welcome it .
However , we are a little disappointed and I ask you to pass this on to Mrs Reding and Mr Barroso .
We would have liked this launch to have been more than a formal statement ; we would also have liked the promise that was originally made to have been kept , namely that Parliament will be involved and that the agencies of civil society must be involved .
Now this has not happened .
We can still make up for this .
However , we would appreciate it if there was more than simply a formal statement and the institutions cooperated to help rectify the particular example that I have just mentioned .
My fellow Member , Mrs Wortmann-Kool , has mentioned other examples .
On International Women 's Day , there is one thing we Europeans must all acknowledge : in our continent , we still have not achieved equal rights , but the dramatic injustice towards women in other parts of the world , ranging from genital mutilation to the compulsory wearing of the veil , all these basic fundamental rights that women and , above all , girls worldwide are deprived of , should not only concern us on 8 March .
For that reason , I would like to offer my thanks to the human rights experts in Parliament .
Here , every Thursday afternoon during the Strasbourg week , we discuss , among other matters , human rights violations towards women .
On International Women 's Day , we should also say that these debates on Thursday afternoon deserve at least the sort of attendance that we have now in plenary .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I am going to start by saying that this was a speech I did not expect to be making until a few moments ago , but it is important that we celebrate International Women 's Day , and especially this one , some 100 years since this celebration was first proposed .
It should be a day , yes , to celebrate how far women have come , but , yes , also to raise awareness about how much further we still have to travel in terms of equality .
Mr President , you exhorted that there should be more women in this Parliament .
The achievements are good but they are still not good enough .
If I look at Parliament in my own country , some estimates say it will take us 200 years to reach parity at the current rate of progress , so we are not going fast enough to really achieve proper equality .
The other issue that this Parliament is working on this week is human trafficking and violence against women .
Last week , I visited an exhibition in my constituency at home with an exhibition of paintings and photographs of women who had been trafficked from a country next to our Union - Moldova - into our Union .
Some estimates say that women - and , indeed , men - are being trafficked at a rate as high in numbers as was comparable with the whole of the African slave trade in 350 years , but women are the main victims .
If we , as a European community , cannot do something about this and deal with the women who are the victims of that trade , then it would be a poor thing if we do not make progress on this day .
The other issue we should concentrate on are the many women 's health issues that have to be addressed and which are not given the time and energy that they should be .
Much has been achieved , much can be celebrated , but there is very much more to do .
International Women 's Day , 8 March .
I have celebrated this day for as long as I can remember , like my mother and grandmother before me .
On 8 March , I sometimes become disheartened thinking of everything that must still be done for men and women to enjoy genuine equality of opportunity .
There are so many women for whom violence is a day-to-day reality , so many women living in poverty , so many women having to single-handedly care for their children and parents ; and so few women making it to the top in business , academia and politics .
Yet then , I think of the generation of my grandmother , who had to stop work when she got married and had absolutely no educational opportunities , and that of my mother , who fought very hard to have a say in what happened to her own body , and I see how far we have come in the space of one century ; I see that change really is possible .
We need to do our best now , however , if we are to make the world a better place in the near future .
The European Union can make an important contribution , but only if it moves beyond fine words .
The fight for equal rights has already been burdened by far too many fine words for far too long , and these have been joined by several more .
On Friday , the Commission presented a Charter of Women 's Rights containing very many fine words .
I harbour a very healthy scepticism about its implementation .
This scepticism is reinforced by the fact that the European Parliament and non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) were not consulted , as Mr Schulz has already said .
Since this is Commissioner Reding 's first act as the Commissioner responsible for equal opportunities , however , I am more than willing to give her the benefit of the doubt .
The kind of initiatives with which she accompanies her fine words are what counts .
If , in this period , she presents us with a directive to combat violence against women , a directive on paternity leave , strong measures to combat discrimination against women , strong measures to increase the female employment rate - for example , by improving the mutual compatibility of working hours and school hours - and quotas for women in top jobs , at least in her own ranks of the Commission , if the Commission translates its fine words into genuine action , my colleagues in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and I will be the first to stand up and show our appreciation .
If we want to see change , we need to work together : the Commission , the Council and the left and right in this House .
Today , 8 March , is not only International Women 's Day but also my son 's birthday ; he is two years old today .
I hope with all my heart that , in 30 years ' time , he will live in a Europe where he and his wife - or husband - share child care responsibilities equally , and where women have just as much chance of becoming a professor , CEO or European Commissioner .
In the coming years , his mum will be doing her very best to achieve this , and fortunately I am not the only one .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , International Women 's Day gives us a united opportunity to focus on issues and challenges women face today - to focus on the various forms of inequality that many women experience , but also to celebrate achievements by women throughout the century .
We in the United Kingdom are especially proud to celebrate figures that have helped our nation progress in the field of women 's rights : women such as Emily Pankhurst , leader of the British Suffragettes , which won women the right to vote , Shirin Ebadi , winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1993 for her efforts in promoting human rights , especially for women , and Margaret Thatcher , the first British woman Prime Minister , elected in 1979 .
The issue of women reaching high positions and being given equal opportunities to men is just as relevant today as it was in the UK when the first female prime minister was elected .
We can provide educational opportunities and employment , but the pay gap still remains .
We can legislate against discrimination in the workplace , but we cannot legislate against the pressures of juggling work , family life and managing a home .
As a parliament , we should be working towards assisting women to have a choice in what they do .
If they choose to go into a career , they must be supported to do so on an equal playing field .
If they chose to stay at home and bring up their family , they must not be undervalued .
The phrase ' just a housewife ' needs to be outlawed .
No woman is ' just ' anything .
Each is valued for her contribution .
So , if we talk about great women achievers , I believe one group of women must head the list and in the UK , we celebrate their contribution on 14 March , that is , the mothers of the world : the women who voluntarily give up their own ambitions and contribute their life to bringing up their children .
For , by doing so correctly , they contribute towards a goal we all have - a society based on equality and tolerance , where human rights are respected , whatever your gender .
Mr President , today we are celebrating International Women 's Day and it is 15 years since the UN platform for women 's rights was established .
Halfway through the review which is now under way in New York , I and the other members of the delegation from the European Parliament can only say that women all over the world will have to content themselves with the status quo .
Despite the positive resolutions recently adopted by Parliament , the Tarabella report and the resolution on Beijing + 15 , unfortunately , the UN meeting has not yet produced any results .
The EU governments involved in the negotiations clearly have less challenging objectives on women 's rights than the European Parliament expressed in the resolutions referred to earlier .
Sometimes , it seems to me that the EU governments use the Beijing platform primarily as a means of lecturing non-EU countries about equality .
It is often easier to tell other people what to do than to produce results oneself .
Before he was elected , the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , promised to draw up a Charter of women 's rights .
Today , we have had the chance to read the Commission 's document .
I and my group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , are deeply concerned about the weakness of the content and the way in which the charter has been drawn up .
There is a major risk that it will not be worth the paper it is written on .
Parliament , the national bodies and the European voluntary organisations were not involved in and did not contribute to the charter and , of course , the citizens of Europe did not take part in the process either .
I would like to explain to Mr Barroso that it is not enough to make a declaration about common values .
What the women and the men of Europe need is a powerful document which has been developed and drawn up in collaboration with all the relevant parties .
Let this be the first draft of a Charter of women 's rights .
Use the period until the next International Women 's Day to hold debates and discussions with Parliament , the national bodies and the voluntary organisations in Europe .
When we then celebrate the next International Women 's Day , it will be clear that we have made progress .
We are working to defend women 's rights not just on 8 March , but on every day of the year .
This is what the women and the men of Europe need .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , on this day , I wish to ask all politicians and legislators to stop issuing all these demagogic laws on equality that make life more difficult for women who wish to work .
They are scaring organisations away from employing women .
Equality is not about laws : it is about behaviour .
As a working mother , in all my 30 years of professional life , I have never been recruited or promoted on anything other than my qualifications and merit , and I would be insulted if somebody gave me special treatment merely due to my chromosomes .
However , I do have specific requests for this Parliament to defend the women of this world .
I want the Spanish land-grab problem to be debated and resolved , to end the suffering of many women and men who risk demolition of their houses and cannot live in them .
Do you not think this is violence ?
I want this Parliament to stop the flow of EU funds to the regions where this enormous breach of human rights is taking place .
Do you not think this is violence ?
I want this Parliament to hear and protect those who want to communicate their concerns on structural irregularities affecting the European budget , as I did eight years ago , and ensure they do not suffer my fate .
Is this not violence ?
I want you to withhold discharge to the European Commission until the auditors clear 100 % of the budget without reservations .
This is how I wish this Parliament to honour the women and the men of Europe , those who , with their taxes , allow this European Union to exist .
( HU ) I would like to point out to my fellow Members that it is a grave mistake to talk in general about European women and the rights of women living in the European Union without taking into account the second-class position of women in Central and Eastern Europe 's post-communist new Member States .
The time has come for the EU to go on a fact-finding mission to investigate their particular lack of rights and , on the basis of the results , to remedy the existing serious discrimination among women inside Europe itself .
Allow me to mention just two areas .
Both are related to globalisation , the neoliberal economy , liberalised free trade and their drawbacks .
The first is that multinational companies as well as large , EU-registered European firms , use different standards for labour law and occupational health .
I am thinking , for instance , of large retailers , hypermarkets , such as those on both sides of the border between Austria and Hungary .
The same company applies different standards concerning breaks , lunch time and notices of termination .
They keep Eastern European , in this case Hungarian , female employees practically in slavery .
The second area , completely unexplored , is the migration of women within the European Union .
Women in a second-class position in Central and Eastern Europe , such as Hungarians , seek employment as domestic staff in the West , living as servants , as economic refugees , who often had to leave behind their children .
From the point of view of their rights and dignity , their situation is much more like that of women in Third World developing countries than that of their sisters in Western Europe , who are fellow citizens of EU Member States .
This calls for urgent redress .
I would like to give a warm welcome to Commissioner Dalli .
Welcome , Mr Dalli .
The Commissioner will now make a statement on behalf of the Commission .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am very pleased that my first attendance at the plenary session of the European Parliament takes place on this important day - 8 March , International Women 's Day .
It is also an honour for me to represent the Commission , and in particular Vice-President Reding , who will lead the Commission 's efforts to protect fundamental rights .
This is a unique opportunity to collectively celebrate the economic , political and social achievements of women , past , present and future .
In 1957 , gender equality was enshrined in the European treaties .
Since then , an impressive number of legal instruments , followed by a great number of decisions by the European Court of Justice , have created a legal arsenal at EU level .
I would like to remind you that gender equality is not only a fundamental value enshrined in the treaty , but also that gender equality policies have proven to be a driver for economic growth .
Last Friday , the President of the European Commission and Vice-President Reding renewed the Commission 's commitment to the values of gender equality by presenting a Women 's Charter .
The Women 's Charter represents the political commitment of the Commission to advance equality between women and men in five areas : equal economic independence ; equal pay for equal work and work of equal value ; equality in decision making ; dignity , integrity and an end to gender-based violence ; and gender equality beyond the Union .
The Women 's Charter will be followed , in September 2010 , by a new comprehensive strategy for equality between women and men .
This strategy will translate the principles of the Women 's Charter into concrete actions to be implemented in the next five years .
These are ambitious projects and objectives that the Commission will not be able to achieve alone .
It will need to work in close cooperation with its main partners at EU level and , in particular , with you , the European Parliament and the FEMM Committee .
International Women 's Day is an excellent opportunity to remind us all of this commitment .
That ends the speeches related not only to International Women 's Day , but also to our constant efforts at achieving equal rights for women and eliminating violence .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( EL ) Mr President , I am making the major assumption that the restoration of the public finances of a Member State of the euro area is the responsibility of the euro area itself .
However , coordinated intervention is required in order to protect the common currency against speculation .
The horrendous financial crisis in Greece and the financial imbalance in other Member States have highlighted the need for politically directed European economic governance .
In my question to the Commission on 17 February 2010 , I proposed that a European Monetary Fund be set up . I am delighted to see that Commissioner Rehn is moving in that direction .
We shall await the Commission 's integrated proposal .
( ES ) Mr President , a Spanish Central Criminal Court judge has confirmed what many of us were already aware of , namely that Hugo Chávez , the President of Venezuela , cooperates with ETA and FARC terrorists .
This proves that Mr Chávez is in cahoots with terrorists , that he gives sanctuary to murderous terrorists on Venezuelan soil , and that he helps them by bestowing official positions in the Venezuelan Government upon them .
Essentially , Mr Chávez is cooperating with ETA criminals .
As a Basque , a Spaniard and a European , I wish to denounce and condemn the appalling attitude of the dictator Hugo Chávez .
I urge the European institutions to take all necessary measures to condemn Mr Chávez and thus also condemn his policies in support of terrorists .
I would also remind Mr Rodríguez Zapatero 's government , which currently holds the rotating Presidency of the European Union , that there is no point in being friendly and wishy-washy with Mr Chávez as it has been to date .
There is no point either in displays of affection , or in friendly gestures and cooperation , because when the Spanish Government goes back on its word and humbles itself before Mr Chávez as it has done recently , this is tantamount to punishing the victims of terrorism , disdaining the Spanish justice system and thereby punishing freedom and democracy .
( ES ) Mr President , Fidel Castro and his oligarchs betrayed the ideals of the Cuban revolution long ago .
Those ideals had been shared by peoples the world over , especially the cream of international youth , whom they inspired .
At present , however , the Castro brothers ' dictatorship is characterised by a lack of compassion for political prisoners and prisoners of conscience , and for their own people .
It puts me in mind of the period when Franco was on his deathbed , because of the mistreatment of political prisoners , who were also perceived as common criminals , and because of the same obsessive disdain towards exiles .
Castro has ended up like Franco and all other enemies of freedom who become entrenched in power .
Nonetheless , we are called upon to save lives and display solidarity with those who are fighting and suffering .
That is our duty , as Europeans who are committed to democracy , freedom and human rights .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we know that the Commission and the Spanish Presidency are very much stepping up the pace of negotiations with certain Central and South American countries in order to conclude association agreements before the May summit between the European Union and Latin America .
As a Co-Vice President of EuroLat , I would like to draw Parliament 's attention to the fact that with some of these countries , there is a risk of accelerating negotiations whilst neglecting important points concerning human rights and the respect of human rights in various regions .
For example , in Colombia , assassinations of trade unionists continue to happen practically on a daily basis .
In Honduras , with whom we are negotiating an agreement , a government remains in place that is simply the product of a military coup d 'état which took place last year .
In Guatemala , there are similar problems , not relating to human rights but concerning certain aspects of the agreements , which are being overlooked .
I believe it is important that the Commission and the Presidency proceed with more caution .
Mr President , it being International Women 's Day , I wanted to raise a particular female health issue which persistently remains a Cinderella issue .
I stood here two , maybe three years ago talking about a silent , unseen , painful and debilitating female illness - endometriosis : an illness which destroys lives , families and fertility ; you see , some women do not even have the chance to be mothers .
Maybe it is because it is about women 's menstruation that we do not want to talk about it ; do not even want to name it .
So I will say it again - endometriosis .
It still has no known cause , still no known cure and still affects up to one in every ten women and rising .
This week is also Endometriosis Awareness Week across Europe .
So , when are we going to take those women , their families and their sufferings seriously ?
It is good that you are here , Commissioner , to hear this ; perhaps proper dedicated funding - and , I hope , before next year .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you touched on the subject of storm Xynthia , which has just struck Western Europe causing the deaths of almost 60 people and considerable material damage .
I am extremely sad today , but also angry because this human catastrophe could have been avoided ; at the least , its impacts could have been limited .
Until recently in France and throughout Europe today , coastal areas and flood zones are being developed in spite of and in violation of current European , and indeed national , legislation .
These are often Natura 2000 sites , and their protection from urbanisation is essential to limit the effects of similar natural events .
It is up to us to demonstrate greater accountability , to make sure that Community regulations - in particular , the Birds Directive and the Habitats Directive - are strictly applied by Member States , and to make the Structural Funds conditional on the requirements of sustainability , safety and biodiversity .
The EU 2020 strategy is a unique opportunity to redefine our relationship with the environment .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , important Czech media reported last week that the German transport police have introduced much stricter checks for Czech drivers on the German side of the border .
According to the reports , the checks are more frequent and substantially more thorough .
According to witnesses , the situation is made worse by the fact that some people even have to provide urine samples during the checks , under conditions that are tantamount to an affront to human dignity .
It is not , therefore , a matter of routine roadside checks combined with the inspection of travel documents or documents relating to the technical condition or origin of the vehicle .
Czech citizens travelling freely within the Schengen area should not be considered as second class citizens .
They are fully-fledged , equal and sovereign citizens of a Member State of the European Union and they must be treated as such .
Mr President , I would like to ask you to pass this information on to the relevant authorities so that they can examine it properly and arrange the necessary remedy .
Mr President , European Obesity Day is an initiative which brings together medical , patients ' and political communities to support overweight and obese European citizens .
Its objective is to establish 22 May as the annual European Obesity Day , raise awareness of the need for action at European level and ensure that the voices of overweight and obese patients are heard .
Obesity is a disease , not a problem .
Each Member State should face the challenge and provide efficient support to this population group .
According to the World Health Organisation , the statistics on obesity in the whole of Europe - not just the EU - are staggering , reaching epidemic proportions .
If no action is taken , there will be an estimated 150 million obese adults - 20 % of the population - and 15 million obese children and adolescents - 10 % of the population - in the region by 2020 .
We must therefore strengthen the voice of obese and overweight patients .
( PT ) Mr President , today we celebrate the centenary of the declaration of International Women 's Day , which has become a symbol of a revolutionary fight .
On a worldwide day of action by women for their rights and against all forms of discrimination , I salute all women but especially all those that are still victims of discrimination , inequality and various kinds of violence .
At this time , it is also important to stress the topicality of this fight for equality in law and in life , considering that the crisis of capitalism has specific consequences in the lives of women , as the main victims of insecure and underpaid jobs , and of poverty !
Most of the 85 million people living in poverty within the European Union are women .
Therefore , as we celebrate this day and we urge all women not to abandon their dreams , we reiterate the importance of the fight against injustices and discrimination , opening new horizons for a better life in equality .
Mr President , I would like to bring to your attention the fact that now we are actually going to have a referendum in Wales .
Yes , believe it or not , a referendum .
We were denied one on the Constitution , we were denied one on the Lisbon Treaty , but we are to have one in Wales on further powers for the Welsh Assembly .
Now that is the issue at stake , but there is a sting in the tail .
All the political parties in Wales - Labour , Plaid Cymru , Liberal Democrats and Conservatives - are supporting this and they are wishing for more powers .
Well , I have got news for them : I do not .
They are treating people in Wales like fools .
At a time now , when independence will be next on the agenda , we could end up having as many as 80 Assembly Members .
In Wales , we have care homes under threat , we have schools under threat of closure , our roads are like a Third World country , and yet our political class in Cardiff Bay , as over here , are determined to push ahead with this mad idea .
I welcome the fact that there is a referendum , but I hope the good people of Wales stand up and vote ' no ' .
( SK ) Allow me to express my deep sympathy and solidarity with the victims of the natural disaster in Madeira .
The emergency situation demands flexible action , to satisfy the basic needs of the people quickly and to provide material aid as well as to restore rapidly the key infrastructure that has been damaged .
I hope the Portuguese authorities will assess the amount of damage as soon as possible and also that no formal administrative obstacles will be placed in the way of providing financial assistance from the European Union Solidarity Fund .
Since the mobilisation of resources from the Solidarity Fund requires the European Parliament 's consent , I trust Parliament will set an example by responding promptly and by passing a resolution along this line .
Allow me to express still one more sentence of solidarity regarding the catastrophe caused in Western France by the recent torrential rains in Vendée .
Mr President , here in the European Parliament , we recently adopted a resolution on Ukraine in which we questioned the granting by the former President of Ukraine of a high state award to Stepan Bandera , a leader of the struggle for the country 's independence .
This paragraph in our resolution has attracted much criticism in western Ukraine .
I would like to say that this resolution did not question Bandera 's goal of an independent Ukraine .
Indeed , the resolution supported the cause of a strong , united and free Ukraine , which has the full backing of the European Union and my native Poland , but the resolution did suggest regret that the award was given with little regard to the tragic circumstances of the wartime struggle for an independent Ukraine .
This saw ethnic cleansing carried out also in the name of Bandera .
My view is that what was missing from the award given to Bandera was an expression of regret for innocent victims of the struggle .
Only then could it have fully served the goal of an independent Ukraine in peace with its neighbours . The award should have been accompanied by an effort for reconciliation with the families .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) Slovakia 's language law has been the object of numerous critical comments lately .
I would now draw your attention to the opinion of the European Commission 's Legal Service .
It states that the language law and its implementing regulations are not , in their present form , compatible with fundamental rights and the pertinent documents of the Council of Europe , or even with Slovakia 's law for the protection of minorities .
The opinion deplores the lack of reasonableness and proportionality in the language requirements .
It considers that the law endangers the free movement of workers , one of the greatest achievements of European integration , and is also a threat to the functioning of the European Union 's integrated internal market In addition , the amended language law is declared by the Legal Service to contravene the Audiovisual Media Services Directive as well as Article 56 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , which addresses the freedom to provide services .
The report states that the section on health institutions could , in practice , lead to discrimination , and that as far as fundamental rights are concerned , the rules protect the State 's interests far more than the rights of individuals .
I request that the Commission takes the necessary steps to ensure that Community law continues to prevail without fail .
( RO ) I must mention the subject of women 's involvement in the labour market .
Data from Eurostat confirms an encouraging trend .
While in the 1970s , women did not even account for 30 % of the European labour market , in 2008 , this figure reached 43 % , and the global crisis has pushed it up to roughly 50 % .
Romania , too , is part of this trend , as a result of the economic crisis which has hit the business sectors in which men are predominantly employed .
However , wage discrimination between women and men exists on the labour market .
This is why it is important for the legislative package envisaged by the Commission to include targets relating to the elimination of these gender pay gaps , in order to encourage greater participation by women in the labour market .
This legislative package must also feature in the European Union 's 2020 strategy .
( DE ) Mr President , recent events in Turkey have once again confirmed that there are still insufficient guarantees for the rights of trade unions as well as workers .
For more than two months , 12 000 employees of the now privatised former state tobacco monopoly , Tekel , fought mass redundancies , short-time work and the loss of the social rights they had won .
Several times during the strike , President Erdoğan threatened to have the protest camps in Ankara cleared by the police .
At the start of the strike , police attacked workers with tear gas and water cannon .
I would like to ask you to call on the Turkish authorities to treat trade unions as social partners with equal rights and to issue legislative provisions that guarantee the unconditional protection of trade union rights .
The rights must be tailored to EU standards and the ILO Conventions .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , recently , there has been yet another environmental disaster in Italy , on the River Lambro and the River Po .
Also recently , the Court of Justice in Luxembourg condemned Italy for endangering public health with their illegal waste disposal and their inability to control the collection of waste in Campania .
An increase in cases of leukaemia has been reported recently in Taranto through the Ilva steelworks , as well asbestos removal in schools in Crotone and dioxins in Campania .
It is an ongoing environmental disaster .
I strongly ask the Commission what it intends to do to ensure that the Italian Government falls in line with standards of the European Union directives , particularly with regard to the recent ruling by the Court of Justice , which strongly condemned Italy for not being able to dispose of waste in Campania .
For many weeks and months , the city of Naples was a laughing stock all over the world .
( FR ) Mr President , the London Conference on Afghanistan has led to panic sweeping through the heart of Afghan society , and women are particularly afraid .
The peace plan agreed on by 70 countries includes a fund to help reintegrate the Taliban and a Loya Jirga - peace council - must take place within the coming months in order for this reconciliation to be put into effect .
Women do not want to and must not pay the price for this reconciliation .
The Taliban are still demanding the suppression of women 's rights and the return of Sharia .
It is to be feared that the Loya Jirga will modify the Constitution and that the articles protecting women 's rights will disappear ; in particular , Article 22 of Chapter 2 .
Today , 8 March 2010 , I solemnly request that the European Union act as guarantor of the future of Afghanistan 's women , as the re-emergence of the most femicidal regime in history cannot be countenanced .
( MT ) The diplomatic incident between Switzerland and Libya has escalated and is having very serious consequences for many European Union citizens who want to travel to Libya but who are being denied entry .
In particular , adverse consequences are being suffered by workers who earn their living in Libya , as well as European investors who are being prevented from sending their workers there .
In the meantime , workers who are already in Libya are trying to remain there for as long as possible in order to cover for those who still cannot enter Libya .
The European Union has nothing to do with this incident and has found itself hostage to an issue between two third countries .
I therefore appeal to the European Union to take all possible measures to solve this issue as soon as possible .
( ES ) Mr President , the government of Spain has asked the government of Venezuela for an explanation following a court ruling referring to alleged cooperation between the government of Venezuela and ETA .
Mr Iturgaiz should update his information , because on Saturday , the government of Venezuela and the government of Spain issued a joint communication regarding this matter .
In the communication , both governments reaffirmed their intention to cooperate fully and work together to combat terrorism .
We should all rejoice at this intention and congratulate the government of Venezuela on the desire it has expressed to cooperate with the government of Spain in combating terrorism and ETA , instead of sending out inflammatory messages or attempting to derive political capital from as serious an issue as terrorism .
I believe it is important to respect the independence of the judiciary , diplomatic relations and , above all , cooperation between states as we strive to continue the vital struggle against terrorism .
( SV ) Mr President , on Saturday , the people of Iceland said a resounding no to the Icesave agreement .
Only a week ago , the Commission recommended that the EU should begin membership negotiations with Iceland .
It is true that the finance ministers in London and The Hague have right on their side , but nevertheless they also have a significant responsibility .
Those consumers who were unwise enough to invest in Icesave also have a right to some compensation for their losses .
However , the claims must be reasonable and proportional .
We now need new negotiations with the governments in London and The Hague .
The Icelanders must be made to feel welcome in the EU , but , of course , they will never vote in favour of EU membership if the finance ministers in London and The Hague are allowed to determine Iceland 's fate .
The British and Dutch treasuries must not be permitted to control the European Union .
It is time for the EU to take action and to show solidarity with the Icelanders .
I would like to quote from the Hávamál , the words of Odin the High One from the Poetic Edda : ( The speaker speaks Icelandic )
That is Icelandic : ' We have to solve the problems together ' .
( FR ) Mr President , during the night of 27 to 28 February , storm Xynthia hit western France particularly hard , claiming many lives .
Naturally , our thoughts are with the victims and all those who mobilised to help them .
We are calling very clearly for the European Commission to make the Solidarity Fund available quickly in order to help the most affected people .
However , we must also learn lessons from this tragedy .
How is it possible that there are between five and six million people in France living in flood zones ?
There is obviously pressure from the property lobby , but it is also true that a few months ago , President Sarkozy was calling for construction in flood zones to be permitted .
Responsibilities therefore lie with politicians .
We are calling for all European cofinancing linked to reconstruction and restoration to be conditional on respect for the law : coastal law and prevention plans relating to flood risk .
Naturally , we are also asking once again that we show swift support for all the worst affected sectors , in particular shellfish farming .
Mr President , Buckfast Abbey has been producing fortified wine in Devon , in my constituency , since 1890 .
Unfortunately , this wine has now come under attack from some Labour Party politicians .
They would rather blame one alcoholic product for an increase in antisocial behaviour than accept that their social policies have failed .
Buckfast wine should , apparently , be banned because it contains both alcohol and caffeine .
If that happens , what happens next ?
Will young people be prohibited from mixing Red Bull with vodka ?
Will Irish coffee be banned ?
How will this be policed ?
This is the nanny state gone mad .
Calling for one product to be banned will not solve the problem of irresponsible drinking .
We should trust consumers to enjoy whatever drinks they choose .
The majority should not be punished for the actions of the ignorant few .
Do people honestly think that , if Buckfast was banned , the hooligans who currently drink it to excess would start drinking tea ?
( PT ) Mr President , one or two years ago , when the euro was strong , the Wall Street Journal was betting on its failure and explained how it might happen .
The economies of the euro were very diverse , it said .
It would only take the most vulnerable to fail .
That is what happened and now everybody is complaining about foreign speculators .
It would be better , however , if they complained about themselves , if they complained about the European leaders .
Nobody forced us to form a monetary union without political union and without social cohesion .
Likewise , nobody forced us to hesitate and falter when the so-called ' peripheral ' economies come under attack .
Let us be very clear about one thing : there is no such thing as peripheral economies .
When a euro economy is under attack , it is the euro that is under attack .
It is the Union that is under attack and it should respond in solidarity ; the same solidarity that was valuable for Eastern Europe and that was valuable for Germany in its reunification .
If not out of solidarity today , it will be out of self-interest later , given the size of these markets and the size of their debts and the exposure of Central European banks to them . It would be better if we acted out of solidarity .
Mr President , the EU 's ' harmonise everything ' policy creates many casualties , not least the Instrument Meteorological Conditions ( IMC ) rating for private pilots in the UK .
This is a vital safety rating that enables holders to fly on instruments in cloud and poor visibility , which is not permitted by the private pilot 's licence .
It is unique to the UK because of our capricious weather conditions , and it also has a very good safety record .
In developing a harmonised European pilot 's licence , the European Aviation Safety Agency is about to wipe out the IMC rating , leaving many private pilots unable to fly unless they can guarantee cloudless skies for the entirety of their trip .
This is a bit like guaranteeing that England will win the World Cup on a penalty shootout .
After losing visual perspective , an untrained pilot has about 50 seconds to regain it before losing control of his aircraft .
Therefore , the abolition of the IMC rating is a serious threat to the safety and future of private flying .
The European Aviation Safety Agency must think again .
This is yet another example of sensible , practical British law being subordinated to over-the-top and expensive EU legislation .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one of the Millennium Goals is the halving of world poverty .
The Commission declared 2010 European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
Sixteen per cent of Europeans - that is 79 million people - live below the poverty line .
Seventy-nine million Europeans have to make ends meet on only 60 % of the average income of their respective countries .
If you are poor , you lose the opportunity to contribute to large parts of civil society .
If you are poor , you suffer .
The strategies for the 2010 European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion must have an impact , even during the economic crisis .
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have taken the floor to highlight and condemn implementation of the Spanish Government 's Law on the Coastline , in particular , its effects on the island of Formentera .
Formentera is one of the Balearic Islands .
It is 19 kilometres long and has a perimeter of 69 kilometres .
The implementation of this law will be positive in areas devastated by urban development .
It will not , however , be beneficial for the island of Formentera , because it requires the elimination of most of the island 's tourist facilities , which means small family businesses will be seized .
These facilities are the island 's livelihood and have been legally established for between 30 and 40 years .
By way of example , I could mention the Hotel Rocabella , which was the first hotel on the island , or the bar and restaurant known as the Blue Bar , which is internationally renowned and has helped to promote the island abroad .
Seventy per cent of these facilities would be affected by the implementation of the aforementioned law , despite having been established legally when they were set up .
All this law would do would be to permit seizure .
We therefore call for a fair demarcation system for the island of Formentera .
I call on the Spanish Government to undertake a new demarcation , respecting private property , in line with the many rulings on the subject by the Court of Human Rights at Strasbourg .
Never again should a law like this one with retroactive effect be drawn up .
It is causing a great deal of damage .
In particular , it should be borne in mind that all these facilities were built with respect for the environment .
Furthermore , the coast is protected under national and local legislation .
It is not possible to build within 300 metres of the coast or to increase the amount of hotel accommodation .
Mr President , the reply received recently by President Buzek from Prime Minister Netanyahu justifying his refusal to allow this Parliament 's delegation to enter Gaza last December requires a robust response .
He is free to object to our meetings with Palestinians in Gaza and East Jerusalem , but he has no right to prevent them - nor , indeed , to interfere with this Parliament 's democratic rights .
High Representative Ashton must pursue her intention vigorously to visit Gaza ; she must press Israel to end the siege and the humanitarian crisis which Goldstone has described as illegal collective punishment of the population .
Finally , I want to welcome the agreement on proximity talks , but I am seriously worried that escalating tensions around religious sites in East Jerusalem and Hebron could destroy the possibility of progress .
I believe High Representative Ashton should act to de-escalate those tensions .
Mr President , as the President of Parliament kindly reminded us , on 11 March , Lithuania and Estonia mark 20 years since the passing of two fundamental legal acts .
As the Lithuanian Supreme Council adopted a declaration of independence , in Tallinn , the first session of the Congress of Estonia passed a declaration on restoring the legal state power in that still Soviet-occupied state .
The Congress of Estonia presented a unique democratic alternative to the existing Soviet institutions .
Elected by 90 % of newly registered Estonian citizens , it united the absolute majority of Estonians , represented by almost 30 political parties and movements , in a quest to restore real independence and a nation state .
This quest was successful largely also thanks to the solidarity of Europe .
Mr President , you are staying so much in line that I think that , for these one-minute speeches , at least today on International Women 's Day , Parliament should have made a gesture of generosity to women .
( RO ) I would like to draw your attention today to a number of cases of discrimination against Romanians in Europe which , unfortunately , are steadily on the increase lately .
Just very recently , the spokesman for the Copenhagen police made some racist and xenophobic statements against Romanians , while the Danish press is branding a whole nation for the crime apparently committed by a Romanian immigrant .
At the start of this year , a 13-year-old Romanian girl in Italy committed suicide , leaving behind a shocking statement about the discrimination she was subjected to by schoolmates .
You , too , may have seen recently posters displayed on the trains of the French national railway , SNCF , which were asking customers to report any acts committed by Romanians to the SNCF 's national security agency .
I believe that you will all agree with me that any person who breaks the law must pay .
However , branding a whole nation like this is unacceptable .
Indeed , the cases I have told you about here illustrate the deterioration in the climate of interethnic coexistence in countries with a tradition of democracy .
These are displays of behaviour which are incompatible with the principles forming the foundation of the European Union and seriously spoil the European Community spirit , revealing the existence of a disgraceful iron curtain between the EU 's citizens .
( GA ) Mr President , I have a few words to say on the Atlantic Strategy .
Over the past weeks and months , I have listened with interest and indeed approval to the discussions regarding the Danube Strategy and the Baltic Strategy , but never a word did I hear about an Atlantic Strategy .
I think there is great room here for development as well .
The 2020 strategy has outlined very clearly that no country can go it alone , and certainly countries along the Atlantic seaboard such as Ireland , Great Britain , France , Portugal and Spain can make an awful lot of progress in many areas , particularly offshore energy , marine research , fishing , maritime and naval construction , ports and biodiversity .
I would call on the Spanish Presidency to make this a priority in the coming months .
( GA ) If they succeed in doing that , they will have accomplished something great by the time the term of their Presidency is over .
( PT ) In the last three months , six very serious sea accidents have occurred in Portugal , in which 13 fishermen have lost their lives .
In eight cases , it still has not been possible to recover the body , and they have involved the total loss of the boats and the livelihood of many others .
The fishing communities of Castelo de Neive , Matosinhos , Setúbal , Areosa , Peniche and Caminha are in mourning ; I would like to join with them with my speech here today .
A somewhat harsh winter that did not allow many days ' fishing and the scarce support available for fishermen staying on shore forced them to go to sea in adverse conditions .
The ageing of some boats , the lack of on-board safety and proper safety training make accidents even more likely .
This is an unacceptable situation that should be eliminated urgently .
In this context , establishing conditions that can ensure the safety of fishermen should be one of the main goals of the reform of the common fisheries policy , by investing in the modernisation of boats , the strengthening of safety measures , the training of fishermen in basic safety and in decent living conditions when sea conditions make it advisable to stay on shore .
Mr President , my contribution addresses the need for a unified approach to the recognition of Kosovo .
In adopting the Lisbon Treaty , our Member States have accepted many new commitments .
One of these is the new integrated and unified proceedings in foreign and neighbourhood policy .
Kosovo has been recognised as an independent state , so far , by 65 countries of the world , including 24 out of 28 NATO countries and 22 out of 27 EU countries .
This is the right time to encourage our hesitating Member States , namely Cyprus , Greece , Romania , Slovakia and Spain , to put aside their concerns in this matter and join the majority in recognising Kosovo as soon as possible .
This would be an important signal demonstrating the increasing unity and integration of the EU .
Mr President , global capitalism moves people around the world - some legally , some illegally - as though they were simply expendable facts of production .
It moves goods and even services around the world in a bid to undercut the prices of its latest victim , closing factories , farms and offices and throwing workers on the scrapheap .
It moves money around the world , closing workplaces in Europe and the developed world and opening them in places where wage rates are a fraction of the cost .
The European Union 's embrace of global capitalism is an embrace that will smother us all .
Whenever there is an economic crisis , politicians line up to denounce protectionism .
However , it is only protectionism that will enable us to rebuild our manufacturing bases and guarantee our peoples their livelihoods .
Economies exist , or should exist , to serve our peoples .
We do not exist to serve economic forces .
There is no way in which Europe can compete with the Third World without becoming part of it , and it is happening already .

( ES ) Mr President , I regret that some of those present in the House today should opt to congratulate Mr Chávez , who is in cahoots with terrorists and has included ETA leaders in his government .

My group and I , faced with a choice between Mr Chávez and a Central Criminal Court judge like Mr Velasco from a state governed by the rule of law , have no hesitation in supporting that Central Criminal Court judge .

Furthermore , if Mr Rodríguez Zapatero were to stop being all matey with Mr Chávez and humbling himself before him , and instead treated Mr Chávez as what he is , a terrorist supporter , the credibility of Spanish foreign policy on the international arena would be enhanced .
( DE ) Mr President , once again , I would like to refer to the discussion in the last debate about one-minute speeches , in which we expressed our unease about the fact that it is obviously unclear when it is your turn and that when you have applied five times , it would be nice to know when your turn will be .
Several colleagues submitted this request .
At the time , it did apparently find a sympathetic ear .
I fail to understand why we clearly are not learning from this and trying to make it easier for MEPs and to announce a clear procedure and keep to it .
I put my name forward at 17 : 00 and cannot quite comprehend the procedure .
We are sticking to the procedure , but you have to take into account that we have more than 60 requests and we have 30 minutes for this procedure .
We gave the floor to about 35 of you .
We shall write down your name , and I can promise you that next time you will be among the first , but that is the way we do it .
I would like to give the floor to all of you but , unfortunately , we do not have the time .
( HU ) Mr President , I have the same complaint .
I have not been given the floor for six months .
I do not know the rule .
We always sit through the debates and are sitting here pointlessly .
For half a year , I have not had the floor .
I do not know of any regulations so I sit here in vain .
Mr Tőkés , I personally gave you the floor on at least one occasion .
I do not think that it is correct to say that you never had the floor .
I would like to remind Members to give their names well before we start , because we make a list .
I can assure you that , next time , you will be among the first .
Animal health requirements applicable to the non-commercial movement of pet animals ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Bairbre de Brún , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , concerning the draft Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 998 / 2003 on the animal health requirements applicable to the non-commercial movement of pet animals - C7-0035 / 2009 -

Mr President , this is the first amended regulation to come before the plenary meeting and the first that comes under the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I would like to express my gratitude to the shadow rapporteurs - Mrs Soullie , Mrs Willmott , Mrs Vălean , Mrs Evans , Mr Nicholson and Mrs Rosbach - for their help during a series of complicated negotiations ; and I am grateful for the exceptional support I received from the Parliament 's legal services and codecision unit .
I would also like to thank the Council and the Commission .
The substance of the Environmental Committee dossier was agreed at the beginning of December , and from the start of this year , we have been dealing with certain aspects relating to how Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union can be implemented with regard to this dossier .
It sometimes seemed that we would never manage to come to an agreement . However , we succeeded .
We agreed a solution for this dossier .
In doing so , we ensured that pet owners could continue to travel across EU borders with their pets , while including a transitional system that allows certain Member States to apply stricter controls , depending on disease , for a period of eighteen months .
The proposed amended regulation recognises the progress that has been made hitherto .
To ensure that the rabies situation in the EU improves from here on , the transitional system will be extended in five Member States until 31 December 2011 - by that time , provisions relating to the non-commercial movement of pets will be the same all over the EU .
It is recommended that the transitional system should also be applied in relation to tapeworms ( Echinococcus multilocularis ) and ticks until 31 December 2011 .
As regards the new procedures which take the place of the committee 's procedure , the Commission should be empowered under this regulation to adopt delegated acts under Article 290 of the treaty , through which the European Parliament and the Council delegate to the Commission the power to adopt non-legislative acts which have general application in order to add to or amend non-essential elements .
For example , in order that diseases other than rabies may be contained - diseases that could increase as a result of movements of pet animals - the Commission could adopt preventative health measures through delegated acts .
In the second place , in order to allow for technical progress the Commission could , through delegated acts , adopt modifications to technical requirements with regard to identifying animals ; and in the third place , they could , through delegated acts , adopt modifications to technical requirements in relation to anti-rabies vaccinations , in order to allow for scientific and technical developments .
We succeeded in agreeing the wording for all of this and for arrangements relating to the implementation of Article 290 of the treaty in relation to this dossier , and we kept all of this as consistent as possible with regard to the European Parliament 's powers under the Treaty of Lisbon .
The agreement at first reading demonstrates how important the urgency of this dossier is to every person who took part .
Finally , I would like to say that the fact that a rapporteur from one of the small groups took on such a complicated dossier with the active cooperation of shadow rapporteurs from other political groups is an important democratic signal and something of which this institution should be proud .
I would like , once more , to express my thanks to everyone from the three institutions - the Parliament , the Council and the Commission - who worked unremittingly on this dossier .
I hope that colleagues will support this work through their votes .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for its work on this dossier .
I would especially like to thank the rapporteur , Ms de Brún , for her efforts to reach an agreement on this issue , which is a sensitive one for some Member States .
We also appreciate that , apart from the issues involved , she had to steer the process through the difficult part on delegated acts .
Thank you very much .
I am pleased that the intense discussions held between the three institutions have resulted in a compromise text that fully reflects the technical measures proposed by the Commission and also addresses the necessary adaptation of the proposals to the Lisbon Treaty in a way that is acceptable to the Commission .
Indeed , our joint work has been complicated and slowed down by this alignment .
Nevertheless , the Council is now in a position to ensure that this work is finalised on time .
Before a vote is taken on the compromise text , I am pleased to confirm that the Commission does not intend to propose a further prolongation of the transitional regime , which will come to an end on 31 December 2011 .
This means that fully harmonised rules will be in place from 1 January 2012 .
However , the Commission does intend to propose a revision of the regulation in its entirety before 30 June 2011 and , in particular , the aspects of delegated and implementing acts .
As regards the notification of delegated acts , the Commission will also take account of the periods of recess of the institutions in order to ensure that the European Parliament and the Council are able to exercise their prerogatives within the time limits laid down in the relevant legislative acts .
Finally , I can confirm the Commission 's commitment , jointly expressed with Parliament and the Council , that the provisions of this regulation shall be without prejudice to any further position of the institutions as regards the implementation of Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union or individual legislative acts containing such provisions .
I hope Parliament will support the compromise text , which I firmly believe properly addresses all concerns raised by this House .
Mr President , Commissioner , this is a very important report , partly because it looks at how we can make it easier for pet owners in Europe to transport their pets across national boundaries and partly because it deals with preventing the dangerous spread of diseases carried by pets throughout Europe .
As a Swedish Member of the European Parliament , I am particularly interested in this question , because there are two diseases which we fortunately do not yet have in Sweden , the dwarf tapeworm and , most importantly , rabies .
During the discussions on this proposal , I have been concerned on a number of occasions that we would need to amend the regulations we currently have in Sweden and that this would result in the dwarf tapeworm and rabies reaching Sweden .
This would have appalling consequences , not least with regard to the way in which we exercise the right of public access to the countryside in Sweden , in other words , our opportunities to roam freely through the woods and fields .
I am very pleased to see today that Sweden will be able to retain its current exemptions , at least for a transitional period , which will allow us to ensure that these diseases do not enter our country .
Throughout the course of the process , we could not take it for granted that this would be the case .
Even right at the end , a debate took place in the committee procedure which I , at any rate , was worried would create uncertainty and give rise to a loophole in the application of the procedure that would result in the risk of these diseases reaching Sweden .
I would like to extend my warm thanks to everyone who has worked hard to find solutions to enable pets to be transported across Europe and to ensure that the exceptions in countries where certain diseases are not present could be retained , so that we do not need to be concerned anywhere in Europe that new diseases will be introduced as a result of this proposal .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , the Council and the Commissioner .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , can I start by thanking Mrs de Brún , who took on this dossier expecting it to be fairly expeditious .
It then became very complicated as we found ourselves negotiating whole new delegated acts without precedents for future acts , so congratulations to her and to the Council and Commission .
Commissioner , one of your first tasks here is to find a solution .
A lot of the debate has been about the technical aspects of this legislation , but it is an important piece of legislation for lots of citizens , being about moving their pet freely around the EU .
When we first adopted this legislation a few years ago , there was a lot of support for it , but we have this transitional period , which Mr Fjellner has mentioned , which is important to prevent diseases spreading to states that do not have those diseases .
I welcome the Commission 's support for extending the transitional period so that , when we do have the new legislation , all countries will have the same legislation .
We will , by that point , have much higher levels of animal health and animal welfare across the EU .
On the comitology issue , our group supports the compromise that has been negotiated .
We think that Parliament should have parity - equality - with the Council in legislation .
The whole issue was about the expert groups and who these experts should be .
What we would like to say is that when we talk about experts being consulted , this has to refer to all experts , and the Commission will be looking with experts from the Member States , from non-governmental organisations , and also those perhaps which the European Parliament is recommending .
I am very pleased that we have this agreement .
It enables the transitional period to be agreed in time for when the derogation runs out , and we look forward to hearing the Commission 's new proposals for the future legislation .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , let us recall that free movement has been one of the fundamental pillars of the single European market , which aims to achieve increased competition and larger economies of scale and confers on the EU its main power of attraction .
Over time , the ability of people to move freely within the EU has become not only a basic component of the internal market but a fundamental right .
By removing the barriers created by different national provisions and regulations , European citizens , as well as businesses , can thrive .
Likewise , the possibility for EU citizens to carry their pets with them , without being subjected to specific national regulations and standards , is important , as it can significantly reduce their travel efforts and costs .
I am pleased that the Commission proposal points in that direction .
I welcome the general regime passport , which will harmonise the animal health measures and controls that will facilitate the free movement of pet animals .
At the same time , I agree that we need to guarantee a high level of protection for human and animal health .
This transitional regime will allow more time for the right infrastructure and staff to be in place .
So , under this argument , Parliament will certainly vote tomorrow to prolong the transitional regime for some Member States until the end of 2011 , as these countries allegedly need to take specific health risks into account .
However , this is not the first time that some Member States have been allowed to apply more stringent health requirements than others .
Initially , the transitional period lasted until July 2008 .
Then the transitional period was extended to 2010 .
Now we have agreed to a new prolongation .
Thus , while I have some sympathy for the fears of the Member States who consider that their pet population is more prone to certain diseases , and I understand that the proposed prolongation would be simultaneously completed with EU-funded vaccination programmes to eliminate sylvatic rabies in some Member States , I believe that this should be the last extension of the special treatment enjoyed by these countries .
We all know that asymmetrical measures and opt-outs will not bring the full benefits of the internal market in this area .
So let us all agree that this transitional regime needs to be eliminated and that a level playing field has to be ensured as soon as possible .
Interestingly enough , the more contentious issue in this report has not been the content that has sparked heated debate among us on how to apply the new Lisbon Treaty provisions regarding the comitology procedure .
This is the first codecision file where these provisions are to be put into practice .
Given Parliament 's extended powers under the new treaty , it was crucial for us that this particular regulation did not set a precedent for future decisions .
In this regard , I welcome the written statement which was agreed between Parliament and the Council during the trialogue , stating that this file should not be treated as a precedent .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , first of all , let me begin by thanking the rapporteur for all her hard work on this report .
What many of us felt at the beginning would be a dossier which would not cause us much of a problem turned out to be an awful lot more tricky than we thought .
Unfortunately , the rapporteur had to take the brunt of most of the negotiations , but she certainly had to work very hard to ensure this report got through within the necessary timeframe , which was very important as we were under pressure to secure the extension of her derogation which was due to run out in June of this year .
In my opinion , this is a small but vital piece of legislation which will protect those areas and those countries that are concerned by the threat of rabies ; the disease continues to occur in some parts of the EU , and hopefully by the end of 2011 , vaccination programmes will have proved successful in eradicating the disease once and for all .
Until then , however , we have found a way which allows us to continue to enforce our own stricter requirements under the transitional period before we move , in line with other EU Member States , to the general regime .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs de Brún for the excellent job she has done on updating this technical regulation on travel with pet animals within the territory of the EU .
Many ordinary families find it a challenge to complete all the vaccinations and paperwork required for all the members of the family to go on holiday together .
It is necessary , however , because some countries are fighting a hard , long-fought battle against uncontrollable animal diseases .
Various measures have been taken : quarantine of varying lengths , double-checking with vets both before and after travel depending on the destination country , expensive compulsory vaccination of wild animals at national level - to name but a few .
I can therefore well understand why some Member States fear any easing of their stringent national regulations , and I consider it necessary that we respect their high safety requirements and would like others to emulate them .
Consequently , I would like to ask the Commission whether it would not be a good idea nonetheless to implement veterinary border controls at which the owner of a pet animal must demonstrate that the animal travelling with him or her is free of dangerous diseases , has been vaccinated and has its papers in order in respect of the destination country .
That would also provide an opportunity to check pig and other animal transports that do not meet EU requirements , and the smuggling of puppies and kittens which are far too young could also be exposed by border controls .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , welcome to the European Parliament .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to compliment the rapporteur who has done a competent job .
The document covers many areas .
In recent years , we have seen a growth in pets and domestic animals and naturally , also the desire to be able to take these animals with us on trips .
That is right and it should be so , as being able to take your pet gives you an increased sense of well-being .
For that reason , however , in Europe , we must have regulations to prevent the spread of animal epidemics .
We have them .
We have very good regulations in Directive 998 / 2003 and from 2011 we will have the European Vaccination Card , which will accurately document which vaccinations animals have received .
Moreover , from 2011 , electronic tagging will prevent confusion and deception .
In recent years , we have done a lot to curb animal epidemics in Europe , especially rabies , also through the achievements of the European Commission , which first pushed through and financed the vaccination of foxes .
That is a very important matter and we should acknowledge it .
These special regulations that are repeatedly approved for some countries are burdens for citizens .
Here , the expense bears no relation to the benefit .
I have received letters from many citizens complaining of annoying behaviour at borders .
Let me just cite the United Kingdom as an example : arriving two days too early in a half-year stay means a EUR 3 000 fine and the animal is quarantined for six weeks .
We should consider whether this kind of behaviour is right .
Therefore , Commissioner , I think one more year , but then this must end .
We have European regulations that apply to everyone .
The risk of disease spreading - if the animal epidemic situation remains as it is , we must always presume that - no longer exists in this form with pets and domestic animals .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , welcome to Parliament .
I would like to join my fellow Member , Mr Schnellhardt , by saying you have a major task in this area , to create genuinely equal conditions in the 27 Member States by 2010 so that household pets can be transported and brought from one country to another without obstacles .
Free movement for dogs and cats was certainly the goal of the 2003 regulation .
Now , for the third time , we are making an exception .
In the EU , some things take a really long time : ten years to tune such regulations .
No country in the EU wants diseases to be introduced and I also wonder why 22 countries accept the idea of dogs and cats being allowed to travel with their owners and five countries do not .
You should examine whether the reality and the obstacles still correspond to these special provisions .
I know that there are thorny debates at national level , but we are now one legal space and it is time , by 2011 at the latest , to introduce free movement , the single market for pets .
The animal expert , Mr Schnellhardt , has already mentioned the conditions , namely that there is a vaccination card and that instruments like electronic tagging will be used , which will then give you access to the five countries when you are on holiday or travelling to work and wish to take your pets with you .
This regulation on pets will go down in history .
It is , in fact , the first legal act since the Treaty of Lisbon and we wanted a level playing field with the Council of Ministers in the empowerment of the Commission for delegated acts .
That was an uphill struggle , but it was worth it .
My congratulations to Mrs De Brún for this report and , of course , for this procedure to begin a new era .
That is why it is so important , because we have perhaps a hundred legal acts in a year , but 6 000 delegated acts , and from this we can gauge how important it is to set the new procedure on the right track from the beginning .
Mr President , I just wanted to say a few words in praise of the legislation we have .
I understand it was based upon the United Kingdom 's pet travel scheme , which was introduced about a decade ago .
That helped us reduce dramatically the quarantine regulations we had in our country which had caused much distress to both pets and their owners .
I understand the first animal to take advantage of the pets travel scheme was a dog called Frodo Baggins , and after that , many hundreds of thousands of animals have been able to travel more freely .
Then the EU brought in this legislation , following very similar principles , about five years ago , and it has proved a great success .
Hundreds of thousands of animals now travel with their owners each year across Europe .
I am told that 60 % of them happen to be British animals , which may say something about the British character , but we will not go there in this forum .
Of course , we have also kept the balance right .
The concern was to enable movement without spreading disease , and the reality is that rabies has been kept very firmly under control - 2 700 cases 20 years ago down to less than 300 cases last year , and not one single case associated with the movement of domestic animals under this scheme .
I am somewhat disappointed that ferrets are not moving in the numbers that I originally anticipated .
When this legislation was first discussed , many ferret owners in the United Kingdom came to me and asked why this legislation could not include their animals too .
They wanted to take them to ferret exhibitions across Europe .
The Commissioner is looking surprised , but there was a debate .
Apparently you can vaccinate a ferret against rabies but the vaccination does not show , so it was problematic .
Eventually , we decided that the incidence of rabies in domestic ferrets was so small that we could include them , but apparently , I am told , there have been relatively few movements .
Perhaps one reason why - to answer Jo Leinen 's point - is that in some countries , like Portugal , ferrets are still classified as vermin so pet owners are reluctant to take their animals to those countries .
It could be worse - it could be China , I suppose .
Commissioner , just to finish , the great advantage to me is that I can now look to my constituents and , when they ask me what the European Union has done for them , I can say that we have made it possible for you to take your pet on holiday - your cat , your dog or your ferret .
Mr President , I understand that the original idea for the creation of pet passports came from the Official Monster Raving Loony Party in the UK , which probably best sums up this dangerous scheme .
My country had a compulsory six-month quarantine period for domestic pets .
Under the EU pet passport system , this important bulwark against the spread of disease was summarily removed .
The unelected European Commission was able to overrule the democratically elected British Government and introduce a system without a quarantine period that relies on vaccinations and the accuracy of paperwork .
As a farmer , I know something about vaccination .
It is by no means a guarantee against animals bringing diseases across borders .
The effectiveness of the vaccination can be compromised by many things , including its being administered to an animal that already has the disease it is being inoculated against .
Vaccinated animals can also be carriers of the disease without displaying a symptom .
Batches of vaccine of varying quality and forged paperwork is a real probability .
I understand there is no standardisation of enforcement of the scheme .
Some countries require the formal passport while others will take documentation in any form ; still others will not accept the passport as proof of vaccination .
Many airlines are unable to provide details of the formal procedures and staff are poorly trained .
In other words , it is an accident waiting to happen .
There is a saying in my country , ' If it is not broken , why fix it ? '
Such advice is wasted on the Commission .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , I would just ask the honourable gentlemen , would he not think his tirade against the European Union would be stronger if the British Government had not introduced similar legislation before the European Union did ?

Mr President , I think that the European Union has become far too big , has far too many cultures , and I simply do not trust this system at all and it is going to get worse .

Mr President , I welcome the Commissioner and I thank the rapporteur for her work .
Just to continue with Mr Agnew 's point of ' if it ain 't broke , don 't fix it ' , I think that is exactly what we are doing here : we are extending derogations where Member States have asked that that happen , but we are allowing the movement of pets .
I am sure those who are in the visitors ' gallery thought that it was quite a simple matter to move pets between Member States , but because we are dealing with issues around animal health - and indeed human health - it is not quite so simple .
We do need stringent rules and controls on that , while recognising that many British people , but also people from other Member States , like to bring their animals with them .
My worry about this report was that it might get bogged down in the technicalities of life after the Lisbon Treaty which , quite frankly , lots of people outside this Chamber should not worry about , or indeed know about - it was of importance to us as a Parliament .
I think the rapporteur has settled the case very well on our behalf and has been congratulated for so doing .
The danger was , had it slipped through the net , we would not have had in place measures to address the concerns of Sweden , Ireland , the UK and others .
But we are in the right place now .
I think the future is much more important .
Commissioner , you mentioned that you have plans to look at new legislation in this regard .
I think that is what we should be talking about at this stage .
What we all want in this House is high animal and human health standards , and this new legislation that you promise should ensure that .
So , well done to the rapporteur and to those involved in this report in bringing it to the stage it is at today .
It has satisfied all concerns - not for all , perhaps , to my extreme left here , but for most of us .
I hope you will consult wisely and widely in relation to what we need on new legislation on the transport of pets .
We have it with farm animals ; we need simplified but effective rules for pets .
( SV ) Mr President , the Commission has produced a positive proposal to amend the regulation on the animal health requirements applicable to the transport of pet animals .
I am particularly pleased that this will allow us to extend the period during which a number of countries , including Sweden , can retain their stricter regulations relating to rabies and dwarf tapeworm .
The Swedish Board of Agriculture , which is the relevant authority in Sweden , has said that , without the option of special controls , the tapeworm , for example , would probably become established in Sweden .
This would have a negative impact on the freedom of access to the countryside , which is an important part of the everyday life of people in a country like Sweden .
I would like to thank the Commission , the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs for listening to our requirements and , therefore , making it possible to introduce what is initially a temporary solution .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank my colleague , Ms de Brún , for her hard work on this report .
The case of a 38-year-old woman who died in the Royal Victoria Hospital in Belfast last year was a tiny reminder of the ongoing threat posed by rabies to Ireland .
It is believed that she contracted the disease when trying to break up a fight between two dogs while on a working holiday to South Africa .
More recently , four people had to receive preventive injections in Dublin after an illegally imported kitten started to act strangely and bit them .
Rabies is one of the oldest zoonotic diseases which affects humans , and is invariably fatal once symptoms have occurred .
Global travel patterns mean that the disease is never far from our door .
It is for this reason that Ireland practises strict quarantine of imported animals , and it is only because of these stringent measures that we are able to maintain our status as rabies-free .
In order to continue this record , it is crucial that the transitional agreement which this proposal would extend until the end of next year is not allowed to lapse in July 2010 .
The additional safeguards proposed are also crucial to both human and animal health , as they would help solve the fight not just against rabies but also against specific ticks and tapeworms from which Ireland is currently free .
By accepting this proposal , this House would facilitate the fight against rabies and provide a base for its eradication across Europe .
For these reasons , the urgency of this matter must not go unstated .
( SK ) I agree with the amendment to the regulation on animal health requirements applicable to the non-commercial movement of pet animals , which de facto facilitates movement across borders within the European Union .
I would also like to acknowledge the work done by the rapporteur , who has produced a top-quality report , including such measures that would lead to vaccination against rabies and other diseases , as well as further preventive actions .
I am convinced that in just taking such a step , we will totally harmonise standards in the European Union 's internal market and move toward the so far most extensive elimination of the threat from transmission of these diseases .
However , I am aware of the ongoing risks and the dangers in the transport of animals and , therefore , I support a reasonable extension of the transition periods for Members States such as Malta , Ireland and Sweden , whose internal standards are stricter .
This is a prudent approach which particularly stresses prevention and takes the special characteristics of the respective countries into account .
( RO ) I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur on all her hard work , along with all those who made this compromise possible .
I am pleased that the report allows Member States to continue implementing their protection measures against the spread of rabies , and also that it will result in the free and safe movement of pets throughout Europe after 2011 .
I think that a good compromise has been achieved , which provides an effective response where Member States have justified concerns about the spread of certain diseases , while also offering the guarantee that when delegated power is used , the Commission will consult a number of experts - from the Commission , Member States , NGOs or from national parliaments .
In a wider context , we have received written assurances that this report will not set a precedent for the use of delegated powers in the future .
As a result , consideration will be given to Parliament 's concerns about creating a precedent for the new comitology procedure under the Treaty of Lisbon .
( DE ) Mr President , the efforts of the European Union to stem or completely eradicate animal epidemics and diseases like rabies are , of course , extremely laudable and it is certainly very positive that measures are being taken to facilitate cross-border tourism with pets .
The European Vaccination Card , vaccination programmes or even the electronic tagging of pets are indeed sensible measures that may make this easier .
However - and I know this from our experience in Austria - there are phenomena that threaten this .
For example , the illegal smuggling of puppies from cheap Eastern European countries to Central Europe or the European Union repeatedly leads to the introduction of diseases .
The mass transport of animals across the EU , including in Austria , could also allow dangerous diseases to reoccur .
Wild animals are furthermore liable to ignore border controls and may , of course , also repeatedly lead to the spread of animal epidemics like rabies .
It will be necessary to take measures in this area .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think that we can all be proud of the swift progress made on this file , which has been conducted under extreme time pressures and in a difficult legal context .
The 18-month prolongation of the transitional regime regulating the movement of pets into five Member States will give them the time to adapt to the regime which applies in the rest of the European Union .
I have also confirmed that the Commission does not intend to propose a further prolongation of this transition time .
At the same time , it will allow the Commission to prepare a comprehensive proposal aimed at revising the regulation in its entirety and , in particular , bringing the old comitology provisions into line with the spirit and the letter of the Lisbon Treaty .
I have to agree that this is an important file for European citizens , and I am pleased that we have had a successful conclusion .
Mr President , I would also like to welcome Commissioner Dalli to the European Parliament and I also welcome the opportunity to work with Commissioner Dalli .
I welcome his statement to the Parliament this evening .
As he said , the substance of my report agrees with the approach of the Commission 's proposal .
I would also like to express my thanks to everyone who spoke in tonight 's debate ; most of them in favour of the proposed system , with only a few people in opposition .
The Commission 's proposal and my report use a scientifically-based approach .
In light of the different situations regarding rabies in Member States , the Commission chose a safe , precautionary approach .
It is appropriate that the end of the proposed extension coincides with the period in which it is expected that the European Commission will put an end to EU funding for a vaccination programme aimed at eradicating rabies in wild animals in some Member States .
As Commissioner Dalli and Mrs Vălean said in relation to the proposed date , the structure in place can be changed and the staff that are already there can be retrained .
The transitional system will be extended in five Member States until the end of 2011 and by that time , provisions relating to the non-commercial movement of pets will be the same all over the EU .
In the meantime , people will be able to cross EU borders with their pets , but the transitional system will be in place to allow some Member States to apply stricter controls during that period .
Again , I would like to express my thanks to everyone who helped with this work .
The work was occasionally complicated , but although it was hard , it was worthwhile in the end .
Thank you all .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Tuesday , 9 March 2010 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( CS ) The aim of Regulation ( EC ) No 998 / 2003 on the animal health requirements applicable to the non-commercial movement of pet animals , which entered into effect on 3 July 2003 , was to make it easier for pet owners to travel with their pets .
This was to be achieved through the introduction of a passport showing that an animal has been inoculated against rabies , and stipulating the obligation to mark animals in order for them to be clearly identified .
The proposed amendment , in addition to making the original regulation more specific in technical terms , again extends the period during which journeys with dogs and cats to Finland , Ireland , Malta , Sweden and the United Kingdom are subject to stricter requirements .
The differences in the protective measures of the previously-mentioned Member States , especially the different time-limits for inoculations and serological examinations and the different deadlines for anti-parasite examinations , unnecessarily complicate and increase the cost of travelling with pets in the EU .
In practice , this means that a sizeable number of EU citizens will be discriminated against unnecessarily for a further year and a half when exercising their right to free movement between EU countries .
The repeated extensions of the time period may indicate that the Commission set the period incorrectly in the original directive , without regard to the actual state of affairs , or that certain Member States were unable or unwilling to implement Regulation 998 / 2003 on time .
In any case , such exemptions do not show an even-handed approach on the part of the Commission to the implementation of general regimes in EU Member States .
Revision of the Package Travel Directive ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the revision of the Package Travel Directive .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am grateful for this opportunity to give you an update of the Commission 's work on reviewing the Package Travel Directive .
At the time of the adoption of the directive in 1990 , package holidays were the most common type of holidays .
Since then , the market scene has changed significantly : the development of the Internet has made it possible for consumers to make their reservations directly from tour operators , air carriers and hotels .
Furthermore , the rapid development of low-cost air carriers has revolutionised the supply of air transport .
It has also enhanced competition and consumer choice in the travel market .
Nowadays , a majority of EU citizens organise their holidays themselves rather than purchasing predefined packages .
These changes have resulted in a decreasing number of consumers being protected when going on holiday .
We are also aware that the existing directive has led to an uneven playing field for the holiday industry , with some operators being regulated by the directive while others are not , even though they sell similar products .
Moreover , the minimum harmonisation of the directive has caused legal fragmentation in the Member States .
This means that the current legislation may not be up to date .
For this reason , the Commission launched the impact assessment process to prepare for a possible revision of the Package Travel Directive last year .
In the context of the impact assessment work , the Commission published a study on consumer detriment in the area of the so-called ' dynamic packages ' in November 2009 .
At the same time , the Commission launched a public consultation on the revision of the directive .
This consultation was closed on 7 February 2010 .
The Commission is now examining more than 170 contributions , which will feed into the impact assessment .
The scope of the possible revision will depend on the outcome of the impact assessment .
However , let me explain briefly the guiding principles of this work .
First , a high level of protection is key if we want to make sure that consumers have confidence in their holiday purchases .
Second , we must improve the functioning of the internal market for travel , in particular , since cross-border purchases are so frequent in this area .
There is therefore a good case for more harmonisation of the relevant legislation in Member States .
Finally , I think it is necessary to create a more level playing field for the businesses selling travel packages .
The Commission is planning to present its proposal early in 2011 .
The key challenges for the revision will be to define the scope of the directive .
The Commission will look into the possibilities of extending the scope of the directive to cover a wider range of travel arrangements including the ' dynamic packages ' .
This could help to reverse the trend of the decreasing number of consumers being protected when going on holiday .
We will need to update the different information requirements and clarify the obligation and liabilities of the professional parties to the contract .
Finally , in order to improve consumer awareness , the Commission will explore the cost and benefits of introducing a standardised package travel label which would have to be displayed when selling package holidays .
In parallel with this work , the Commission is examining the possibilities of enhancing protection against bankruptcy for passengers buying stand-alone air tickets , as recently requested by the European Parliament .
At the beginning of 2009 , the Commission published an independent report that explored the different possible ways of addressing the consequences of bankruptcies .
We also launched a public consultation on the future of air passengers ' rights on 15 December 2009 .
These elements will serve as a basis for the impact assessment .
We aim to present the most appropriate bankruptcy protection measures to Parliament before the end of 2010 .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I would firstly like to thank Commissioner Dalli for his promises and explanations that in 2011 , he plans to undertake a revision of the Package Travel Directive dating from 1990 .
In terms of timing , it fits exactly in the current window , which we should use , because in the area of package travel , there is a whole range of issues when consumers are not properly informed about their rights .
For example , on many websites , they are seduced into booking further offers through additional links , although these offers are not subject to the same protection mechanisms as the original ones .
Here we are talking in particular about offers from low-cost airlines .
Secondly , in most Member States of the European Union , these low-cost airlines make the service of judicial documents impossible so that consumer protection is greatly hampered , exactly where consumers actually want to defend themselves legally .
This absolutely must be changed with a new proposal for a directive .
Thirdly , we must also ask ourselves whether the rights of air passengers and the rights that are in force pursuant to the existing Package Travel Directive should , in the long term , be transferred into a common document , to eliminate contradictions between components of both legislations .
Fourthly , I believe - and this is something you have pointed out - that the assessment of the work of travel agents that varies from country to country also means that the cross-border provision of goods and services is being made very difficult for travel agents .
In some countries , travel agents are liable just like package tour operators ; in other countries , like mine for example , travel agents are only intermediaries .
Here it would be preferable if , Europe-wide , we could at least agree on principles to facilitate the cross-border work of these travel agents .
Due to the increasing use of the Internet by consumers , package travel deals on the Internet should , in future , also be labelled as such , so that abuse here , too , remains impossible .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , this debate comes at a very timely juncture for tourism , the air travel industry and consumer protection .
We had a summer where it seemed that half of Europe was stranded on holiday , with airlines and travel agents going bust left , right and centre , and consumers being stranded away from loved ones , in countries that were not their own .
It was clear that our laws had failed to properly protect consumers .
We had several reports of passengers left with no information about when they could get home , no transparency about who was technically responsible for their situation , no phone number to call to get any information and no idea how to seek redress when they did get home .
Therefore , I welcome this timely debate and the Commission 's efforts to tackle this matter , as all of us have let this area go for too long .
Many problems with the Package Travel Directive were identified almost 10 years ago in a parliamentary report , but very little has moved on it since .
I know that the proposed Consumer Rights Directive will deal with some issues , but cross-border air travel needs more European laws for the protection of consumers .
The very fact that the law is still called the Package Travel Directive shows how outdated it is .
The majority of consumers no longer use travel packages if they have found cheaper methods to go on holiday and see the world .
Forty per cent of travellers in my own country , Ireland , do not bother to use packages , and I know this is replicated in many other Member States .
Most people are now acting as their own travel agents with online booking on sites such as Tripadvisor , where they effectively become their own travel agent .
Our laws now must reflect this change in consumer behaviour .
One of the most significant issues that must come from any review is to demonstrate clearly to the consumer who is responsible in the event of these delays and cancellations .
Travel companies must be mandated to provide very clear information .
Consumers must be told where they can get this information and be informed of their rights in the circumstances .
( The President asked the speaker to speak more slowly for the sake of the interpreters )
Under the current legislation , there are no clear lines of responsibility .
In the event of a mishap , is it the airline that is responsible ?
Is it the travel agent ?
Is it the airport or train station ?
Who should a consumer ask for the information ?
Typically , these situations descend into scrambles of information from various sources and nobody knows whether they are going or coming .
If we are trying to build the European economy based on cross-border trade , consumers have to be aware of their rights and entitlements and how these are enforced and communicated .
I know , for example , that it is extremely difficult to find an airline 's complaints department .
How can you get redress if you do not know where to go or ask ?
What I will be calling for - and I am hopeful that the Commission will take this on board - is for the basic principles of customer care to be enshrined in clearly communicated legislation that is uniformly understood and simple .
Updating this law is not enough .
Member States must be obliged to communicate new legislation to citizens once it is agreed .
Finally , one other idea that the Commission might consider is : how much does a flight cost ?
We are all aware that the advertised price does not include taxes and charges : there are charges to check in , charges for extra pieces of luggage , charges for virtually everything and anything .
Revising this directive provides an opportune moment to compel travel and airline companies to provide better transparency , and we must take this opportunity to do so .
Mr President , Commissioner Dalli , I would firstly like to give you a warm welcome on behalf of the ALDE Group .
You have already said that you are planning a revision of the directive we are talking about .
We can indeed be glad that we live in Europe , as in Europe in the European Parliament , we can even discuss how we can go away on trips with ferrets and other pets .
That was the previous debate and I was delighted and proud to be a European because we can even regulate something like that for the protection of consumers and animals .
Now , however , we are talking about people travelling .
That is an important right in Europe .
We want mobility and freedom of movement for people and we have considered how we can ensure that .
Twenty years ago , we had the directive regulating package tours , so that you could say to yourself ' I can go and explore other countries , see the beauties of other countries in Europe and know exactly that my rights protect me ' .
I will be informed in advance on what to expect , I will not be misled , the information must be right and if something does not work , I will receive compensation .
That was 20 years ago .
As you said , Commissioner , a lot has changed since then .
Now people are frequently booking on the Internet themselves and that then leads to loopholes in the system .
Six months ago , we in the Transport Committee put a question to the Transport Commissioner because in the context of SkyEurope in Slovakia , we had the case of passengers with low-cost flights being stranded and not being transported further .
Here it was actually a matter of a small loophole , which only affected those who had booked on the Internet without a credit card , but we do want people to be able to move freely in Europe , so that they can actually enjoy their holidays and are protected at the same time .
That means if we have loopholes in the system in terms of consumer protection and if we want to have a high standard of consumer protection for people in Europe , then we need a revision of this Package Travel Directive and we must also consider whether is it necessary - as my fellow Member has already mentioned - to have a special regulation for air passengers .
We still have to discuss this and I am already looking forward to this with great expectation , as we want to be able to travel happily and safely , not just with animals , but , of course , also with our families .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as our new Commissioner has already said , the legislative framework is no longer suited to today 's reality of a greatly changed travel market , which has given rise to very many problems and a great deal of frustration , not only among consumers but also among travel agents and tour operators .
It is clear that the number of people still enjoying effective protection under the existing directive has fallen tremendously even though more people are travelling .
Indeed , the European Parliament has been calling for a revision of the directive for years .
As you said , the sticking points and possible solutions are well known .
Another consultation has just been completed .
In my opinion , it really is now high time we took the plunge .
I welcome the Commission statement , but I should just like to identify a number of specific points that are very important to us .
Firstly , the scope of the directive must certainly be clarified and even extended .
As we have already heard , more and more consumers are putting together dynamic travel packages or booking separate travel services .
Just recently , as a result of the problems with the Eurostar , we saw thousands of tourists running into problems because they were not given any compensation for hotels or theatre tickets they had booked .
This kind of thing is unacceptable .
In my opinion , passengers ' rights must also be given a clear place in the directive .
We do have to take sufficient account of the widely differing travel markets and differing holiday practices of consumers in the various Member States and of national case-law , of course , but harmonisation is required , as some concepts differ greatly , such as that of the tour operator , the agent and force majeure .
I read in the consultation held by the Commission in 2007 that , in fact , very detailed feedback came in from the industry and the stakeholders , and so I ask myself what the problem is .
Why are we not taking a decision now ?
There have also been calls for a kind of ' Travel Protection Label ' .
I should have liked to hear the Commissioner 's opinion on this .
My second point concerns the role and responsibility of travel agents .
This needs to be defined much more clearly , as consumers are inundated with information via the Internet but this is far from reliable and can even cause significant harm : in extreme cases , people have paid rent for holiday apartments that do not even exist .
Therefore , the role of travel agents should be regulated much more precisely .
We have already discussed bankruptcies .
In a Parliament resolution , this House made a very clear call for the passengers affected to be better protected .
Living as I do in a border region between Flanders and the Netherlands , I also wish to call for particular attention to cross-border sales , as protection is often limited to the travel contract entered into in a particular Member State .
My final point concerns consumer information on prices .
In most other sectors , the prices of services sold must be fixed and all inclusive , and this should also apply to travel services .
Do you share this view ?
I should have liked to hear your views on this .
Consumer rights must be clarified and stricter and more specific information requirements must apply in the case also of force majeure and a change in the range of travel services offered .
Perhaps we should also consider introducing sanctions in the new directive .
I hope the Commission will get to grips with this very soon and present us with a new proposal to discuss in this House .
Mr President , the EU Package Travel Directive , which we are debating today , comes from the year 1990 , 20 years ago , and so from the times when the most popular form of holiday was a two-week package tour , reserved , usually , in a travel agency and chosen from among the offers remaining in the brochure .
The directive provides for fundamental means of consumer protection in the case of this type of package , which includes , principally , clear information about the packages being offered , the right to withdraw from the trip , compensation for services of lower standard than agreed and matters related to the insolvency of travel agencies .
The problem is that in the last 20 years , there has been a complete change , both in the business model and in the pattern of consumer behaviour .
I , myself , reserve most of my holiday trips via the Internet , very many people in Poland do the same , and in the European Union as a whole , the proportion of people who book their trips in this way has now reached 23 % .
There are countries , such as Ireland and Sweden , in which this proportion is as high as 40 % , while almost two-thirds of the people who buy their holidays in this way do not realise that their interests are protected to a significantly lower degree than in the case of people who still buy holidays in the traditional way .
We should fight this .
I am pleased that the European Commission has , at last , raised this matter .
I think 20 years is definitely too long .
I hope that , today , we will hear from the Commission specifically when the directive will be revised and what direction the revision will take .
For it must not be the case that in the European Parliament or in other EU institutions , we encourage citizens of the Union to use the services of e-commerce and also to buy services in cross-border trade , while at the same time not offering the same protection to the people who do this .
( DE ) Mr President , it is certainly not only differences in consumer protection , but also language differences which , until now , have made package tours to other Member States difficult .
It is already 15 years since the European Union created fundamental basic protection as well as common procedures .
In my opinion , the revision of these procedures must not get out of hand to the effect that they are subject to blanket standardisation in the name of the freedom to provide services .
Travel needs themselves may vary from country to country .
In general , I also consider it dangerous to measure everything by the same yardstick and campaign for enforced conformity everywhere .
If we want travel agents to assume greater liability as travel intermediaries , we must be aware that this may have serious economic consequences .
If we want to avoid killing off small local travel agents with the simultaneous uncontrolled growth of online travel , then the tour operator should primarily be made liable .
The relatively satisfactory protection on package holidays will hopefully reassure those holidaymakers who are worried by the current negative headlines about Greece .
Further announcements of strikes and protests could intensify the tendency to avoid other Mediterranean countries and the price collapse in relation to Greece .
The state 's debt crisis guarantees that this will be a critical year for Greek tourism , this we know .
We can expect further strikes and protests .
Hopefully , we will be spared the experience of discovering how travel protection would function in a case of national bankruptcy .
( HU ) I would like to draw the attention of my fellow Members to the excellent objective mentioned during his hearing by the new Commissioner for Transport , Siim Kallas .
To my mind , what I heard impressed me as an excellent principle : the free movement of people is one of the most important freedoms .
To this end , we need to integrate the rights concerning the various modes of transport and incorporate them into one integrated charter .
We need transparent systems .
I would like to remark that this topic is included among the priorities of the Spanish Presidency .
Why is this so important ? it is important because the 20-year-old directive fails in every area to take into account the rights of people living with disabilities when they are travelling , even when they are travelling in groups .
People living with disabilities are given no opportunities whatsoever .
That is why I come back to my remark at the beginning .
An integrated charter of passengers ' rights would enable everyone - including people living with disabilities - to make use of transportation services , including group travel services .
When this becomes a reality , we will truly be able to say that in the European Union , everyone can travel freely .
( RO ) The Package Travel Directive encompasses transport and accommodation services , along with other related services provided through package holidays .
It also sets out consumers ' rights and the responsibilities of distributors and tourism service providers .
The 1990 directive fails to take into account new trends , such as buying package holidays and making payments via the Internet .
The rise in the level of Internet use and the emergence of low-cost operators have made 23 % of European tourists and 20 % of European households buy customised package holidays via specialist websites .
The directive must therefore be revised to include within its remit suppliers of ' dynamic ' package holidays as well .
Consumers must be fully informed about their rights and about how these rights are guaranteed by each of the offerings available , both for the complete package holiday and each component individually .
I also feel that it is important that websites which offer travel services are accredited .
This will help guarantee that the identity of the tourism service provider can be recognised and , by extension , there will be a clear assumption of responsibility for the information and services provided .
The study published by the Commission in January 2009 on package holidays organised at the customer 's request , known as ' dynamic packages ' , indicates that the proportion of package holidays purchased online rose by 12 % in 2009 , even though their value only accounts for 25 % of the total value of tourism services sold .
66 % of the transactions made online involve direct purchases via the websites of airline operators , travel agents or via specialist websites offering last-minute travel deals .
Tourists prefer dynamic packages because they offer greater flexibility , lower prices compared to traditional package holidays and a higher quality of service , or because they cannot find traditional package holidays to meet their requirements .
In addition , the dynamic package holidays purchased can only be paid for using online payment methods .
However , approximately 70 % of the complaints received last year by the European Consumer Centres Network related to tourism services and were due to the incorrect and incomplete provision of information prior to and during the trip , the provision of services falling below the standards advertised , flight cancellations or delays , and even to failure to provide the services purchased .
I think therefore that it is important and necessary to review this directive .
Thank you .
Mr President , I want to thank the Commissioner very much , both on behalf of our group , but also as the chairman of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , for making a very timely appearance before us this evening , and also for having responded so quickly to the oral question from my committee on 3 December which set out a number of areas which he has answered very comprehensively .
I think that we have some time available now , as the Commission is putting its ideas together , in which my committee and , I am sure , the Committee on Transport , whose representatives are here as well , will want to reflect together about many of the issues that you have raised and how this is going to move forward .
I think that , given the nature and change of the whole of the travel and holiday business , and many of the issues raised by colleagues tonight , the new directive needs to be clearly future-proofed , but that means it does not need to be too rigid in terms of trying to anticipate consumer needs .
However , one thing I do think the Commission needs to think about is that there are other aspects that online consumers need to consider when they are shopping for travel ; issues about the safety of the hotel , if they have young children , a safe swimming pool , for example , or the fire safety of the hotel , where my committee has done extensive work before .
We need some proper indicators and markers there , which may be done by voluntary agreement , but I do think that this needs to be a wide-ranging and ambitious proposal .
I get a sense from this that this is what you would like to do , and I think my committee would give you full support in coming up with such a proposal .
( NL ) Mr President , this is one of those dossiers where the European Union can indeed provide tangible added value by affording a kind of protection to the millions of people in the EU who go on holiday in Europe and purchase travel services there .
Cross-border problems call for a cross-border strategy and approach .
All of us here agree that the 1990 directive is hopelessly outdated .
Twenty years ago , most people chose trips from a travel brochure and then went to a local travel agency to book them .
Nowadays , more and more people are putting their holidays together themselves and booking trips on the Internet .
In addition , there are relatively new phenomena such as the emergence of the low-cost air carriers and the growth of the cruise industry .
Well , then , what do I believe to be the essential components of this new directive ?
Firstly , a definition of the scope of the directive ; in short , what kinds of package travel are covered ?
Secondly , a precise definition of legal liability and , last but not least , far-reaching consumer protection in the event of operator bankruptcy .
Only if there are watertight rules for these things will the revision have succeeded and better protection be afforded to millions of EU consumers .
( MT ) I would like to seize the opportunity to extend my welcome to Commissioner Dalli for this , his first session , in this Parliament .
Indeed , as has already been stated , in recent years , there has been a substantial decline in travel bookings via travel agencies and an increase in package tours purchased online .
What consumers do not realise is the fact that travel packages purchased online offer limited protection which is much lower than that provided by travel agencies .
On the other hand , packages offered by agencies carry added costs in order to ensure compliance with this directive , while those purchased online do not carry such expenses .
For these reasons , I believe that this directive is failing to protect consumers and is also creating an imbalance between operators in the travel industry .
In order to ensure that this goes on , I appeal to the Commission to ensure equal protection on all packages irrespective of where such packages are purchased , so as to protect consumer rights which I know are of paramount importance for the Commissioner .
Therefore , in the context of the revision of the directive , it should be ensured that definitions and terminology are clarified and updated ; these include the definition of the consumer , the seller , the operator and essential contractual terms as well as , as was previously stated , the scope of the directive itself .
In my opinion , it should be solely the operator who should comply with the directive , irrespective of how the package is sold , whether directly or via an agency .
The operator should be the entity which sells or offers for sale at least one of the services included in the package in its name and which provides access by whatever means to the other services included in the package .
I believe that this is a clear example of how I think Commissioner John Dalli will be working in the coming years ; we have here clear proof of how the consumer will be given all the rights he merits .
( CS ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the revision of the Package Travel Directive must respond to a series of new challenges in the area of tourism , especially in connection with the development of new technologies which have influenced ways of communicating and selling services .
This mainly concerns sales over the Internet , which , among other things , has facilitated the dramatic growth in budget airlines .
Every challenge has its opportunities and risks .
The opportunities include greater flexibility and access to services for customers , while there is a possible risk in the insufficient level of protection for consumers .
Several months ago , the Committee on Transport and Tourism questioned the Commission in response to a series of bankruptcies of budget airlines .
In these circumstances , we have witnessed the situation of passengers being stranded in airports without money and struggling to make alternative arrangements for their return journeys .
This is only one of the examples of insufficient protection for consumers / airline passengers .
The Commission should find a solution that will deal effectively with the situation in the foreseeable future to assist consumers and to boost confidence in the sector .
The holiday season will begin in a few months and we certainly do not want to again experience problems similar to the collapse of the SkyEurope company last year .
However , the consultation with the Commission over this directive has also uncovered other issues .
Their common denominator is the need to strengthen consumer protection , especially through better levels of awareness on the part of customers concerning the real terms and the price of services .
I would like to conclude with one more remark , which applies generally to public consultations with the European Commission on various themes .
I consider it important for these consultations to be implemented in all EU Member State languages , if we really want to discover a broad spectrum of views on a given topic .
In this sense , it is EU citizens who are clients with rights to information and for whom we wish to revise the Package Travel Directive .
Mr President , I would just like to comment on the third point of the oral question this evening on airline bankruptcy .
A recent resolution in this House called for the establishment of a guarantee fund that would be used to compensate passengers in case of airline bankruptcy .
However , the establishment of such a fund would inevitably have to be funded by the consumer , meaning passengers would be required to pay even more for their tickets .
At this stage , this is an unnecessary step and would add to the sizeable list of existing airport taxes , security charges and other duties that they are already forced to pay .
In addition , the Commission should ensure that the national aviation authorities and regulators uphold existing obligations , such as regularly carrying out financial status checks of airlines and exercising their right to revoke airline operating licences before liquidation occurs .
We ask the Commission to vigorously pursue this course of action now .
Finally , I would call on the Commission to pursue other options which could protect passengers in this regard , including the provision of obligatory information regarding risk , insurance options and other protective mechanisms .
Mr President , I think we all applauded when the former Commissioner for Consumer Affairs announced on 29 August 2009 that the current directive is totally out of date and does not meet the challenges or the demands of the modern travelling public .
Why is it out of date ?
Well , these reasons have been enumerated here this evening , but they are worth looking at again .
It was fine in its own time but now it is certainly not equipped to meet the modern challenges of the travelling public .
It does not consider consumers self-packaging their holidays , and that has become increasingly the trend .
It does not cover consumers based in one country purchasing from suppliers based outside the jurisdiction of the European Union .
It does not cover scheduled airlines , and more and more people are now arranging their own package holidays by virtue of the fact that they have easy access to the Internet .
Indeed , over the past number of years , the proportion of holidays that are protected has fallen from about 90 % to about 60 % .
In other words , the current measures do not extend to online travel firms selling foreign holidays with flights and hotels as separate components , a practice referred to by the industry as ' dynamic packaging ' .
We pride ourselves on having a lot of achievements within the EU , and we laud ourselves - quite rightly - on our achievements , but , when you look at the current situation in relation to travel protection , the European Union has the least integrated market for travel services of any modern trading bloc .
There is also considerable confusion as to who accepts liability and when a customer is covered .
For example , additional security can be obtained by someone using a credit card , but not if the billing is taking place , for example , in my own country , the Republic of Ireland .
And because of the diversity of products in the marketplace today , a blurring has occurred between airlines , tour operators , cruise operators , agencies and so on , so the new legislation is urgently needed .
What we need is a vastly improved , modern piece of technology by way of the implementation of a new directive to cover all the contingencies .
We need clarification , we need certainty , and we need protection for the consumer .
( PL ) I support revision of the Package Travel Directive .
The directive is 20 years old and does not reflect the realities of today .
Today , over half of all consumers organise their trips by themselves , often using the Internet and the offers of cheap airlines .
Members who have spoken before me have talked about this .
Not all of them , however , have drawn attention to the fact that the scope of the directive needs to be defined clearly .
We cannot allow a situation in which we do not know what comes under the directive .
Such a situation is not good either for consumers or for business .
Furthermore , I do not think it is necessary to extend the scope of the directive to include individual products or packages made up from products bought from different suppliers , for extending the directive 's requirements to cover dynamic packages or affiliate sales would ultimately mean the consumer would pay in the form of a more expensive ticket .
I do not imagine that , for example , a hotel stay bought after clicking on WIZZ Hotels just after buying a ticket from WIZZ Air would constitute a package which would come under the requirements of the directive .
Consumers must know , in the case of a specific journey , if , and to what extent , they are protected by EU law .
All the rest is a matter for the free market .
It would be a good idea to mark journeys covered by the directive with a special European logo .
( DE ) Mr President , I am from Austria , a country for which tourism and the tourist economy continue to play a very important role .
Almost every one of us is involved in an area of tourism in some way or other .
Therefore , this question is rather important for our country and I am very pleased that the Commission is tackling this issue right at the start of the legislative period - and I would like to extend my thanks to the Commissioner in this regard .
Freedom of travel and travel possibilities mean that purely in quantitative terms , there is a very different level of importance than perhaps twenty or more years ago .
The possibilities offered by the Internet have also led to the emergence of a completely different kind of travel behaviour .
It is , however , all the more important that , if they can afford a proper holiday during the crisis , our citizens can also return from this holiday satisfied .
If they should experience a problem , then they should at least get back some of their hard earned money .
It is , of course , tempting to make bookings over the Internet ; we know this and it is also cheaper .
However , no traveller will be persuaded that if he books a hotel through a travel agent , he will be treated completely differently from someone who has booked it on the Internet and that , above all , any compensation claims will be handled completely differently .
Finally , another small problem .
Obviously nobody can see that there are divergences in the guarantee , which treat the tour operator completely differently from the airline .
The latter is only liable if its guilt is proven .
Anyone who has already experienced this problem knows that this is a major problem which you can normally only consider tackling with very good legal cover .
I therefore hope very much that the Commission will put a proposal before us which takes these problems into consideration and , above all , thinks of our citizens , who have a right to a trouble-free holiday and particularly at this time .
( EL ) Mr President , it is true that widespread use of the Internet nowadays allows consumers to change the way in which they plan things , even down to their holidays .
In other words , they have the facility , via the Internet , not to buy ready packages , as we have learned to do in the past , and to pick and choose how they wish to plan their holidays .
Of course , now that several parties are involved , the question arises as to who is responsible in the event that there is a problem with the service and from whom the consumer will ultimately claim compensation .
My fellow Members rightly raised this matter and we need to find answers and to update the directive which we have applied to date .
This is also crucial for Greece which , as you know , is a tourist destination , and the more clearly we define who is responsible in each instance ( the Greek hotelier or the travel agency or anyone involved in the procedure ) , the more we shall be able to rely on everyone trading in the tourist sector .
I should like to close by saying that legal protection for European citizens is crucial .
At the same time , Commissioner , we have a duty to inform everyone who chooses to holiday in a European country of the rights which they have had to date and , more importantly , to inform them of the loopholes and of the improvements we want to make .
All this is important , but citizens need to know about it in order to exercise these rights .
( EL ) Mr President , almost everything has been said .
However , I should like to focus on four points .
This directive is twenty years old .
For a woman , twenty is an excellent age .
For a directive , twenty means it is in need of a facelift .
That is because four things have entered our lives : the first is the Internet .
Now that the Internet has entered our lives , we can choose to holiday in the furthest corner of the world without thinking twice about it .
However , when we get there , we may find that perhaps we should have thought twice .
The second is prices .
Consumers have both an obligation and a right to know if the prices which they have to choose between are legal or if there is unfair competition .
The third is quality .
Accommodation which may be considered exceptional in one Member State may be considered average by a citizen from another Member State .
Finally , there is the question of security .
As people work very hard to save for holidays , we must make them feel secure .
That is what we want from the new directive .
Mr President , many colleagues have pointed out the necessity of having this review , and the sooner the better .
They have particularly mentioned the value to the consumer - and that is absolutely correct - but benefiting the consumer does not mean it is going to affect industry : it can benefit both industry and the consumer .
I particularly have in mind the fact that over the next few years , we are going to have two million people passing the age of 60 in the European Union .
That gives a great opportunity to the industry to tap in to what those people would like to do in terms of travel , particularly travel without hassle .
If this directive is all-inclusive and offers full protection , it is a great opportunity for the industry to tap into the over-60s in this European Union , which would be of great benefit to them .
I think , therefore , that , like the Timeshare Directive , this can be seen as a win-win situation both for the consumer and also for the industry .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am the mother of a large family and over many long years , have learnt to study brochures .
It is a great challenge , a challenge that sometimes even those employed in the travel agents are not up to .
That is why I would like this new directive to give me real freedom of choice as a consumer .
I will only have freedom of choice when comparability is possible , when I have the criteria to compare different offers with one another .
For me , one of these criteria is the age of the children .
Whichever tour operator we are talking about , there are fixed prices for children .
Sometimes , this affects six year olds , then ten year olds , next time twelve year olds .
With some operators , the first child is not worth as much as the second , and the third and fourth do not exist at all .
It is important for the protection of consumers - as well as for the protection of travel agents and operators - that as a consumer , I know what I am buying , so that I feel really well informed beforehand and have comparable criteria .
Mr President , I would like to add my support to what colleagues have said on the rights of disabled travellers , what Ms Kadenbach said about children , the issue of fire safety in hotels and , in particular , the issue of sprinkler safety in all EU hotels , and the need to future-proof the new proposal .
Who could have predicted the rate of change that we have seen in the past 20 years ?
There are , however , two specific issues that I would like to raise .
We have heard about the issue of credit card charging , and there has been discussion on hidden charges .
However , airline and travel companies are exploiting the fact that more people use their credit cards to book due to the protection they receive from using them , by placing double credit card charges for each leg of our journey or placing credit card charges on passengers for one online booking .
You might have one online booking , but you are charged four times for using your credit card because you have four passengers involved .
Commissioner , could you please look at this in order that people are protected .
There is , finally , the issue of bankruptcy .
In Scotland , we saw the demise of Globespan , and we must ensure that people are compensated and that no one loses out .
After all , this is the biggest budget expense many families have in a year and they expect us to protect them .
We need to do more so thank you , Commissioner .
( LT ) Over the last two decades , the travel market has developed in a very dynamic manner .
More and more people are making their own travel arrangements by purchasing services from various operators and service providers .
However , the provisions of the directive currently in force do not apply to these new travel packages , and this means that our citizens are travelling without proper protection .
I think that while revising the directive , it is necessary to define more accurately its scope and we should not allow inflexible rules to leave our citizens without appropriate protection .
Moreover , the question of liability must be resolved in cases where air carriers or travel service providers go bankrupt .
Over the last decade , more than 70 airlines have gone bankrupt , leaving travellers in the dark .
Therefore , I believe that this matter must be highlighted clearly when we review the provisions of the directive .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I have listened to the views of the honourable Members with great interest .
Many of you have affirmed the direction being taken by the Commission .
Others have underlined and emphasised many points that we have noted to make sure that they are all taken into consideration in the deliberations and discussions that we will be having on this revision of the directive .
I would like to assure you that the Commission takes these issues very seriously and is determined to find the best solutions for the way forward .
We are now in the middle of a consultation process . We are analysing the feedback we gathered from the recent online public consultation .
Consumers , businesses , organisations and Member States have all contributed .
Moreover , I can inform you that the Commission will host a stakeholders ' workshop on 22 April 2010 .
This workshop will focus on possible policy options for the revision of the Package Travel Directive , including all the issues that have been mentioned during this debate .
I must stress that it is , as yet , too early to decide the way forward .
It is essential to respect the impact assessment procedure .
However , I am determined that any action should aim at ensuring a high level of protection for the EU 's citizens .
Before I close , may I once again thank all those present for contributing to this debate . Thank you very much .
The debate is closed .
Taxation of financial transactions ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission by Sharon Bowles , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the tax on financial transactions - B7-0019 / 2010 )
author . - Mr President , the ECON Committee has put forward this question and resolution because some careful thinking has to be done .
Last year , the committee discussed financial transaction taxes with Commissioner Kovács , who , like many , said he found the idea attractive , and we made it clear then that it would be a good idea to investigate how it would work , including the infrastructure for it .
Since then , the Commission has been investigating the subject , and we are highlighting here the large range of questions needing to be answered .
There have been calls , including in the G20 last September , to make the financial sector pay for setting up stability funds and recompense for the damage that they have caused to the real economy .
President Barroso has suggested using a global financial levy to fund environmental projects .
The original Tobin Tax idea of using a financial transaction tax for development aid has also strongly resurfaced .
It is not the intention of this resolution to bring pressure to bear in any one direction , other than for answers and impact assessments , but , of course , we have many who are strong advocates of transaction taxes and many who have equally strong reservations about them .
Nowadays , it does seem highly likely that the collection of a transaction tax is easier , even at international level , given the electronic nature of many transactions , but it is also impossible to ignore the fact that there are more alternative competing destinations for the proceeds of any tax .
One idea concerning the tax is that nobody would notice because it is so small in each instance .
On the other hand , others suggest it should be used to deter excessive transactions .
It seems to my committee that if the end amount collected is large - and the sums suggest so - then somebody somewhere will actually be paying .
Many financial transactions are intermediate , not like end sales , so the intermediaries - banks and the like - will bear the tax .
But surely the extra costs - for that is what they are - will simply be passed on to the end user .
Some may say that does not matter .
However , there are also other ways that taxation could be raised within financial services .
Then there is the question of who is to collect the tax and who is to decide how it is used .
Here , there is even the ' no taxation without representation ' issue .
If the tax is collected in London for a derivative transaction that is uncosted , to somewhere else in the world , who says where to spend it ?
This question may be easier to answer if it goes to a financial stability cause in which the payers are obviously participating than if it is to go outside the financial sphere , such as to environmental projects or development aid .
All these things have an international element , both on the paying side and on the spending side .
We probably cannot do all these things and have all these benefits , so at the very least , choices have to be made about what we are trying to fix , the method by which it is to be done , and the primary purpose of the tax .
Finally , indeed , are we right to mix regulation with tax-raising ?
Are these truly complementary ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am happy to contribute to this important debate on the innovative financing instruments and answer this oral question .
Regarding the options for the introduction of a general financial transaction tax , the Commission intends , as announced in its EU 2020 strategy , to contribute to the debate on innovative financing at global level .
It is currently working on defining and assessing different approaches , one of these being a general financial transaction tax ( FTT ) .
The ' financial crisis responsibility fee ' proposed in the US and the ' stability fee ' on certain assets of banks , as introduced in Sweden , are other ones .
As far as the FTT is concerned , it is clear that the options today differ from the initial discussions on the Tobin Tax , as it would cover a broader base of financial products .
Concerning the advantages and drawbacks of the introduction of the general FTT , the Commission believes that , in assessing the different instruments , it is important to avoid the accumulation of initiatives that could be detrimental to the financial sector , and to ensure that the new initiatives do not result in the relocation of transactions to other regions , which would have a negative impact on Europe 's competitiveness .
Regarding the possibility of implementing a general FTT in the EU if our main partners do not introduce such a tax , I would like to remind you that the IMF is also , in parallel to the work of the Commission , examining options , including a global financial transactions levy .
This demonstrates that the subject is of a global nature and the Commission believes that the best way to tackle this issue is to find global and coordinated solutions .
This is our first and preferred option .
Concerning the use of tax as a complementary regulatory tool in the context of financial market reforms , I can confirm that the Commission is considering complementarities between the tax and regulatory instruments and will pay attention to the cumulative impact of these two types of instruments on the ability of the financial sector to support economic recovery .
Regarding the possibility of making the financial system long-term oriented with the introduction of a general FTT , the Commission is not aware of clear data or studies on the relationship between such a tax and the maturity structure of financial intermediation .
Concerning the allocation of revenues generated by a FTT , as the analysis on innovative financing is still ongoing , I think coming to any conclusions about revenue sharing and allocation would be premature .
Let me , nevertheless , emphasise that the potential revenues of a general FTT would be very asymmetric , probably located in only a few countries that have the largest financial centres .
This asymmetry points to the need for global solutions , including about the sharing and allocation of revenue .
Finally , the timing of the different initiatives .
As a first step , the Commission 's services are currently examining the issue of innovative financing instruments overall .
The Commission will also take into account the conclusions of our main international partners in order to identify the options with the most potential .
It is on this basis that , in a second step , concrete proposals with a detailed impact assessment might be launched , in line with the Commission 's standard approach on better regulation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the financial crisis we are experiencing has forced public authorities to intervene financially using public money .
Under these circumstances , it is tempting to consider the implementation of a tax on financial transactions .
The income from this tax would be used , for example , to finance the recovery and to develop a sustainable economy , and could initially serve to offset the cost of the crisis borne by the real economy and the taxpayer .
This tax would be added to the regulations governing the financial sector , the elimination of tax havens or even the regulations currently being drawn up for derivative products .
At this stage , it would be advisable to evaluate the effects of a tax on financial transactions .
That is the main purpose of this oral question : to encourage the Commission to examine in practical terms the various points listed in the draft resolution in order to give an opinion on the feasibility and timeliness of such a tax .
Commissioner , what you have just said is a step in the right direction .
It should , however , be stressed - as you have done - that this measure will have to be approached in a realistic and pragmatic way .
Such a tax must not be harmful to the European economy or to the competitiveness of the European financial industry .
More generally , it is important to underline the consequences of implementing this tax in the European Union alone , as some people are advocating , if no agreement were possible at international level .
We believe that this sort of purely European solution cannot be countenanced .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to chip in with a few questions on what Mr Scicluna has stated on behalf of the Committee .
Commissioner , if there are 70 , 80 , 90 or 100 times as many financial transactions in the world as gross national product , and if this development is becoming ever more dynamic , would you then say speculative elements are , for the greater part , linked to this explosion of financial products ?
If so , how do you then plan to curb them , or what might contribute to curbing them ?
If short-term financial transactions increase more and more relative to gross national product in the world , do you then share our view that we must strengthen the long-term approach in the real economy , where people work , earn money and manufacture products that we can consume and that we can use .
If you share this opinion , by what way and means do you believe will we then be able to achieve this ?
Commissioner , if the tax on financial transactions can make a contribution to this - that is what we want to look into - what would the timeframe be for negotiating this with international partners ?
We have the impression that the financial instruments that were created in the world are being used right now to speculate against the euro area and against the euro and to act against the weakest Member States .
Is it not high time now that we dealt with this and define a European approach ?
Commissioner , there is one thing I cannot understand , namely why we are urging Member States to raise value added tax by three or four or more percentage points , when a transaction tax of 0.01 or 0.05 percentage points will supposedly ruin competition and weaken Europe 's position .
I cannot believe that .
Take action .
That is what Parliament wishes .
Mr President , as we have heard here in the Chamber , the so-called Tobin Tax has been dusted off and brought out again recently as a result of the economic crisis and the increasingly troubled discussions about climate change .
We have also heard that there are high hopes of this tax , which is intended , among other things , to create security on the financial markets and to generate income that can be used to fund a variety of deserving causes , such as development aid and combating climate change .
In my opinion , these hopes are relatively naïve and I am very sceptical about the possibility of introducing a tax on financial transactions that really works .
On the one hand , I am one of those who doubt whether it will be possible to implement the tax in practice .
On the other hand , I do not believe that it will have the effect that some people are hoping for .
Among other things , I am fully convinced that no tax in the world could have prevented the financial crisis which we have experienced in recent years .
Personally , I am also critical of the idea of taxing something and then using the taxes raised for a purpose which has nothing to do with the activity that is being taxed .
I believe that this is illogical and not a particularly sound tax policy .
Please do not misunderstand me .
I want to see more funding made available for development aid .
I am a critic of my own country , which has not managed to reach the level of 0.7 percent of GDP that is often regarded as a minimum .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has produced a balanced document on this subject .
It is good that a proper investigation is being carried out at EU level into how a tax like this could work .
After this , I hope that there will be more facts and fewer political opinions in this discussion .
Otherwise , we run the risk of becoming bogged down in a debate about a tax which is impossible to put into practice while , at the same time , failing to find opportunities and solutions for raising sufficient funding for development work and our efforts to combat climate change .
The worst thing that could happen would be for the EU to attempt to introduce this kind of tax on financial transactions forcibly and for ideological reasons , without the rest of the world doing the same thing .
This could only lead to an economic fiasco for Europe which is hardly what is needed in times like these .
We must bear this in mind .
I hope that the investigation will be both serious and effective .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , I am trying out the new rule we have so that we can use our blue paper .
I was interested when the previous speaker was talking about their own country , about the reservations that they had , and they were talking about the 0.7 % GDP and the Tobin Tax .
Obviously the Tobin Tax is quite different from the financial transaction tax and this is where the confusion often is leading .
I think you are absolutely right that we need to get clarity , but maybe I would like you to go into a little bit more depth about maybe why we are not fulfilling the 0.7 % and also about how we can get clarity about what we are trying to get here in terms of a transaction tax that actually works .
Mr President , this new way of discussing is actually quite interesting .
It gives us the possibility to have a dialogue .
Finland , unfortunately , is a country that does not put 0.7 % of its GDP into development aid , which is a bad thing .
That is something that we should handle politically in our country .
It is a shame though that our government has not been able to do that .
When it comes to the Tobin Tax and the financial transaction tax , you are right : it is probably something which is not exactly the way that Mr Tobin figured it initially .
I am still very sceptical as to whether we could actually have a tax that would globally work , with all countries globally coming in , because that is the only way it would actually work without moving capital elsewhere in the world .
We will see , however , which is why we have the Commission looking at this .
It is going to be interesting .
Mr President , Commissioner , our public finances are in a situation of crisis and we know that part of the solution may lie in reducing some spending , but that a large part of the solution is in Member States ' ability to raise more funds .
The issue at stake , therefore , is knowing what type of tax may be increased , what type of tax must be increased , and what the consequences of these tax increases will be .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance estimates that it would be difficult to significantly raise the taxes paid by small businesses , which create the majority of jobs .
It is difficult to increase the taxes paid by families - with the possible exception of those paid by the richest - because in the majority of cases , these are already high enough , particularly in Europe .
The question , therefore , is : which taxes should be increased ?
If taxes on small and medium-sized enterprises are not increased and nor is VAT , other possibilities will inevitably have to be sought .
We estimate that a tax on financial transactions is , in the end , the least painful tax for the European economy .
It is the tax with the least negative consequences for the global competitiveness of the European economy .
Moreover , the cost of financial transactions has diminished enormously over the last ten years or so , both because of a certain number of technical improvements - if they can be called that - and because of European regulation .
In fact , these reductions in costs have been entirely absorbed by the financial industry and the banks .
It would not be totally unjustified if , by means of a tax on financial transactions , part of the profit saved by the banks from these decreased costs made its way back to the public authorities that saved them .
As is always the case , this House is turning this into a very ideological debate , but it is actually quite technical .
Transaction costs existed before ; they have been reduced .
Today , we are proposing that they be increased again in order for public authorities to benefit from these technical improvements and not just private actors .
Naturally , the issue of whether the European Union can take this step forward on its own is being raised .
It is clear to everyone that it would be better if this were done within an international framework .
If others - specifically , the United States - do not follow our lead , the following question arises : is the European Union 's prospect of achieving this then ruled out ?
Some statements - for example , that of Mr Gauzès - suggest that the Group of the European People 's Party believes that Europe can do nothing on its own .
That situation would not , of course , be perfect and there would be obstacles to circumvent .
Does that , however , mean that the European Union should necessarily position itself at the lowest common denominator , that it should have the least possible regulation , and align itself with the least ambitious actor ?
That does not seem to us to be the sort of thing that will strengthen the European Union 's position of leadership in the world .
Furthermore , it is possible to imagine the European Union putting this transaction in place on its own .
This is quite simply because the capital flows that concern us start out in the European Union , then may move elsewhere , only to return to the European Union .
When these flows leave and return , we have the opportunity to demand that they can be traced , and to know whether or not they have been subject to this tax on financial transactions .
If they have , no problem .
If they have not , then we can deduct an entry or exit tax .
We have done so for years in the real economy with the Common External Tariff .
Financial globalisation is now obliging us to do so in the financial sphere of the economy , and it is entirely possible from a technical point of view .
What is needed is the political will .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , following on from the recent turmoil in the global financial markets across the world , academics , politicians and Nobel Prize-winning economists are rightly looking into finding a way to recoup the money which has been spent saving our financial institutions .
Financial transaction taxes , in their many different forms , are just one of many ideas on the table and we must not limit the tools available to the EU and its Member States to looking at one idea .
We must be creative and look as widely as possible to see where we can best respond to the financial crisis and strengthening our national financial systems .
President Obama 's concept of a levy on financial institutions could bear some merit .
Yet this proposal is very specific and does not look at considering all other forms of financial taxes or levies .
As the Commissioner has said , the IMF , under the instruction of the G20 , is currently doing a study into possible financial taxes , yet this resolution appears to seek answers ahead of this study .
I do not understand the logic of trying to implement an EU solution to a global problem .
It is nonsensical and naive to think that , if the EU were to implement a transaction tax without the support of all key global players , we would not lose out to other countries .
My concerns are twofold with this financial transaction tax resolution as it stands .
Firstly , we cannot support a measure which seeks to give tax-raising powers to the EU .
It is fundamental to the sovereignty of our EU Member States that they retain the right to control their own tax systems .
It would be useful , therefore , to clarify whether this proposal is for coordinated tax-raising by individual Member States - to be retained and used at that level - or whether it really is an EU tax .
Secondly , the taxes raised to stabilise financial systems should not , in my opinion , become an extension of an EU budget line .
There are many EU- and Member State-led initiatives and spending programmes looking to tackle the global climate in smart ways .
We have ambitious targets of money to be spent in developing countries .
I would not be able to support something that actually raises taxes for other purposes .
Mr President , I believe that the technical discussion in which we must engage is undoubtedly very important , but it must not hide the fact that the choice facing us is of a political nature .
Therefore , conducting and building the whole argument on a technical basis to avoid having to make the political choice is somewhat lacking in legitimacy .
Mr Haglund , for example , explained that if we had the Tobin Tax in place , we would not have avoided the financial crisis .
I can agree with him , but we would certainly have a lot more resources to fight the effects of the financial crisis in our economies and on the most disadvantaged sectors of the European population .
This , therefore , is the issue at stake here .
And the second aspect concerns ... and this is why Commissioner Šemeta 's answer did not convince me at all , either in terms of the schedules , or in terms of the basic issue .
Ultimately , what Commissioner Šemeta is telling us , as well as Mr Gauzès , is that the tax is an appealing and very interesting idea , but that we cannot apply it on a European scale .
It must be worldwide .
Let us be clear .
Saying this is saying to people that the Tobin Tax will never exist on a global scale .
Therefore , there is no point in deceiving people here .
What is being said is that either it is global or it is not going to exist .
What is being said , therefore , is that it is not going to exist .
I have an entirely different view .
I believe that the European Union is a sufficiently strong financial market for a general residual tax on all transactions to be created without capital flight .
However , above all , we would be telling our citizens something absolutely decisive : that , in this crisis , at least on a residual level , the financial capital that led us into the crisis , at least on a residual level , must pay .
And that this was essentially and specifically intended to fight global hunger and poverty and to begin financing the establishment of a social pillar in the European project , the pillar that we are missing and that we do not have .
Citizens would understand this very well .
( DE ) Mr President , eleven years ago , I was one of the handful of Members who cofounded the cross-party Tobin Tax working group and our meetings were often met with a contemptuous smile .
From the perspective of the turn of the millennium , we referred again and again to the apparent rationality of the market , to the risks for competition and possible cracks in globalisation .
It is no good if today , you continue to put forward these arguments .
We have only just avoided a major crash , and that not only cost an awful lot of money , but also a lot of trust .
If you now think we can slow down a little with such a financial transaction tax , then the speculators - as I will call them - that I personally have got along well with , in other words , investment fund managers as they are euphemistically called , have an entirely different view , because they are conducting their business along this dividing line ever more quickly and intensively .
That is why I am not convinced that a financial transaction tax on the volume of financial transactions would achieve anything more than the damping of these enormous speculative waves .
I would really like those of you from the Commission and national governments to take heed , above all , of the words of our Green colleagues , but also those of Mr Bullmann and the Left .
It is a political question ; the technical aspects can be resolved quickly , as there are experts for that .
Mr President , one can question if , from an administrative point of view , it is possible to launch a financial transaction tax , or if it is politically possible , but I think the fundamental question must be : is it good ?
Is it useful for economic development to have a tax on financial transactions ?
Because this means that you will have a tax on investments ; cross-border , you will have a tax on investments in countries where you have less capital than in others .
Will this help international trade or will it reduce international trade , if it has an impact ?
I say this because there are two examples we could look at when we discuss this item .
Firstly , we have 30 years of enormous economic growth thanks to well-functioning global financial markets .
Then we have seen the consequences of the crisis giving us the credit crunch .
I think that we should have more affluent and functioning global financial markets rather than trying to get anywhere close to what is a credit crunch .
Because a transaction tax , just like every tax , aims to reduce the volume of what is taxed , and I do not see a benefit in reducing the amount of international trade because we have seen the consequences when that has happened .
I cannot see that making investments in poor countries more expensive is useful .
Taxing financial transactions will not hinder financial transactions .
It will not even hinder what are sometimes called speculative investments .
It will hinder the big flow of normal investments and trade that we are in need of .
And I think , Commissioner , there is every reason to be careful and hesitant when we discuss this item .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , it seems that you , Commissioner , are responsible for taxation and that your contribution to the 2020 strategy in that area will be to propose an innovative type of taxation .
Coming up with innovative types of taxation requires courage and you should not brush aside all the intelligent and constructive work done by your predecessors .
I note that the 2020 strategy does not even mention harmonisation of corporation tax ; perhaps you left it in a drawer somewhere .
I suggest that you take a slightly closer look at that .
If , however , you demonstrate that same courage regarding the tax on financial transactions , we will not get very far .
Within the European Union and the Commission to which you now belong , the conclusions of the G20 seem to be gospel .
The tax on financial transactions figures in the conclusions of the G20 , so we are asking you to implement them .
Please do not present us with the argument that we need to do what everyone else is doing , because when President Obama , under the influence of Paul Volcker , proposes reforming the United States ' banking system , he is turning his back on the conclusions of the G20 !
Why would we rule out a method which could be good for the United States ?
All the more so , Commissioner , because I note that your colleague , Mr Barnier , said that this reform could be well suited specifically to the American situation and have nothing to do with Europe ; that Europe had its own path to follow in the area of a tax on financial transactions .
That is true .
We await your courageous and innovative proposals , Commissioner .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , to be perfectly honest - and everyone knows that I fully support the Commission - your proposals seem singularly timorous .
None of them demonstrates a desire to be politically ambitious on a subject that , nevertheless , seems to me to be very important .
I remind you that the 2002 Monterrey Consensus and 2008 Doha follow-up conference recommended innovative and alternative financing in the field of development .
I do not believe that this tax on financial transactions could regulate the world financial system either ; it is not about that .
I believe that the European Union - alongside the G20 , certainly - must take the initiative in launching a tax on international financial transactions that could be set , as has been said , on a scale between 0.01 % - what a lot of money ! - and 0.1 % of the value of the transaction .
The expected revenue varies , obviously , on the basis of these two coefficients .
You can choose between USD 20 billion and USD 200 billion .

It can be of a global and general nature .
However , there is a point on which I am not in agreement with you at all : I do not believe that its implementation should be the subject of an agreement between every country in the world , but between the key economic players instead .
We must not wait for the whole world to accept this tax , as we know full well that would , in fact , kill off the very idea of it .
It should be levied at the state level and voluntarily at first , which would , of course , give the idea some impetus .
It should be coordinated by the key economic actors , in particular , the G20 .
As you are wondering what it could be used for , one alternative would be for it to be paid into a global or even a European fund ; the European Development Fund could really do with it as a means of providing public development aid .
Alternatively , states could make use of it in their development policies .
There is also something else about which I have serious doubts and , moreover , that seems to be the way things are going .
A clear indication , for example , would be when I hear the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund more or less dismissing the philosophy of the Tobin Tax , or tax on financial transactions , as a sort of blanket , anticipating or covering the risks of the financial world - what I call financial jugglers .
That is not what it is about at all !
I do not want the purpose of this tax to be to cover risks taken by the financial world .
That must be paid for another way .
That is a misappropriation I cannot accept .
I would like to remind you that all the progress recorded in the last few years in a certain number of developing countries - even those that are doing best - will probably be wiped out , preventing the Millennium Development Goals from being achieved .
I am , therefore , a fervent supporter of a tax on financial transactions .
Mr President , there are obviously many good reasons to ask financial institutions to contribute more to tax revenues post financial crisis , and it is a shame that this resolution only looks at transaction taxes and not at examples like the Obama levy .
On transaction taxes , I have three areas of concern .
Firstly , the impact on end-users of financial services .
In the UK , the stamp duty that has existed for many years has had a disproportionate impact on smaller investors and companies seeking capital .
Secondly , the impact of the EU going it alone .
We know financial markets are global and very fluid .
There is obviously a risk that we just push transactions outside the EU , which would not be beneficial .
My third concern is regarding moral hazard : if this money is to be put into a bail-out fund .
I do not believe that every failing financial institution should automatically be bailed out by taxpayers .
It must be possible to allow a bank to fail whilst still protecting customers .
Experts have warned both the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Special Committee on the Financial , Economic and Social Crisis that such a fund could encourage irresponsible risk taking .
We do not want to risk more risk , and this should be investigated .
( EL ) Mr President , there can be no doubt that the recent financial crisis has shown that the liberalisation of the financial markets and insistence on the freedom of the market has allowed the financial system to grow dangerously large in relation and in correlation to the real economy and to operate for years on the basis of massive profitability , unaccountability and no regulation , ultimately leading to the crisis .
The proposal , therefore , for a tax on financial transactions could limit the size of the financial system and make certain speculative financial options unprofitable .
However , this measure will be dead letter unless it is accompanied by an integrated plan for regulating the financial system , so as to minimise the abusive policies applied by banks and speculation by hedge funds and credit rating firms which are exacerbating and exploiting the economic problems in numerous countries .
Nonetheless , in my opinion , any such measure should not simply be considered a temporary measure .
The banks must pay off the massive support packages which they have received from European governments , packages which ultimately increased the financial deficit in those countries .
These countries are now being forced to borrow from the same banks , thereby paying them twice .
We must be clear .
The banks must pay off their debts to government .
That is why , apart from anything else , we need to impose a tax on financial transactions , firstly in order to limit the size of this financial sector and , secondly , in order to save resources for new social and development policies .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what is this all about then ?
The question is quite simply how can the financial markets help to reduce the costs that they have incurred for states , societies and the economy ?
That is the crucial question that we must answer .
I think that together , we have developed a very balanced text .
I am also very grateful to the Commissioner for the way he has worded it .
On the one hand , we cannot pretend that Europe is the Island of the Blessed where we can do what we like without the global financial markets reacting to it .
Things must be coordinated internationally .
On the other hand , we must also ensure that the sector makes an appropriate contribution to overcoming the crisis .
That is why I would caution that we must stop coming up with a new item every week that we can use to solve all the problems of the world .
A couple of months ago , it was an additional levy on airline tickets that was going to solve all our problems , now it is the tax on financial transactions and next month , somebody will think of something else .
That is going too far .
It is a question of involving the financial markets in an internationally coordinated manner .
If a sensible solution to this can be put forward by the Commission and introduced into international negotiations , then we will be on the right track .
We should also be honest with ourselves .
Those who maintain that we can stop speculation with such instruments are clearly deluding themselves .
What we want is for speculators to make their contribution to the risk and to overcoming the risk .
That is the right approach .
In doing so , you have our full support Commissioner .
Mr President , in the UK at the moment , a campaign called the Robin Hood Campaign has been launched involving NGOs , churches and civil society , and fronted by the actor Bill Nighy .
Commissioner , if you have not looked at their website , I would highly recommend it to you as part of this debate .
The basis of the campaign is a financial transaction tax at 0.05 % , which they believe would raise something in the region of GBP 37 billion .
So the financial transaction tax is not about people going to a cashpoint and withdrawing money : this is about non-public transactions and it is about those who have contributed to the financial crisis giving something back .
If I put that into perspective , I listened to John Kay the economist about three weeks ago ; he came to Scotland to speak , and if Scotland had been an independent country and our banks had collapsed , each man , woman and child in Scotland would have been liable for GBP 750 000 .
Now we cannot allow that to happen in the future .
It has not happened at the moment , thank goodness , because we in Scotland are part of the United Kingdom , but in the future , we must look seriously at the financial transaction tax and look at how it would be applied .
The Robin Hood Campaign is an interesting one and I think there should be an 80 : 20 split within it ; 80 % going to public services and 20 % to making sure we have a fund to ensure that the banking crisis does not happen again .
Thank you , Commissioner , and I look forward to your proposal .
Maybe you could give us a time-scale on when we will hear what your opinion is .
I know that the EU 2020 will come forward in April , but it would be good to hear your time-scale .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , in the current crisis , there are only two choices before us .
The first is to make the people pay for the crisis , as we have been doing : through austerity plans , unemployment action and tax rises like the recent increase on VAT in Greece .
The other is to tax speculative capital movements and financial transactions .
That would generate considerable revenue for the European economy and I believe that it would be a weapon against the financial crisis that we are currently experiencing .
It would also be necessary to have the courage to close tax havens .
This suggestion is in no way revolutionary , since it is already included in G20 agreements .
Some of these principles were even debated and voted on here , but it is urgent that we go further than making aimless proclamations .
We must put an immediate end to this lethal speculation .
In fact , several economists believe that if we applied a low tax rate of 0.5 % to financial transactions , it would make a further EUR 500 billion available to the European Union .
That is money that we could use for a recovery based on work , training , research , salaries , and new environmentally friendly , industrial and agricultural policies .
We need , therefore , to start taking action .
We need to have the courage to vote for the principle of such a tax and to then implement it .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the Austrian Parliament and in the Austrian Federal Government , as well as in my party , the Austrian People 's Party , there is broad political will to campaign for a financial transaction tax .
The financial and economic crisis has global repercussions , as well as causes , which cannot be reduced to one continent .
We do not need just global governance mechanisms ; we need global supervision mechanisms , global regulatory guidance mechanisms and also sources of funding .
However , the question of sources of funding is not enough .
The effects of guidance are equally important .
First of all , we need a common European will , a European project , so we can also be successful globally .
The question to the Commission and the resolution , which I hope Parliament will pass on Wednesday with a wide majority , are an expression of the joint political will to develop and implement - preferably on a global scale - a model for a financial transaction tax .
I look forward to receiving a very concrete proposal from the Commission that will contribute to this solidarity in Europe , and I expect the Commission to present this proposal as soon as possible , as well as an answer to our questions .
What impact will such a financial transaction tax have on the real economy and on the competitiveness of the economic and financial position of the European Union ?
What should it be levied on , how high should the percentage be , who levies it and who receives the money ?
Should there be earmarking ?
I would say yes , but what for ?
We must resolve all these matters .
With today 's debate and the vote on Wednesday , we are setting the course .
Please give us an answer quickly .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , the crisis has shown that the European Union lacks the necessary instruments to counteract the effects of the former and provide an appropriate framework for economic recovery .
It is therefore necessary to formulate a common response .
This should involve not only coordination of Member States ' strategies , but also equipping ourselves , as a Union , with appropriate instruments empowering the Union to take meaningful action so as to provide an immediate and global response .
The first objective should be to equip the Union with more far-reaching and more effective economic governance , which calls for greater financial autonomy .
In this context , a tax on financial transactions designed to fulfil a triple purpose could be very helpful .
After all , we need to enhance the Union 's capacity to develop its own policies , we need to improve economic stability by limiting speculative operations , and we need to provide the information required to monitor the condition and evolution of financial markets .
In addition , when designing this fiscal instrument , provision should be made to ensure that the financial sector makes a contribution to help repair the damage to the real economy and cover the expenditure and cost of stabilising the banking system .
Commissioner , can you provide us with a timetable for this ?
( PT ) Mr President , the European Parliament is right to present a set of questions on this issue and not to give a final position on the new tax on financial transactions .
There are , moreover , several reasons for that .
You only have to listen to what the indefectible supporters of this tax have been telling us .
They say that it is a political problem , that the technical solutions hardly matter .
Firstly , let us go ahead with the tax , and then we will see how it is going to be implemented .
It is a mistake .
It is not possible to solve the problem of the financial crisis with ideology .
Secondly , they say this would be a tax that might help the most disadvantaged , a kind of Robin Hood tax , since the most advantaged overcome their situation with the growth of the economy .
The issue of European or global scale hardly matters .
It also avoids resolving the issue .
What would happen if only Europe had this kind of tax ?
There are several elements that must be taken into account .
In a time of crisis , it is not by means of a new tax that one can solve any problem .
It is not by means of a new tax that we will solve the problem of public finances .
It is not by means of a new tax that works as a kind of penalty tax , a punitive tax , a tax intended to punish those responsible for the crisis .
End consumers are the ones who suffer with a new tax .
Those in need of credit are the ones who suffer with a new tax .
Secondly , there is a series of technical problems to discuss .
Those that do not matter .
Is there one European administrative system that might implement a tax such as this one ?
Can anyone tell us the cost of this implementation ?
Can anyone tell us what its effect on liquidity and credit will be ?
How is a global tax going to be applied with time differences and transactions by the second ?
How can all this be controlled ?
All these questions are still to be answered .
It is my view that we should learn from a crisis and adopt positions .
I doubt the new tax is the right one .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the debate on the imposition of a tax on international financial transactions may not be new , but it is extremely topical today , because the basic lesson from the crisis in the global economy , especially for the euro area , which has been subject to systematic attacks by speculators recently , is that the previous unaccountability of the financial markets and the lack of fundamental financial regulation and governance is having immediate and visible repercussions on the real economy , on the viability of public economies , and on social stability .
Within this framework , the imposition of a tax on international financial transactions is especially important , because it is one of the key points of the long-awaited restructuring of financial control mechanisms .
The solution , of course , is not for us to introduce yet another European tax which will have dubious repercussions on the competitiveness of the European economy , but to formulate an ambitious European proposal to be put to the G20 .
Mr President , financial markets are global and financial companies are global ; indeed , the financial industry is the biggest global sector at the moment .
As our needs are global as well - such as the development agenda , the Millennium Development Goals or tackling climate change - to me it is more than natural that financial transaction taxation should be the first attempt at global taxation .
Politics is not global ; nor , as we know , is it properly European Union .
Someone has to take the lead in tackling the issue , and it is quite naturally the European Union 's place to take the lead .
Usually the one that takes the lead - developing the mechanisms , the models , having the intellectual property - has the leverage , and the advantage of being the first as well .
While there are slight benefits in terms of slightly curbing most speculative transactions , in my opinion , the biggest benefits relate to entering the new field of taxation , a global mechanism and gathering resources - not so much in the financial sector , but especially for our European and global development and environmental needs .
Indeed , to be active on this issue , the European Union has to have clear thinking , we have to have a united position , and that is why I would like to see the Commission come forward with a proposal very soon on how to make this FTT workable .
Mr President , it has been no less than 40 years since , as students , we discussed a new international economic order , one part of which included a proposal to use special drawing rights ( SDR ) loans to the IMF and to include a sort of tax on national governments which would be used for helping poor countries .
This , as we know , did not materialise .
Many years later , realities have changed : globalisation , together with the advancement in technology and the stronger political will , has made certain plans more doable .
The number of global policy objectives has , however , increased .
Besides poverty , which unfortunately is still with us , we are also concerned with global environmental problems like climate change , and now we are essentially talking about a sort of global insurance premium to compensate victims for the social and economic pain caused by financial catastrophe .
We have to be careful when faced with multiple objectives .
I suggest that we abide by the wise rule , that we ensure that for each objective , we need a separate instrument .
Let the Commission be bold , but we must ensure that the financial transaction tax must be very focused and doable .
Let us not try to make it all things to all people .

Mr President , two words spring to mind in discussing this topic : they are the Latin words festina lente , or ' hasten slowly ' , because this topic is obviously quite controversial , as all taxes are .
I suppose it is particularly attractive to talk about putting tax on financial institutions to make them more risk-aware and to maybe pay for their sins , but financial transactions are global and not just European in dimension so , as Ms Swinburne pointed out , we have to consider all options .
Look where the IMF and the G20 are going , and then maybe move ourselves , but we certainly need to consider this very carefully .
So I say , festina lente , hasten slowly , having thought deeply and consulted widely , and then we may need to act , with or without the aid of Robin Hood .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , even though the developed countries are responsible for 80 % of greenhouse gas emissions , developing countries are today paying for the worst repercussions .
These extremely drastic repercussions are hitting the poorest countries , the countries which have not done anything to cause the greenhouse effect .
There are currently twenty million environmental refugees .
If we do not do something straight away , there will be five hundred million by 2050 .
We have a serious climate-related obligation towards these countries of an estimated EUR 100 billion a year .
Of this , a fair share for the European Union is EUR 35 billion .
It is vital that we immediately introduce a tax on financial transactions , so that we can fund our climate-related obligation .
At the same time , this tax will allow us to pay our climate-related debt to posterity by helping to fund energy independence from coal .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , a proposal that did not prosper two decades ago is once again the subject of discussion and debate due to the financial and economic crisis .
No longer is the proposal being advocated just by academics and minority or opposition groups .
Now , the G20 , the International Monetary Fund and some leaders of the most developed countries in the world are suggesting the introduction of this tax .
We must seize this opportunity because the time is right .
As a Member of the Committee on Development , I support the view that if such a tax is introduced , part of the revenue generated should be devoted to financing development .
If the revenue were used exclusively to finance deposit insurance or for purely economic purposes , the financial sector would not be making a fair contribution to global justice .
Accordingly , part of this revenue should be devoted to development aid .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am pleased that you have devoted your time to this important debate .
The idea of a financial transactions tax has generated a lot of attention so far .
As I explained , the Commission is currently examining innovative financing at a global level and is paying particular attention to the following issues .
First , the analysis of the competitiveness aspect .
As financial transactions are so mobile and financial markets so competitive , the risk of reallocation of activities to other markets appears to be very high .
This means that a common approach and , at the very least , good cooperation , are necessary at international level .
A second issue is the cumulative impact of various initiatives which should not undermine the ability of the financial sector to support economic recovery .
Third , we need to get the analysis right .
The Commission will soon publish its analysis of various options .
I have to say that it is not so simple .
We are carrying out an analysis and analysing various instruments .
Those instruments are related not only to the financial transaction tax but also to possible levies on banks ' assets , on banks ' leverage and so on .
We have to make this analysis very thoroughly in order to make proper conclusions as to which options are the best .
The Commission will compare its findings with those of one of its international partners .
On this basis , the more promising instruments will be identified which the Commission will assess in further detail .
I should also say that , in the EU 2020 strategy , ' taxation ' or ' taxes ' is mentioned many times , which is in strong contrast with previous strategic documents .
I think the Commission is paying serious attention to the issues related to developments in the taxation area .
To conclude , I would like to stress that the Commission promotes and supports a serious global analysis on the potential benefits and disadvantages of different innovative finance instruments , including a financial transaction tax .
I would like to thank Parliament for its interest and involvement in this topic .
I have received one motion for a resolutionon behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Policy to wind up the debate in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon on Wednesday , 10 March 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - I have been a long-time supporter of a Financial Transaction Tax ( FTT ) , or as the supporters in the USA call it - a financial speculation tax ( FST ) .
James Tobin was one of the first to promote the idea as a means of stabilising global financial markets and , in the process , raising substantial money for development aid .
The powerful financial speculators rejected it , as did powerful governments , as not feasible .
Now the IMF , as a consequence of the crisis , is studying its feasibility and we must insist that the expert report is not gutted and rendered useless by backroom lobbying .
We now have the tools , for example the SWIFT clearing system in Europe , which would enable us to apply a tax .
But still , contrary to research , the old spurious arguments are trotted out ; ' it could be evaded , it would be a burden on consumers ' .
The financial crisis , driven by unscrupulous financial speculators , who continue to make vast fortunes , whose activities have brought the world economy to its knees , need to be circumscribed .
The growing support for a FTT must be driven hard by public opinion for governments to act , and not to cave in to the people for whom greed is not enough .
Implementation of the Single Euro Payments Area ( SEPA ) ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission by Sharon Bowles on the Single European Payment Area ( SEPA ) .
author . - Mr President , my predecessor as Chair of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee brought a resolution on SEPA to this Chamber on 12 March 2009 .
Not much has changed and now I bring mine here in March 2010 .
Can I say that we really do expect progress before the Ides of March 2011 .
The Commission has made an effort in its SEPA roadmap of September 2009 .
We agree with the actions in the six priority areas , but a large majority of the respondents of the Commission 's own consultation said that it was necessary to fix an end date in order to incentivise the reluctant .
Those are the Commission 's own words .
Now , you cannot put it any straighter than that , and we suggest that the binding end date be fixed for no later than 31 December 2012 .
We live in times when there are increasing numbers of cross-border purchases and contracts .
Having common standards for these cross-border payments , credit transfers and direct debits is an important part of the health and growth of the single market .
It is much better for consumers when they do not have to check whether there are different arrangements from country to country or get caught out because there are .
So consumers are not unfavourable to this project , but they do have to have security , and it is a worry if there are not sufficient safeguards for the management and checking of the mandate of direct debits .
Payment systems take up one third of the operating costs of banks so there is a lot in it for banks to get SEPA right , but they cannot have it all their own way .
The European Payments Council must recognise that consumers are worried about frauds and confidence tricks , and who is looking out for them .
Some busy people may not notice a new transaction , especially if the amount is a common one .
Therefore , there must be possibilities for the consumer to have extra safeguards around the setting up of direct debits .
It is no good to say that banks will pick up all the frauds .
Banks have not picked up fraudulent cheque practices .
For example , in France , there have been problems with back-of-cheque endorsement frauds on cheques made out to a bank being paid into a third-party account .
This has happened four years after the UK Financial Services Authority closed that loophole .
It is not satisfactory to solve these problems with add-ons or additional offers of services which do not protect everyone .
That is the fraudster 's charter .
It is not satisfactory to be done country by country .
That is the cross-border fraudster 's charter .
So , Commissioner , we look to you to be firm , fix these problems and come forward with solutions for SEPA direct debits by 30 September 2010 .
This year should see a significant increase in the use of SEPA by public authorities , so the moment is right to press forward , especially asking Member States that have not made plans to participate in the surveys .
We also ask that those - or maybe it is that - Member State that has not solved the problem of continuing legal validity of existing direct debit mandates to get on with it and solve the problem .
Perhaps the other main stumbling block is the multilateral interchange fee for card payments and , again , this needs resolving in a way that is also in accord with competition policy .
These are important issues and , Commissioner , we say that the moment has come to be firm and set an end date so that we can successfully migrate to SEPA and make this project - which is very important for the single market - truly take off .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to see you again and I would like to start by expressing my agreement with what Mrs Bowles just said , namely that consumers need security .
That echoes an ambition that I stated during my hearing before this House for consumers to reclaim the domestic market through specific projects .
One of these is the single euro payments area ( SEPA ) .
It is a complicated project but its aim - that of simple financial transfers within Europe - justifies our action .
Mrs Bowles , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Parliament for its support for SEPA and to give concrete responses to the five points mentioned by Mrs Bowles , which correctly identify the problems that we must solve .
I am also mindful of the preliminary work that was carried out and of Mrs Berès ' and Mr Gauzès ' extremely positive and interesting reports on matters relating to SEPA .
It is true , Mrs Bowles , that a deadline could give the SEPA project some of the impetus it needs .
That is what I believe .
An expiry date would indeed have several positive effects .
It would make the legal position clearer , allow the planning of necessary investments , and bring an end to the coexistence of two payment systems - national and European - which leads to needless expenditure .
A deadline presupposes legislation .
My staff are currently analysing various options and their analyses should be finished next spring .
We will decide on the most effective course of action on that basis .
I can confirm for you that it will be based on legislation .
As I speak to you now - it is early March - it is really too early for me to announce that end date .
I have noted your suggestion of 2012 , Mrs Bowles , and I will bear it in mind .
Whatever the case , we will have to permit operators an adjustment period , for example , 12 months for transfers and at least 24 months for withdrawals .
Another advantage of a legislative initiative could be to deal with some of the issues raised by your resolution and by the Economic and Financial Affairs Council in order to improve the quality of SEPA products for users .
My second point , Mrs Bowles , is that we need clarification on multilateral interchange fees .
It is an important issue for the financing and therefore the development of SEPA cards and withdrawals .
In late 2009 , the Commission published a discussion document which included new data as well as the opinions of various types of users on this issue We will touch on the result of that public consultation in a moment .
This issue must , of course , be analysed on the basis of its compatibility with competition policy , for which my colleague , Mr Almunia , is responsible .
Nevertheless , I would like to make several comments .
There is a short-term , transitory system in place for withdrawals until November 2012 , allowing multilateral interchange fees of up to 8.8 % for cross-border transactions .
I note , however , that more than 70 % of withdrawals in Europe are now carried out without the imposition of any multilateral interchange fee on the transaction .
The multilateral interchange fee , therefore , does not seem to be the only financing mechanism , or even the most effective one .
For cards , as you know , the Commission has adopted a decision against MasterCard 's cross-border multilateral interchange fees .
We did the same for Visa .
The procedure regarding MasterCard is being appealed before the Court of Justice .
As part of this procedure , specifically with regard to the level and type of these fees , the European Commission has already clarified the rules of the game .
The Court 's final rulings should contribute to giving this a firmer legal basis .
Thirdly , as I had the opportunity to mention at my hearing , I am in favour of launching a European initiative on cards .
A series of initiatives is being developed in the private sector , for example , the Monnet project , PayFair , and the European Alliance of Payment Schemes .
Mrs Bowles , ladies and gentlemen , I will soon be meeting the main players in this market in order to jointly assess their willingness to move forward and perhaps to coordinate their initiatives and determine a framework for action .
At the same time , the Commission will be analysing , from the perspective of competition regulations , the arguments presented by the card systems in order to justify their financing system .
The fourth point relates to the future of governance .
As you know , the SEPA does not benefit from a pan-European system of governance .
That is why there has been a joint initiative with the European Central Bank to create a SEPA council that brings together a limited number of high-level representatives of the payments industry and users .
The objective is not to make decisions but to facilitate dialogue to ensure the SEPA project is properly implemented .
The first meeting will take place in the spring .
Mrs Bowles , ladies and gentlemen , I will personally keep Parliament well informed about the work of the SEPA council , particularly when I appear before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
My final point concerns respect for the interests of users , a subject which you mentioned , Mrs Bowles .
It is unfortunate , but the bank payments industry often seems somewhat reluctant to recognise users ' concerns .
Improvements can be made to the way in which the European Payments Council governs , which would encourage transparency and the recognition of users ' concerns .
The SEPA council will constitute a good platform for moving towards these improvements .
I also intend to take more direct action on specific points , in particular , the improvements that must be made to the withdrawals system .
The Commission and the European Central Bank will be writing very shortly to the European Payments Council to request that they incorporate certain modifications in response to consumers ' concerns .
I cannot exclude the possibility that the Commission may take measures if it notices obstacles preventing this , in order to take account of the worries of consumers .
Mr President , Mrs Bowles , ladies and gentlemen , you will have understood that I am determined to act and make SEPA work , as I told you in January .
I will , of course , rely on the support of this House and your determination in making these improvements .
Mr President , Commissioner , I do not doubt your determination , and you have , in the points that you have just covered , already answered most of the questions we were going to ask and that are raised by this resolution .
I will simply remind you that the difficulty of the subject stems from the fact that the single euro payments area ( SEPA ) is an initiative of payment institutions , particularly banks .
Also , may I say that the purpose of the directive on payment services , for which I had the honour of being rapporteur , was specifically designed to enable us to identify and define the legal instruments needed in order to put this European payments system in place .
Another purpose of the directive was to improve competition in the area of payments , and Title II made provision for the creation of payment institutions , which were intended to break the monopoly of the banks .
This complicated beginning certainly explains part of the delay , but it is certainly also true , as you have said , that payment services establishments - that is , banks - have demonstrated a certain reluctance to implement this mechanism .
There is an explanation : the cost .
I am sure you already know this , but to give you an idea : in France , for example , the cost of implementing SEPA is higher than that of changing to the euro .
There has also been the matter of interchange fees , which deserves to be tackled .
There are two issues involved .
The first , as you mentioned , is that of conformity to the rules of competition , but the second issue , which must not be neglected , is that the payment service is a commercial activity for payment institutions which must , therefore , be fairly remunerated .
What has been condemned is the possibility of setting interbank margins unilaterally , arbitrarily and without consultation , when these rightly appear excessive .
Commissioner , we are counting on you to ensure that the progress we have made with the creation of a single-payments market can result in the swift implementation of European tools for transfers and direct debits .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Single Euro Payments Area is an important , indeed central , instrument of the European single market .
It is thanks to Mr Gauzès that we have got it off the ground .
My group is fully behind it and would like to see it working well .
I personally also have nothing against us setting a deadline for the migration , and here to me it is not so much a question of whether it takes three , four or five months as the fact that it then actually works .
Whether it actually works depends on two things .
Firstly the appeal to industry that it must be end-user friendly .
These days , we cannot afford any rumours , any secret resistance , any hankering after the old system .
Therefore , it must be functioning properly , also in respect of those who ultimately have to use it .
Secondly , it must , of course , also work for the benefit of the economy .
Here I would like to mention one point , which is still a bone of contention , namely the matter of how direct debits will be calculated .
Here , the economy does not yet seem to be in a position to propose a sensible model .
There are still snags , there are still sticking points and if the economy is not in a position to present a common model that works within the European Union , then the Commission - as stipulated in this proposal for a resolution - must present a concrete proposal within a certain period of time , let us say before the end of the year .
It should not be the case that we confront the economy and demand a deadline for the migration , but do not take the initiative to remove the resistance that the payment service providers are obviously not in the position to overcome single-handedly .
We need a community initiative here , so the whole thing can work .
That is our approach to the discussion .
Mr President , it is good that we have the euro .
Small countries like my native Austria would have otherwise come under immense pressure during the financial crisis of 2007 .
The other side of the euro coin is , however , the lack of consistency and the lack of accountability , and here there are , of course , some questions for the Commission .
Firstly , who is responsible for the lack of control in the euro system ?
Secondly , who is responsible for the fact that the false budget figures from Greece were not recognised sooner ?
Thirdly , is it not the case that while we are talking about Greece today , the real problem is Spain ?
Fourthly , can the European Commission guarantee that Spain will not submit false budget figures and what is it doing about this ?
I demand clarity and transparency and , above all , that those people who bear responsibility are ultimately brought to account .
Only then , when these people are actually made responsible , can we guarantee that the rules of the game will , in the end , be adhered to consistently .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , to begin with , it is right that common procedures should go with a common currency .
It is right to consider how these common procedures , which have not yet been implemented everywhere in the Single Euro Payments Area , might be enforced a little better .
On the other hand , I will say quite clearly that we still have to adapt the rulebook in a few places .
I myself come from a country where the direct debit procedure is a very widespread procedure , in order to facilitate the processing of certain regular payments .
The procedure that is currently planned in the rulebook is a very bureaucratic , very complicated procedure and therefore , I would be very pleased , Commissioner , if , with regard to a final date - something we all want - this area in particular is tackled once again .
On the one hand , there should be no vulnerability to fraud - that is a problem in the cross-border area - but on the other hand , it should also be possible for local charges to be debited , and for any magazine subscription , any insurance premium , any mobile phone bill , and so on to continue to be collected in a simple procedure by the companies concerned .
That is my request and there is also a corresponding passage in our motion for a resolution on this subject , so that we can contribute to ensuring that procedures that have proved successful in the Member States can also be guaranteed after the final introduction of the Single Euro Payments Area .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are probably all united in our approval of the answers given by the Commissioner to the question and are grateful for them .
They are in keeping with the objectives of the European Parliament .
Secondly , I would like to say that the method of self-regulation in the banking area that we have chosen for SEPA is a method in which the organs work well and several hundred banks have joined the SEPA area in a very short space of time .
SEPA is part of the single market , it is larger than the euro area , but it is not complete .
I am very much in favour of a consistent , legally binding final date , because I hope that with such a date , we will increase the pressure to take care of outstanding questions and the legal obligation to get consistent implementation off the ground .
This will allow all participants once again to present everything that still has to be done .
A common date is essential to implement the SEPA area as quickly and efficiently as possible and to ensure maximum suitability for the single market .
Mr President , SEPA is a commendable initiative that will undoubtedly be of great benefit in improving the efficiency of cross-border payments and turning the fragmented national markets for euro payments into a single domestic one , by enabling customers to make cashless euro payments to anyone located anywhere in the area using a single bank account and a single set of payment instruments .
Another major benefit will result from the reduction of the overall costs to the European economy of moving capital around the region , which is estimated today at two to three per cent of the total gross domestic product .
We must remember that the end goal of SEPA was to create a truly domestic payments environment all around Europe , and it is understandable that achieving such an ambitious goal is by no means easy , especially when considering the unfortunate necessity of finding compromises between the often conflicting interests of the pan-European banking community .
The economic crisis has only hindered the process of implementing SEPA standards ; this is a costly process and the banks have understandably had other , more urgent priorities in recent times .
An analysis of the current situation should be carried out and , I think , a realistic timetable set as soon as possible .
It is now essential that a legally binding deadline for migration to the use of SEPA instruments be established , as my colleague , Mr Karas , has just said .
It is unacceptable that to date , there is no concrete schedule in place .
The notion that domestic standards should be allowed to run in parallel with SEPA is inefficient and counterproductive .
I therefore call on you , Commissioner , and the Commission , to bring certainty to this already fragile sector and ensure that a legally binding end date for migration to SEPA instruments is finally set .
Mr President , I would like to thank all those who spoke for their contribution .
What particularly struck me during the course of Mrs Bowles 's initial speech was the fact that the whole Parliament has shown unanimous support for the implementation of the single euro payments area ( SEPA ) , as it had already amply demonstrated in the past .
That is confirmed by the draft resolution .
It is a project that is two years old and I think that it needs to be implemented now .
Once again , I repeat that I have been struck by the unanimity that was expressed again a moment ago on the need to set a deadline .
I therefore confirm my commitment to setting that deadline .
Please allow me a few weeks simply to take the time - I believe it will be time well spent - to meet with all of the key players in the banking sector .
I will carry out this brief consultation - on this subject and on others relating to the proper implementation of SEPA - and then I will take the decisions quickly , as Mrs Bowles has asked .
SEPA will only be a success if it fully meets the expectations of consumers and the people who use it .
I am talking about businesses , particularly small businesses , consumers , and national administrations .
The Commission hopes - and it will move in that direction - that the concerns of users are taken into account when implementing SEPA .
I would like to say to Mrs Băsescu that I will also pay attention to the efforts of the new Member States - and I know that such efforts exist in your country as well as in others - to be fully included in the SEPA project , which is in everyone 's interests .
Finally , with regard to cards , which I mentioned in my hearing , it seems that greater clarity is needed .
Once again , I need a few weeks , or a few months at most , in which to hold meetings in order to clarify the key players ' intentions and determine the extent to which they are prepared to coordinate or combine their efforts regarding the financing model for a potential pan-European card system .
As for the competitive framework in which it should operate , that is a issue that I will have to raise with the banking sectors ' key players .
I would like to thank you , Madam Chair , ladies and gentlemen , for the constructive and diligent support that you have once again expressed for the SEPA project .
It is matched by the commitment of the European Commission .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon on Wednesday , 10 March 2010 .
Annual accounts of certain types of companies as regards micro-entities ( debate )
The next item is the report by Klaus-Heiner Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the annual accounts of certain types of companies as regards micro-entities - C6-0074 / 2009 - .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report is about a project that Parliament has pursued for many years and that is now possibly being brought a step closer to success .
We wanted to free micro-entities - and here we are talking about companies that are particularly small , with few employees , minimum turnover and profit figures and which effectively only operate in a regional , local area , say a small baker or painter and decorator - from accounting obligations .
In cooperation with the Council - the fourth directive , about which we are talking , and which has been amended several times - Parliament has repeatedly tried to implement this .
The last attempt was within the framework of the report by Mrs van den Burg at the end of 2008 .
We did not manage to achieve this in negotiation with the Council at that time .
The result was that in December 2008 , Parliament passed a resolution , almost unanimously , in which it called on the Commission to get this possibility of freeing micro-entities off the ground from a legislative point of view .
That is exactly what has happened in the meantime .
The Commission has made the proposal and has thus done exactly what Parliament wanted .
In addition , a committee convened by the European Commission - namely Mr Stoiber 's group , which is concerned with cutting bureaucracy - has also given its view on this problem and has said that this would be the key instrument to ease the burden on micro-entities in Europe .
We are talking about possible savings to the tune of EUR 6.3 billion in total .
At the same time , it should be remembered that micro-entities suffer from bureaucratic burdens to a particularly high degree .
This proposal by the Commission is , in a way , the flagship of the fight against red tape and the policy for fighting red tape in the European Union , and is therefore of rather central and major importance .
There is a whole range of sensible reasons why this proposal is right .
This directive we are now discussing dates from 1978 .
It was aimed at large and medium-sized businesses .
It was never intended for micro-entities .
The fact that micro-entities are subject to obligations by this directive , namely the drawing up of accounts , which , in terms of their structure and the elements they contain , are essentially the same as those required from large companies , completely overlooks what is actually necessary , as well as the needs of micro-entities .
If such a micro-entity needs a loan , this balance has next to no value .
I would go so far as to say that most of these micro-entities - and this is confirmed by the Commission 's research - do not understand their own accounts at all .
I will stress again that the value is practically zero .
What is important for the allocation of loans is the matter of cash flow .
That is , for example , the matter of liquidity , the matter of reserves which can be activated .
These are , however , all things which , in principle , cannot be deduced from a balance sheet in this form ; this only portrays a snapshot and does not determine whether such a business deserves a loan or not .
It is also not a matter of competition , contrary to much of what was stated here by parts of the lobby .
As a rule , these businesses do not compete in the single market , in cross-border activity .
They only operate on a regional or local basis .
That is why this problem is not of any relevance to the single market .
Besides , the single market is not an end in itself .
It is important and it is good that we have it .
However , its rules should apply to the functioning of the single market , to cross-border trade , not issues that are only of concern internally to the national economy .
Against this background , we should now bring this never-ending story to a conclusion .
We should adopt this report .
That would pave the way for the Council to reconsider this matter and to possibly break up the existing qualified minority .
That would be good for Europe 's smallest businesses .
Mr President , I would first of all like to give my thanks for and welcome the work of the two rapporteurs : Mr Lehne , Chair of the Committee on Legal Affairs , who has just spoken , and Mr Sterckx .

I would like to remind you that , as Mr Lehne said , this proposal for a directive by the Commission is a response to the wishes of this House .
Parliament 's resolution is dated 18 December 2008 .
It called on the Commission to present a legislative proposal to allow Member States to exclude micro-entities from the scope of the accounting directives .
At the same time , the High Level Group of Independent Stakeholders on Administrative Burden Reduction , chaired by Mr Stoiber , came out clearly in favour of the proposal , as Mr Lehne said a moment ago .

Finally , the European Economic and Social Committee gave its support to this proposal to simplify accounting procedures .
So , here we are .
Why is this measure important ?
By creating a single reporting system , this proposal should allow Member States to homogenise the reporting requirements for all micro-entities and make them more consistent .
This new approach should allow a substantial reduction in the costs borne by these entities .
Mr Lehne , you spoke of several billion euros .
Personally , I have the figure given to me by my staff , who estimate the savings to be a maximum of EUR 6.3 billion .
Even if this figure were lower , that would , in my eyes , justify going ahead with the debate on this issue in order to encourage the activities of European micro-entities .
That is another reason why I am calling for the proposal on micro-entities to be adopted quickly .
If we had to include this proposal within the more general framework of the review of the accounting directives , as the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs wanted , that would certainly take longer .
It could even be several years before these provisions were applicable .
Right now , ladies and gentlemen , I hear criticisms , remarks and propositions from both sides and I would like to try to respond to or reassure you on three specific points .
Firstly , what the proposal does is give Member States an option that they may or may not choose to exercise .
In other words , any Member States that so wish can keep the current rules without having to modify their own national regulations .
Secondly , I wish to stress that this proposal is aimed at simplification and subsidiarity .
In order for members of the public and businesses to understand and take advantage of the domestic market , we must not impose rules at European level unless absolutely necessary .
I think that , in the specific case of micro-entities , the current rules could appear excessive .
Thirdly , contrary to what may have been said , this proposal does not necessarily involve completely exempting micro-entities of all accounting requirements .
I know that concerns were expressed about that in certain Member States .
The compromise proposed by the Committee on Legal Affairs is quite clear on that point .
These businesses will have to keep supporting documents clearly showing transactions carried out and their own financial situation .
To conclude these introductory words , and before I listen to what you have to say , I wish to personally encourage this House to support this proposal .
The parties involved are awaiting this decision and I think that a strong signal from Parliament is now necessary in order to move forward on this issue .
We are all in favour of simplification .
I think that this proposal , of which the Chair of the Committee on Legal Affairs is a fervent supporter , is an example of such simplification and I hope that micro-entities will soon be able to benefit from the savings expected from this proposal .

Mr President , I am pleased that the position of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs can be presented in plenary after all ; that was not the case a few weeks ago .
I agree with the Commission 's basic idea that the administrative burden on small enterprises must be reduced and that - as Mr Lehne said - a distinction must be drawn between large and small enterprises .
Yet the proposal on the table does not achieve this objective , which explains the position of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
If there are no annual accounts available , it makes it more difficult for small enterprises to obtain information about colleagues .
At present , we are seeing different situations in different Member States , which I do not welcome , particularly in the case of small enterprises , who are not specialists in such things .
Therefore , I wish to ask my fellow Members to support our position .
What we are calling for is a comprehensive impact assessment , covering not only the 6.3 billion positive consequences but also the negative impact ; this has been an omission on the Commission 's part .
Administrative simplification would be best carried out as part of the revision of the Company Law Directives , as it would then affect everyone equally .
Within this framework , simplifications could be made and distinctions drawn .
Thirdly , we would end up with a uniform directive for all Member States , a stronger internal market and genuine administrative simplification .
Mr President , we know very well how micro-entities differ from small and medium-sized enterprises , not to mention large economic entities .
I would like , therefore , to draw attention to external factors which are unfavourable to the activity of these firms .
They include both macro-economic factors , such as legislation , taxation and bureaucracy , as well as micro-economic factors , such as difficulties with staying afloat and poor financial liquidity .
What is the outcome of this situation ?
Well , it has meant that for the last few years , the proportion of micro-entities which survive the first year of their operation has been fluctuating at around 60 % .
This means that more than one third of newly-established micro-entities have not lasted through the first year of operation in the market .
If we realise , in addition , that in many Member States , micro-entities constitute over 90 % of all economic entities , then discussion on the subject of reducing administrative barriers and different kinds of burden , especially connected with bookkeeping , becomes absolutely essential .
It is also important that debates focus not only on simplification , but also on the impact of accounting requirements on small enterprises of this kind .
The debate on the subject of simplification focuses , in general , on costs , while the debate on the significance of accounting requirements addresses the advantages of financial reporting and the needs of individual users .
There are a number of characteristics which distinguish these firms from large enterprises and which argue in favour of introducing simplified regulations .
Firstly , the advantages of implementing universal standards are certainly fewer than in the case of large companies .
This leads to a cost-benefit imbalance with regard to application of the standards .
Establishment of an appropriate cost-benefit balance requires a reduction in costs .
Secondly , financial reporting does not play a significant role in meeting the information requirements of the owners of micro-entities , because they are , as a rule , family members .
When discussing the need for change in connection with the financial crisis , let us remember that it was not micro-entities which were the cause of the crisis .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as both the rapporteur and the Commissioner have observed , this proposal for a directive does indeed follow a vote in Parliament .
Nevertheless , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament is still critical of this proposal , because it risks being turned against the people we want to support .
In wishing to lighten the load for businesses , we risk depriving them of the conditions of transparency and trust that are indispensable to their management and to the dynamism of their activity .
First of all , I believe that we must be clear about the thresholds and on what exactly a micro-entity is .
It is a small or medium-sized enterprise with more than 10 employees and a turnover in excess of EUR 1 million .
Whichever Member State you look at , that represents the large majority of businesses .
It may be true that they are local and have little presence in the Community market , but that does not mean that accounting rules will be abolished for them .
They will have to confront accounting rules whenever they want to deal with a banking body or with partners , or negotiate with fiscal , economic and social institutions .
Accounting rules will then be imposed on them and they may have to pay a higher price than they would for ordinary accounting in order to satisfy criteria that they will not necessarily overcome .
I do not want to see progress towards a system in which the obligation to draw up annual accounts is then imposed outside of the common European Union framework .
That is not just a problem of competition .
It is a quite simply an issue of economic integration and Community law , and of equal treatment for all businesses in the European Union .
Having said that , it is quite clear that the simplification of the accounting obligations for SMEs is necessary .
There are , incidentally , three initiatives working towards that aim : the proposal that we are discussing today ; the International Financial Reporting Standards system ; and the review of the fourth and seventh Accounting Directives , on which the European Commission should soon be making some proposals .
We were promised these proposals for 2010 .
It would seem that the period has been extended , but I do not think that this extension is reason enough to rush and do a half-hearted job , for these three proposals , whilst sharing the same purpose , will perhaps not be articulated in the same way and it seems to me , Commissioner , to be preferable and clearer for businesses if we give them a single , general response allowing them to reconcile the simplification of obligations that everyone wants with the reality of life in the small businesses that need it .
The current problem is that the European Commission is delaying in proposing a review of these directives , which is detrimental to our consideration of the issue .
I therefore call on the European Commission to speed up the dialogue on this issue of exemption , which is currently dividing both economic institutions and economic circles in Europe , and to prepare an impact assessment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as shadow rapporteur for the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I simply cannot understand how anyone can be against freeing micro-entities - and I stress micro-entities , not small or medium-sized businesses - from annual accounting obligations .
Here we are not talking about the export-oriented medium-sized company from Baden-Württemberg with a hundred employees , but small craft enterprises , the flower shop , the baker around the corner , the newly founded IT start-up business .
For years , politicians have been repeating over and over , both at national and European level , that precisely these micro-entities must be relieved .
Relieved from unnecessary costs , in this case , unnecessary costs for a tax advisor , not from the otherwise essential costs - in Belgium it is lawyers who complete these annual accounts , in France auditors - and relieved from an unnecessary amount of work and administrative burdens , now more than ever in the current financial and economic crisis .
Now that the Commission has finally tabled the proposal , which Parliament has called on it to do for so long , all of a sudden , the sceptics and nay-sayers express concerns .
Only seven per cent of the micro-entities that we are talking about are involved in cross-border activities .
Therefore , with regard to the principle of subsidiarity , there should not be any regulation at all at European level .
To make matters worse , the accounting rules have continued to be oriented towards the needs of large and medium-sized businesses , and have been totally inappropriate for the micro-entities we are talking about here from the outset .
I hear the arguments of the opposition , firstly , that the micro-entrepreneur might need a loan and then not be able to present his bank with anything .
I say to you , anyone who is familiar with Basel II knows that for the bank , the annual balance sheet is at best a nice bonus , but nothing more .
Secondly , the supposed creditor protection : creditors who depend on the annual balance sheet are in the minority .
In all my time as a lawyer , when a business of this size is sold , I have never experienced a buyer depending on the significance of annual accounts in whatever form .
Thirdly , the southern Member States of the European Union - yes , precisely those that right now are the subject of constant inglorious reports in our newspapers - want to maintain the old regulation .
They can do this as the regulation is optional .
However , states that demand annual financial statements from micro-enterprises because they do not have effective tax administration and exercise no control , apart from the receipt of the annual financial statement , should hardly be surprised if they have missing tax revenue or tax fraud .
I therefore call on all MEPs , in particular , the Social Democrats , to approve this sensible regulation , especially as Mr Lehne from our Committee on Legal Affairs took all concerns into account through compromise regulations , subsequent to which no further relevant arguments were put forward .

( Asking a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) ) Mr President , does Ms Castex accept that the proposition that she put forward that the proposal should be delayed for an impact assessment is , in fact , tantamount to saying ' no ' ?
( Answering a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) ) ( FR ) Mr President , I fully understood the question .
If this proposal is rejected , it will have to go back to the drawing board , and if that happens , we can indeed envisage an impact assessment .
As I said , we are not against a simplification of the accounting rules for small businesses , particularly because directives and measures have accumulated to such a degree that they need to be reorganised in order to clarify the situation .
We just think that , instead of simplifying things , this proposal creates insecurity for businesses .

on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the proposal exempting micro-entities from certain accounting requirements seems to be far from perfect and in the ECON Committee , my group voted to support the ECON rapporteur , Mr Sterckx , in asking the Commission to go further to help all micro-entities and SMEs across the EU to materially reduce their burden , by rejecting this proposal and bringing forward a much-needed review of the entire fourth and seventh Company Law Directives in order to have a more meaningful proposal with more scope .
The Commission 's impact assessment and its claims of how much good this proposal will do is also of concern .
It seems that it has very limited reach .
However , in this time of economic hardship , it is important to remember that every little bit helps .
I am hopeful that , if we support this measure , at least one small business in my constituency in Wales will find some benefit from this exemption .
It will not be a silver bullet solving all the problems caused by the recession , and we should not hold this tiny measure up as a huge achievement on our part .
However , if this exemption can help even a few businesses better weather these difficult economic times , then we should not stand in its way .
Mr President , as a rule , I am delighted when the European Union abolishes rules from time to time , as there are already far too many of them , and they are a burden on both citizens and enterprises .
Yet let us choose the right ones , for example , the procurement rules that are unnecessarily imperative and complex .
The obligation to publish annual accounts , on the other hand , is not the kind of rule we should be abolishing , even for the very smallest enterprises ( micro-entities ) .
Without sound , transparent financial administration , enterprises cannot obtain credit , and doing business in general becomes substantially more difficult .
I understand from sources in the field that financial administration is often a problem among micro-entities .
If annual accounts are no longer compulsory and thus lost as a source of information , the only remaining possibility is to request the documents prepared for tax purposes .
Yet who will guarantee that these are just as reliable as certified annual accounts ?
Establishing their reliability objectively would mean auditing 100 % of tax returns at all times , involving the handing over of all the supporting documents .
This is just what tax administrations and small entrepreneurs alike can do without .
Therefore , I agree with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs when it proposes rejection of the Commission proposal .
The measure concerned is one to which many small enterprises could fall victim , and that is something this House would not want on its conscience now of all times , when small and medium-sized enterprises are so badly needed to provide jobs .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , in the UK , there are now 2 460 000 unemployed .
Youth unemployment is 20 % in the UK .
In France , youth unemployment is 24 % .
It is 25 % in Italy and an incredible 39 % in Spain .
Big companies have been firing people for the last two years and they will continue to do so .
The best hope for the unemployed is with small and micro-enterprises .
However , EU directives make it difficult for micro-enterprises to operate successfully .
EU regulations stifle their growth and , for once , the Commission is doing something sensible with its proposal to exempt micro-enterprises from some accounting regulations .
In the UK , we have over 1.7 million micro-firms .
If these firms were able to hire just one additional person , the UK 's severe unemployment problem would , in large part , be solved .
We have all received the circular from Mr Sterckx and his friends .
Mr Sterckx and his friends oppose this partly on the basis that exempting very small firms from the full blast of EU accounting directives somehow runs counter to the single market .
This is a completely ludicrous argument which only a Belgian Member of the ALDE Group could possibly have come up with .
I know that in this Parliament , if you criticise Belgium or the Belgians , you get fined , but I would remind you of a bit of history .
Ninety-six years ago , Britain entered the First World War in order to protect the territorial integrity of Belgium .
I would suggest that Mr Sterckx partly repay that obligation by ceasing to attempt to destroy Britain 's economy and Britain as a nation state .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , let me first of all thank the previous speaker for what Britain did for us so many years ago .
I have a question for him : If we ask the Commission for a revision of the two directives that are planned for this year and to have an overall framework , is this really going to be a hindrance to what we want to achieve - administrative simplification ?
Mr President , I will just answer in one word : yes .
Small businesses need to have administrative simplification now .

( PT ) Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating Mr Lehne for the report he has presented to us , for the capacity for dialogue and the openness he has shown on this issue , and for his convictions in defending micro-entities .
This is because , while the measure we are discussing here today has a history , it is especially important in terms of tackling the crisis and because it exempts small enterprises from measures that are expensive , bureaucratic and not essential for transparency .
What is essential for the transparency of the relationship between enterprises and the state is that their tax responsibilities are maintained .
Enterprises that are completely different cannot be dealt with in the same way .
Small and large enterprises cannot be dealt with in the same way .
This is also the time to defend small and medium-sized enterprises , putting words into action .
It is the right time to advocate simpler , less costly measures for SMEs , which naturally will lead to the possibility of more jobs and more growth .
Unfortunately , in Europe , we are seeing the closure of many of these small enterprises , and this is why we should not be making assessments ; this is why we should act .
And this was precisely what the party I represent here presented to the Portuguese Parliament .
That is why I here call upon the various Portuguese Members to vote in favour of this measure and therefore bring pressure to bear on the Portuguese Government to end the blocking position which , unfortunately , it is adopting in the Council .
I would like to conclude by saying that this is the report that can make an essential step towards not only tackling the crisis , but also towards simplification and fewer costs for small enterprises , which they sorely need .
( DE ) Mr President , the aim of reducing the administrative burden for micro-entities should , of course , receive our full support , as should the aim of preventing micro-enterprises from being thrown into the same pot as the big players when it comes to financial reporting .
However , can this aim actually be achieved with the Commission 's proposal or your report , Mr Lehne , and who are we speaking about when we talk of micro-entities ?
Mrs Castex has already referred to this .
I would like to take this point further .
Micro-entities are often not so tiny .
In Austria , for example it is not a question of cash-based accounting , but of limited companies , Ltds and limited commercial partnerships and corporations .
Taken together , they account for 90 % of all businesses in Austria which employ fewer than ten workers , just to make the relationship here clear .
The downside of limited liability should therefore be the obligation for financial reporting , although not , as mentioned at the beginning , in the same way as for large companies , but we should not abolish financial reporting obligations .
Instead of removing micro-entities from the fourth directive entirely , a diminished requirement for regulation should be clearly determined and established within the framework of the planned revision of the fourth and seventh directives .
( SK ) The ongoing economic crisis clearly shows us that Europe is starting to become short-winded and can no longer keep pace with the dynamism of economies and the economic development in other parts of the world , such as Asia .

The organisation of our business environment is cumbersome and fossilised .
Look at the tradespeople in China and India .
Can you guess how much time from their work is spent completing all types or reports and statements about their businesses ?
None !
And look at our tradespeople .
For example , the laws in my country force a business owner to send the same data and reports about his or her business , with various modifications , to four different government institutions : the tax office , commercial register , health insurance company and the office of statistics .
If something just happens to be forgotten , in the best case , the business will get a large fine , and in the worse case , the authorities will close it down .
Four state-established institutions live to harass businesses and deprive them of both time and resources because the entire bureaucratic juggernaut is feeding on taxes from the work those businesses do .
All the data could certainly be collected for the government by just one office , and not a very big one at that .
How do you make it work ?
Either we abolish useless acts , simplify and streamline our administration and give most of our officials the opportunity to start also making their living as honest tradespeople , or we are going to end up like our legendary royal regents , who were thrown out the windows of Prague Castle by discontented Czechs in May 1618 .
It would be good if we undertook the first and as soon as possible .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am one of the chairs of the SME cross-party working group .
Many of us collaborated on the Small Business Act .
Hopefully , we all share the wish to put small business first and therefore , we are in favour of simplifications and less burdens for small and medium-sized enterprises .
What we have heard here today , of course , sounds very attractive .
If it is so attractive , why is there not applause from all sides ?
Why are there so many different examples , which , despite this ' simplification ' , are not meeting with enthusiastic applause ?
There are reasons for this .
Is the new regulation compatible with Basel II ?
For many years , we have advocated common accounting procedures , and now suddenly , we are abolishing accounting procedures .
We want European solutions and simplifications , not national solutions , not legal fragmentation .
The cross-border activities of micro-entities would be hampered .
Freedom from the obligation to draw up annual accounts would not , in fact , mean relief , because in many Member States , we have to collect the same data any way under a different name .
However , the ability to monitor creditworthiness would be made more difficult .
Standards concerning statements on the quality of businesses should also be adhered to by small businesses .
Otherwise , there is a danger of a loss of transparency .
As businesses grow , they must adhere to regulations that may not be open to them as micro-entities and the Member States ' freedom of choice in these circumstances weakens the single market .
For these reasons , I am in favour of the revision of the fourth and seventh directives on company law , because this will lead to consistent regulation and relief .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , of course red tape must be cut , of course Europe must play its part , and of course this applies , in particular , to small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , which suffer the most as a result .
Yet this does not mean we should throw the baby out with the bathwater .
Approval of the Commission proposal would give rise to differing annual reporting practices depending on the company 's place of establishment and perhaps also on whether its business consisted to a greater or lesser degree of intra-Community trade .
In any event , this kind of rule would restrain the growth of small companies and constitute a barrier to cross-border operation .
In addition - and this fear has also been expressed by other MEPs in this House - the anticipated simplification would be replaced by other administrative burdens such as requests for information by tax administrations , potential credit providers and even trade unions ; all seeking transparency .
Nor should we forget that the enterprises themselves also need the insight into their own state of affairs that good accounting , sound annual accounts and good reporting can offer .
Although a reduction in burdens is anticipated , an increase is quite possible , and this is what the representative SME organisations in many countries and at European level fear .
I share this fear .
Therefore , with all due respect for the Commission 's good intentions and the work carried out by Mr Lehne and the Committee on Legal Affairs , I cannot support this report .
I do , however , support the calls in the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs drawn up by Mr Sterckx for a comprehensive impact assessment ahead of the general revision of the Fourth Company Law Directive that has been announced to us .
It has been announced for this year , and so this would not mean too much of a delay .
( DE ) Mr President , my speech will simply be a summary .
Everything has been said , both for and against this directive in its current form .
I believe that nobody here can be against us wanting to reduce financial reporting provisions in order to make things easier for micro-entities .
However , I have the impression that we have stopped halfway or would like to stop and we do not really have the courage to follow things through .
We all know that we will need financial reporting provisions and that even the smallest business will need records to portray and prove the state of its business .
Now that may be Basel II , that may be fiscal records , that may be many things .
In future , new provisions may appear , which perhaps come to us from other countries - from the US or wherever - and which we have to deal with .
However , it must be possible to go further here and to consider how we will continue to handle financial reporting provisions .
It must be possible in an area of competition like Europe to once and for all produce really concrete directives , and notably - that would be my point - not just for micro-entities , but indeed for larger businesses , too .
The effort - I know this from my work as a lawyer - required in order to provide the necessary records and then analyse them with the help of several colleagues is immense in larger businesses , too .
It involves a lot of work and costs a lot of money .
Micro-entities , moreover , cannot afford this effort at all .
However , if we are focusing on these businesses and really want to deal with financial reporting provisions within the framework of the fourth and seventh directives , I ask you to also consider simplifying the administrative burden in general and creating sensible , sound directives .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President , Commissioner , if any of us were to establish an enterprise today , it would , at least initially , be a micro-enterprise .
We all know that currently , there is a crisis in the European Union , and unemployment .
In order to solve the unemployment problem in Europe , we need as many enterprises as possible .
It follows that we need as many new micro-enterprises as possible , so we should do everything we can to help micro-enterprises to run smoothly .
We in fact have an opportunity to do this , namely , the Commission 's proposal to relieve micro-enterprises from the obligation to file financial statements , so making them easier to run and easier to set up in practice .
This would reduce the unemployment problem in Europe .
There are various reasons for this .
First , we have to understand , as I have already emphasised , that practically all new enterprises are micro-enterprises , at least initially .
Therefore , if we reduce obligations , we reduce costs , and by reducing costs , we make it easier for them to operate .
Second , the effort needed to draw up financial statements for such an enterprise is out of all proportion to the resulting benefit for either the enterprise itself or the state .
If there is a need to apply for a bank loan , the bank will require an up-to-date statement reflecting the current situation , not that which prevailed half a year , or even a full year , ago .
Third , this is a practical way in which we can begin to implement the Commission 's target to reduce the burden on SMEs by 25 % by the year 2020 .
Therefore , I call on fellow Members not just to talk about support for SMEs , but actually to turn their words into deeds by adopting this resolution to relieve the burden on micro-enterprises . Thank you .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although they have a growing importance in the European economic landscape , small and medium-sized enterprises still do not have sufficient incentives at their disposal .
The European Commission has developed and implemented a series of measures specifically designed to help such enterprises .
The Think small first principle is on the mark , according to which it is vital and fitting to firstly look at small businesses to promote their existence in the entrepreneurial environment .
Reducing administrative costs , simplifying procedures and improving access to markets , thus increasing competitiveness , are vital means for being able to emerge from the crisis .
I think that Mr Lehne 's proposal to exempt micro-entities from the burden of annual accounting , thus producing a reduction in administrative bureaucracy , is a positive one .
I am also in favour of giving , although to a limited extent , freedom to Member States in how they apply such a directive .
Given that the European Union has not yet achieved total harmonisation in the legal sector , I think it is necessary to build up to an exemption taking intermediate steps .
Thinking of my own country , so famous for excessive red tape , I believe there absolutely should be an initial simplification of accounting procedures , as has already happened in some regions , through online procedures that do not require technical consultancy or additional costs .
This ought to be the first step forward .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am astonished by the discussion on the part of fellow Members who , on the one hand , speak of simplifications for small and medium-sized enterprises , but who , when it comes to taking the very first step for micro-entities - and that is all we are talking about today , not about any other scale - are already inclined to say no again .
We cannot always demand something and then subsequently say no .
I have spoken with many micro-entities .
They are hoping and waiting for this regulation .
I have spoken to regional banks , who stressed very clearly to me that it would not be a problem for them at all if financial reporting was changed ; they use other data any way .
Furthermore , there will be absolutely no change in terms of transparency , because - as the Commissioner has explained - provisions will remain in force so that transparency is also maintained .
Trade will not be affected , because the micro-entities do not have an impact on the European market in the sense of trading throughout Europe .
I call on fellow Members to take this step with us and thank Mr Lehne and the committee for their excellent work .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I agree with many of the arguments put forward by Mrs Thyssen , Mr Karas and Mrs Castex .
Nevertheless , I ask myself the following question : following the compromise that we have managed to reach , allowing national options to survive , must we block this directive which constitutes a positive sign of simplification for micro-entities ?
If I may , Commissioner , I would like to make a non-committal proposal .
First of all , I would suggest that Parliament must support Mr Lehne 's proposal and that you take into account what has just been said about modifying other directives .
In that way , we will very quickly reach agreement : accounting rules for small businesses , and a European system in that area .

Mr President , I , like many of my colleagues , got up this morning at four o 'clock to come here , but I am very pleased that I have waited until the end of the discussion here tonight , because these last two topics which we have discussed have filled me with great hope .
Saving EUR 6.5 billion , basically by a wave of our hand , is a very significant fact .
On the one hand , one can say that it proves what many critics have said , that the European Union is far too bureaucratic , but at least we have the integrity and the guts to face up to the fact and take corrective action - unlike the banks , which have so far shown no culpability and no remorse for their actions .
However , it also shows that there is much more red tape that we need to get the scissors to in order to meet the 25 % target , and the sooner we do it the better .
( EL ) Mr President , we are in the midst of an economic crisis and it goes without saying that the exemption of micro-entities from their statutory obligation to prepare and publish annual accounts is a welcome measure of support for small and medium-sized enterprises and , of course , I agree with the rapporteur on this point .
It is a fact that this sort of action reduces the operating costs of companies , increases their profitability , and possibly makes a positive contribution towards maintaining jobs .
However , and I think this is what concerns numerous members , we must be extremely careful as to the methods and means we use in order to provide fast and immediate relief to this vulnerable economic sector .
The objective must be to grant relief and not - I repeat not - an alibi for these companies to disguise or conceal their actual financial status , with everything that this implies for their future progress .
Therefore , I think that we should , in principle , welcome and warmly support the Commission proposal and , of course , be careful that the arrangements that we introduce in the future do not alter our real intentions , which is to support companies .
( LT ) Today , probably no one is in any doubt that micro-entities must be fully promoted and supported and I believe that the best means would be a reduction in taxes as much as possible in each European Union Member State , as well as the simplification of requirements for registration and deregistration documents and many other things .
One idea mentioned today is that when we want to take out a loan from a bank , we will still have to provide certain information and not just accounts , but will have to provide the banks with some additional information .
I am in favour of the state knowing what processes are taking place and therefore , in terms of providing accounts , I still believe that it is very important to simplify those accounts , but in such a way that we do not violate the elementary requirements for transparency and company principles .
Mr President , although it is late , we are discussing a subject which , as was said a few moments ago , is extremely important .
I have listened to everyone and I do not think that there is a single one of you who did not support the need to reduce the amount and complexity of administration burdening what we call ' micro-entities ' .
I remind you - having checked this figure with my staff - that the proposal we are discussing could affect almost five million businesses in Europe .
Nevertheless , having heard you all speak , I notice that there are differences and disagreements over the schedule , Mrs Castex , and / or over how it is to be done .
I would like to restate my conviction .
I have declared before Parliament - when you requested that I appear before you - that the public , the consumer and primarily , as I have also stated before you , small and medium-sized entities , must reclaim the single market , that is , the European market .
That is why , with a great deal of determination , we can further improve this text during the dialogue that we are going to have with the Council .
I think - as Mr Lehne said - that we need this operational sign .
I was very aware that the Earl of Dartmouth paid a - fairly rare - compliment to the Commission .
He said : ' for once , the Commission is doing something ' .
I have noted your reasonable remarks .
Now that we are going to have to work together , I hope to be able to show you that the Commission often does things that are reasonable , useful and concrete , and I still hope to convince you to support the efforts of the Commission more resolutely and more often .
That is my frame of mind regarding this House : somewhat utopian , but in the end , I am not giving up on convincing you that the Commission does useful things , with the support and often at the request of Parliament .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think that this concrete , progressive and reasonable proposal offers a substantial simplification of the burden on the smallest businesses .
This proposal will not abolish bookkeeping .
It will not prevent businesses from transferring information needed by the various parties involved .
It will not prevent anyone from following the provisions of the directive if they so wish .
That is my clear response to the concerns expressed by Mr Sterckx .
This proposal will offer the possibility of adapting the rules for the publication of financial information at national and regional level .
Accounting rules for very small businesses are better when adopted at the level at which they work ; in other words , at local level .
Finally , I think that the timetable is very important .
This proposal can be implemented quickly .
It is an opportunity to help small businesses that must not be missed .
I clearly heard Mrs Castex mention the other prospect : the commitment to carry out a future general review of the accounting directives .
The deadline to which we are working - you said late 2010 , but it will probably be early 2011 - is one that we do not wish to miss .
I also clearly heard Mr Gauzès 's recommendation , which was both non-committal and clear .
We will also make use of this tool of the general review of the accounting directives .
However , with your support , this does not prevent us from making the immediate progress which this proposal on micro-entities represents .
We can then go further by making additional progress when we carry out a general review of the accounting directives .
Let us not wait .
This global review - I have told you , early 2011 - will take time .
I have noted the extremely accurate speeches many of you have made : Mr de Jong earlier , Mr Kariņš , Mr Feio , Mrs Swinburne , and others mentioned the crisis and economic difficulties that we are currently experiencing .

Our calculations show that , if we manage to relaunch the internal market as President Barroso is attempting to do and - as is fundamental to my mandate - if we manage to make the internal market extremely effective and more fluid , we may find ourselves with additional growth of between 0.5 % and 1.5 % in Europe .
We can look for growth outside , in worldwide competition , but we will begin by finding it at home .
I think - as the philosophy of Mr Lehne 's report shows - that a large part of this growth is to be found in the five million very small businesses in Europe , if we are happy to make their work easier .
That is the philosophy behind this proposal .
I clearly heard Mr Karas and Mrs Ranner mention minimum requirements or minimum standards .
I also noticed that Mr Lehne 's report does not rule out minimum requirements .
We need time for that .
We will see what we can do about that with the Council .
I ask you to accept this report and proposal for what they are : concrete progress , a stage and a part of the operation which is needed so that the five million very small European businesses , and the millions of jobs they bring , can develop in the face of the current difficulties .
That is why I wish to take this opportunity to thank Mr Lehne and assure him that once Parliament has , hopefully , adopted the proposal , I will be able , and I am committed , to working very quickly with the Council to conclude the concrete and practical progress we have made to support the smallest businesses in the main European market .
Mr President , I would like thank all my fellow Members and the Commissioner for the debate .
I have six basic comments .
The first concerns the impact assessment .
The Commission has presented an exhaustive impact assessment of this Commission proposal and has also submitted it to the Committee on Legal Affairs .
After the Sterckx report was concluded in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , in the Committee on Legal Affairs , we specifically asked what additional impact assessment should then be carried out .
We waited weeks , but did not receive a reply .
Secondly , it is , in fact , completely correct that the compromise provides for minimum provisions .
It is by no means a removal of all obligations , but a reduction of the obligations to what is really necessary , to what the enterprises need .
Thirdly , anyone who needs such accounts for a bank loan is not prevented from having such accounts drawn up .
However , if micro-entities do not need such a bank loan at all , then viewed objectively , it is incomprehensible why they should be burdened with these extra costs for accountants and tax advisors .
Fourthly , the tax balance sheet provisions remain the same and are not affected by this at all .
This is exclusively about regular balance sheets and the additional costs that arise through drawing up a regular balance sheet .
Fifthly , revising the fourth and the seventh directives is no small task ; it is quite a major task .
The seventh directive also concerns mergers .
That is highly complex and very difficult .
I would dare forecast that if we fail to take this decision now , then with a major revision of the fourth and seventh directives , there is an acute risk that small and medium-sized enterprises would go under because they will not really play a role in this debate , because their lobby will also not play a part in this debate .
That is why it is important to take this decision now and not at a later date , when we no longer know whether it will work at all .
My sixth comment relates to the position of business associations .
I know that of the large European business associations that represent the interests of SMEs , only one is against .
All the others are in favour .
At this point , I think we should make that clear once more .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon on Wednesday , 10 March 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The prosperity of the EU will depend on the success of SMEs .
The EU and the Member States should therefore create a favourable environment for these enterprises .
The greatest obstacle reported by SMEs is compliance with administrative formalities .
In fact , SMEs bear a regulatory and administrative burden that is disproportionate in comparison with big enterprises .
It is estimated that for every euro a large enterprise spends for one worker on account of regulatory duties , a small enterprise might have to spend up to EUR 10 .
In this Commission proposal , the concept of micro-enterprises is broadened to define them as enterprises which , as at the balance date , do not exceed the limits of two of the following criteria : a balance sheet total of EUR 500 000 , net turnover of EUR 1 000 000 and / or an average number of employees during the financial year of 10 persons .
The Member States could choose to exempt these micro-enterprises from implementation of the Community Directive on annual accounts .
In any case , micro-enterprises will continue to keep their sales and transactions records for management and tax information purposes .
In Portugal , 356 140 Portuguese enterprises could be covered by this exemption .
I am very pleased that by adopting new reporting requirements for micro-entities , we are reducing the bureaucratic burden on firms .
The hindering of human enterprise with dozens of regulations is one reason why the goals of the Lisbon Strategy could not be achieved .
In particular , bureaucratic restrictions affect small and medium-sized enterprises , and in these firms , the costs of bookkeeping and legal services are disproportionately high in comparison to their income .
How can the EU be the most competitive economy in the world if firms are subject to so many regulations ?
It shames me to say that the author of too many of these regulations which hinder firms is Brussels , which is contributing in this way to the further restriction of economic freedom .
The Commission 's initiative was , therefore , fully deserving of support , even with the adoption of the amendments proposed by the Committee on Legal Affairs , for there is no point in maintaining complicated reporting requirements in the case of small enterprises .
If the EU is to develop at the speed which we all want it to , we must take further steps to eliminate unnecessary hindrances .
I appeal , therefore , to the European Commission to add to the EU 2020 strategy a clear goal in the form of a reduction in the number of EU regulations which hinder businesses .
Areas which are unnecessarily regulated should be urgently identified , and such regulations eliminated .
Otherwise , Europe will remain a region which is developing more slowly than other developed economies worldwide .
Report on Competition Policy 2008 ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Sophia in ' t Veld , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Policy , on competition policy 2008 -
rapporteur . - Mr President , Commissioners , dear colleagues - also those who are leaving the room right now - this report was adopted by a large majority in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ( ECON ) and it is the fruit of a joint effort of all political groups .
I would like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs - who are still present as far as I can see - for their excellent cooperation .
ECON welcomes , in particular , the emphasis on consumers .
The previous Commissioner , Mrs Kroes , did a splendid job of making the consumer the focus of the competition policies , and we trust Commissioner Almunia will build on that .
That brings me to the first big issue , namely that of cartels .
We discussed at great length issues like the most effective sanctions , the fairness of high fines and the feasibility of criminal sanctions .
However , before I enter into the details of our discussions , I would like to remind European companies that the best guarantee for escaping sanctions is by simply not engaging in cartels .
You may think that you are outsmarting the competition authorities but , in reality , you are doing harm to the consumer .
Cartels are not smart .
They are reprehensible .
We therefore welcome the firm stance taken by the European Commission on anti-competitive behaviour .
It is essential that sanctions punish bad behaviour , in particular , of repeat offenders , but they must encourage compliance at the same time .
Sanctions must have a sufficiently deterrent effect .
High fines are an effective tool but , as a single instrument , they may be too blunt .
Therefore , we invite the Commission to come up with proposals to make the toolkit more sophisticated and more effective .
In the report , we suggest looking at issues such as individual responsibility , transparency and accountability of firms , shorter procedures , due process and the development of European standards and corporate compliance programmes .
A second key issue is State aid .
In the context of the economic crisis , huge amounts of State aid have been granted .
Exceptional circumstances call for exceptional measures .
We recognise that , but we should not lose sight of the fact that granting State aid comes at a price .
It distorts competition and it leads to record levels of public debt and budget deficits .
The bill for this episode will be presented to future generations .
We have a duty to justify every single cent that has been spent .
I am therefore pleased that ECON urges the Commission to do a thorough evaluation of the results of the exceptional State aid operation .
We would , in particular , like to see an evaluation of State aid granted for the so-called green recovery .
Two years ago , we were persuaded to accept the recovery package and the State aid measures with the promise that it would be used to bring about the long overdue shift to a sustainable knowledge economy .
Now we ask you , has the money indeed brought about that shift ?
What has it been spent on ?
Who were the beneficiaries and what have they actually done for green recovery ?
We also need clarity , Commissioner , about the impact of the State aid exercise in the financial sector and , in particular , its possible distortive effects .
I would like now to say a few words on the issue of vertical restraints .
We know the current agreement will be revised for May of this year .
The European Commission previously committed to closely involving the European Parliament in the review process .
However , to my disappointment , I had to read about the latest version of the proposals in the media .
When I then asked the Commission to get the same documents as had been leaked to the press , it took considerable arm twisting to get them and I cannot hide my annoyance at this .
The Commission should put an end to the systematic and deliberate leaking to the press .
To deny that it happens , frankly , is an insult to our intelligence .
On substance , the Commission proposals allow for discrimination against online retailers who do not have a bricks-and-mortar shop .
I have used my prerogative as a rapporteur for tabling an amendment asking the Commission to correct this situation .
In the 21st century , we must encourage , not stifle , competition from online retailers .
We call on the Commission to put consumer interests over vested interests .
We ask the Commission to carry out the long overdue sector inquiries , in particular , into online advertising , which this House has requested several times .
If the Commission does not wish to do so , we would like to understand the criteria for refusing .
Finally , Commissioner , we very much welcome Commissioner Almunia 's pledge to closely involve Parliament in shaping competition policies .
The economic crisis has clearly shown the need for greater democratic legitimacy of competition policies and , in this context , I assume that the incident with the document on vertical restraints was just a mistake .
We recognise the independence of the Commission - and , as a liberal , I certainly do so - but we also expect the Commission to closely involve Parliament in shaping competition policies along the lines set out in the report .
We look forward to the Commission 's response . Thank you , Mr President , for your indulgence .

Mr President , naturally , I would like to thank Mrs in ' t Veld on behalf of my colleague and friend , Mr Almunia , for her report on competition policy 2008 .

I would also like to thank Mr Bütikofer and Mr Bielan who , as rapporteurs for the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , also contributed to this report .
Mrs in ' t Veld , the Commission has noted this year that Parliament 's resolution tackles a great many issues , of which you reminded us a moment ago .
In addition to the Commission 's report on competition policy , it covers the Commission 's reports on how the regulations operate and on the review of the regulations concerning concentrations .
As far as the Commission is concerned , your resolution has two objectives .
First of all , this resolution allows us to further improve the content of our annual reports on competition policy and secondly , and more importantly , it will serve as the basis for the Commission to engage in detailed dialogue with Parliament .
I will be sure to pass on to Mr Almunia your latest encouragement to take that dialogue with Parliament even further .
This dialogue is , in fact , essential to the good functioning of all policies , and in our opinion , that includes competition policy .
Parliament has reminded us of its wish to see competition policy operating within the framework of the codecision procedure .
Mrs in ' t Veld , please allow me to speak frankly : the Commission does not have the authority to modify the provisions of the treaty regarding the legal basis applicable to this competition policy .
However , we are prepared to examine , on a case-by-case basis , whether codecision can be applied to the new initiatives when their objectives go beyond the sphere of competence of competition .
On this point , you know that Commissioner Almunia announced in January that Parliament would be fully involved in all legislative initiatives relating to damages actions brought by private individuals .
The Commission , like Parliament , does not believe that the current economic crisis can justify relaxing competition rules on the control of concentrations or on State aid .
The Commission 's current record clearly shows that it has remained very steadfast on these principles : preventing all distortions of competition , even during periods of crisis , whilst being flexible and open on procedures when necessary .
2008 , the year in which this economic and financial crisis started , was very distinctive .
The report on competition policy reflects the very ambitious work that the Commission has achieved in this context , in close cooperation with its partners at national and European level .
The crisis reached its nadir in 2009 .
The key chapter of this 2009 report will be dedicated to competition in the context of this economic and financial crisis .
The report should be adopted in the second quarter of this year .
It will be presented to Parliament by Commissioner Almunia .
That will certainly be an opportunity for Parliament and the Commission to engage in constructive debate once again .
Mrs in ' t Veld , in your speech , you also highlighted the issue of vertical restrictions , your proposed amendment .
On this subject , Mrs in ' t Veld , the Commission is convinced that it has found a reasonable balance .
On the one hand , exemption by category allows suppliers to select their distributors and reach an agreement with them on the conditions of resale for the products provided , both in terms of sales at physical sales outlets and online sales .
That allows them to decide on the best way to distribute their products and protect their brand image .
On the other hand , approved distributors must be free to use the Internet , and the conditions applied to their online sales must be equivalent to the conditions approved for sales at physical sales outlets in order to avoid all unnecessary restrictions on their Internet usage .
This means that the proposal contributes to the Commission 's general policy of promoting the online market and online trade .
Mr President , the rapporteur referred to cartels .
Now cartels existing and proving that they exist are two different matters .
I know that in Ireland , particularly in the agricultural sector , many farmers believe that the factories operate a cartel .
Being an island nation , transporting cattle - particularly now with the increased , almost draconian restrictions - is becoming more and more difficult , so the factories have it all to themselves .
It has to be noted that prices rise slowly , uniformly , but they drop quickly , uniformly .
As a result , the price differential between cattle in Ireland and in Britain is anything between EUR 150 to EUR 200 a head .
As I said , proving it might be difficult .
However , maybe Commissioner Barnier might be able to use his good antenna to check it out and maybe help to take corrective action .
( DE ) Mr President , to begin with , I would like to thank you and the Commissioner for your presentation and I would firstly like to point out that control of the content of the provisions of European competition law is very much in the interest of consumers .
I am delighted that this time , the Commission has , for the first time , included its own chapter on competition law and its significance for consumers .
That is particularly gratifying after a five-year barren spell in the communication of European competition policy on the part of the European Commission .
The difficult phase of the implementation of European competition law , concerning , in particular , the assistance rights and the assistance regulations of Member States for the banks , has yet to come .
In 2008 , that was not a problem .
In this respect , the clear message that this report sends out is that the Commission must monitor this very carefully , so that the single market and also European consumers are not adversely affected by it .
In this context , the treatment of small and medium-sized enterprises is especially important .
The report is clearly in favour of medium-sized industry receiving special treatment when it comes to the imposition of fines in cartel cases .
The vertical arrangements in the online market are tough in our view , but an assessment , as now proposed following the vote in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , seems premature in our opinion and therefore , we would like to stand by the report of the Economic Affairs Committee .
( ES ) Mr President , the 2008 Report on Competition Policy includes , for the first time , a section on cartels and consumers .
For the first time , too , it refers to the imposition of coercive fines .
In addition , the report mentions important initiatives such as the accompanying guidelines to the climate energy package and a White Paper on damages actions for breach of antitrust rules .
The report also deals with the role of competition policy during the crisis .
The effects of this policy have helped to stabilise and mitigate State aid .
Once we begin to emerge from the crisis , it will be necessary to correct the distortions caused and restore a level playing field avoiding moral risk .
The report calls for the future of the automobile sector to be defined , for attention to be given to the problems experienced by SMEs , and for an investigation of the food industry distribution chain with follow up measures for dairy products .
It also advocates a more sophisticated and legitimate competition policy , strengthening Parliament 's role .
That is why we support it and I congratulate the rapporteur on the result achieved .
( LT ) As shadow rapporteur , I would firstly like to congratulate my fellow Member , Mrs in ' t Veld , for preparing an excellent report .
I think that the report underlines clearly those areas to which the Commission should draw particular attention .
First of all , there is the monitoring of State aid measures .
During the crisis , the European Commission has given Member States the opportunity to apply State aid measures exclusively .
As such measures were provided in a hurry , the Commission must examine whether these measures were used purposefully , whether they were productive , and whether the crisis caused a protectionist reaction by Member States , as protectionism and the division of the common market are damaging to competition and only weaken the European Union 's position in the global economy .
I am also pleased that the rapporteur took into account the opinion of the ITRE Committee on the problems of the European Union 's internal energy market , in particular , the fact that it is impossible to ensure this market 's competitiveness and general operation as long as there are energy islands and energy infrastructures are not interconnected and working properly .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon on Tuesday , 9 March 2010 .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 23.05 )
Closing of the session
I hereby declare the 2009-2010 session of the European Parliament adjourned .
Opening of the session
I declare the 2010-2011 session of the European Parliament open .
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09.00 )
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Internal Market Scoreboard - Consumer protection - SOLVIT ( debate )
The first item on the agenda is the very important joint debate on three reports on the internal market and consumer protection :
by Mrs Von Thun und Hohenstein , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the Internal Market Scoreboard ( SEC ( 2009 ) / 1007 - , and
by Mrs Hedh , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on consumer protection , and
by Mr Buşoi , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on SOLVIT .
I am pleased to be able to present the 19th Internal Market Scoreboard , which was produced in July last year .
This document shows that Member States are managing increasingly well with the transposition of EU law .
Once again , the objective has been achieved - the objective which the Heads of State or Government set themselves so that the average transposition deficit would not exceed 1 % .
Nevertheless , the number of directives which have not yet been transposed in one or more Member States , in other words , market fragmentation , is still too high .
It is over 100 internal market directives .
In addition , as many as 22 directives have not been transposed two years after expiry of the deadline for this .
The Member States must do even more for the internal market to become something which benefits all Europeans .
At this moment , as I present this report to you , I have in my hand the next scoreboard , the round-number 20th edition , which shows further progress in transposition of EU legislation .
The transposition deficit has fallen to 0.7 % , so significantly lower than the target set .
This is the best result ever .
It can be very clearly seen that the work of the European Commission which has resulted in this publication is having a mobilising effect on the Member States .
We can warmly congratulate the Commission on this productive , hard work .
Another piece of good news is that market fragmentation has fallen from 6 % to 5 % .
However , 74 directives still have not been transposed in one or more European Union Member States , and this means that barriers , very harmful barriers , continue to affect citizens and entrepreneurs in the internal market .
We must eliminate these barriers together .
To this end , the report of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection proposes closer cooperation between all the institutions which are jointly responsible for transposition and stakeholders .
We propose holding an annual Single Market Forum , or SIMFO , which would bring together the European institutions , but which would also bring together Member States , members of national parliaments and representatives of business and consumers .
A forum of this kind will be an opportunity for the exchange of experience and best practices concerning transposition of EU law , as well as for the preparation of strategies for meeting the challenges which are still ahead of us .
To get rid of those harmful barriers , we are calling on the European Commission to apply an ' internal market test ' to all new EU legislation , to ensure that new measures do not undermine the four freedoms of the European Union .
It is also extremely important to give the citizens clear information about how the internal market operates , bearing in mind that it was precisely for them that the internal market was established 20 years ago .
To present a fuller picture of the development of the internal market , the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection is calling for the Internal Market Scoreboard , the SOLVIT Report , the Citizens Signpost Service and the Consumer Markets Scoreboard to be published at the same time .
Finally , I would like to thank everyone who has worked on this report , and to ask fellow Members to vote in favour , because I am sure this will result , in the future , in faster , proper transposition of EU legislation within the framework of the legal order of Member States .
Thanks to this , Europeans will encounter fewer barriers in the internal market , and surely this is a matter which is fundamental for the development of our European economy , and also of our European identity .
Mr President , first and foremost , I would like to start by thanking the shadow rapporteurs and others involved for the good cooperation we have enjoyed over the period in which we were working on the Consumer Markets Scoreboard .
I am also pleased that once again , we have produced a report that has the support of the overwhelming majority of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
I have always maintained that we need confident and satisfied consumers in the EU in order for the internal market to operate properly .
It was therefore pleasing that in 2007 , we got a Commissioner with specific responsibility for consumer issues .
Partly as a result of Mrs Kuneva 's strong personal commitment and great openness , consumer protection policy and consumer issues have moved forward .
The Consumer Markets Scoreboard is also of Mrs Kuneva 's doing .
Despite the concern regarding responsibility for consumer issues being shared by two Commissioners , we hope that this work will continue to make progress and bear fruit and that the focus on consumers will not be weakened as a result of the new Commission .
This responsibility is , in fact , now even greater , since Article 12 of the Treaty of Lisbon states that consideration is to be given to consumer protection requirements in the drawing up and implementation of the Union 's other policies and activities .
This is an important step for consumers and something that I do not intend to allow anyone to forget in my continued political work .
I very much welcome the second edition of the Consumer Markets Scoreboard .
The scoreboard is one of a number of instruments that we have to improve the internal market and I think the perspective on which the scoreboard is based is of particular interest , since it concerns citizens ' expectations and problems and because it improves the internal market specifically for consumers .
The scoreboard has analysed the consumer market according to the same indicators as previously - namely price , switching supplier , safety , complaints and customer satisfaction .
Eventually , these will no doubt need to be developed and improved , and new indicators will also need to be included .
However , I feel that at present , they provide an adequate basis for establishing priorities and drawing conclusions concerning the further analyses that need to be carried out .
It is incredibly important that we are patient and give the scoreboard time to develop .
It is still in its infancy .
In the second Consumer Markets Scoreboard , we have seen , among other things , clear indications that consumers have more problems with services than with goods , and that prices increase less often in sectors in which consumers frequently switch supplier .
Cross-border e-commerce is also developing more slowly because of border obstacles that leave consumers concerned and lacking in confidence .
Moreover , we can see that effective application of the legislation and actual redress mechanisms are of crucial importance for the proper operation of the market .
Data also shows that there are great differences between Member States and that there is room for improvement in respect of redress mechanisms .
I therefore call on the Commission to follow up the Green Paper on Consumer Collective Redress .
Effective application and surveillance of the EU 's provisions on consumer protection are essential if we are to increase consumer confidence .
However , surveillance in the EU is far from uniform and , according to the statistics , there are significant differences between Member States in terms of market surveillance budgets and the number of working inspectors .
Both the Commission and the national surveillance authorities must therefore increase their efforts if we are to achieve the aim of bringing about good consumer protection and ensuring that consumers feel sufficiently confident to be able to exploit all the opportunities offered by the internal market .
It is highly important that we strengthen the mechanisms for market surveillance and supervision in order to increase consumer confidence .
Consumption will , after all , be a crucial factor in Europe 's economic recovery .
I would like to begin by thanking those whom I had the opportunity to work with on the SOLVIT report , the Secretariat of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , all the shadow rapporteurs , and the rest of my fellow Members who have shown their interest in this dossier and have made an important contribution to the end result .
SOLVIT is a network offering informal solutions to problems which can arise due to the inappropriate implementation of internal market legislation .
It is a particularly useful innovation for European consumers and companies in the European Union in terms of providing the benefits which European legislation entails .
We often have problems implementing European internal market legislation .
SOLVIT seems to me to be a viable alternative to the judicial route , with the courts also being so clogged up with all kinds of different cases .
We cannot ignore the fact that SOLVIT is faced with an ever-increasing case load and , from this perspective , it is somehow a victim of its own success .
So that SOLVIT can offer high-quality assistance to citizens and companies in the European Union , those SOLVIT centres which do not have the staff they need must receive additional staff .
This additional staff must be supplied in a logical and controlled manner , taking into account the size of the country 's population and the previous number of cases the centre has dealt with in the past .
This analysis must be carried out with a view to providing additional staff only in those places where there is a genuine need .
Providing SOLVIT with additional staff obviously incurs some costs as well .
The report invites Member States to use all the resources available to fund additional staff , including alternative methods of financing .
Another focus area in this report is the promotion of the SOLVIT network , which I personally consider to be of paramount importance , and I believe that all of you will concur with me on this .
By calling upon the services of SOLVIT , SMEs can save large sums of money which they can invest in other areas capable of generating economic growth and which are more beneficial to their development than the legal assistance which they would need to resolve any problems .
As far as individual consumers are concerned , SOLVIT offers them the benefit of avoiding lengthy and costly judicial proceedings .
However , to enjoy the benefits offered by the SOLVIT network , citizens and companies firstly need to be aware of the network 's effectiveness .
This is why I believe that we should actively involve national authorities , the European Commission , as well as members of this Parliament , in promoting SOLVIT .
There are numerous ways of doing this , ranging from the mass media and information campaigns organised by Member States to the creation of a single SOLVIT portal .
In addition , the public services which are involved in the implementation of European legislation governing the internal market could appoint someone in charge of SOLVIT 's communications , which would again boost the network 's efficiency and contribute to its promotion .
As MEPs , we can take the initiative ourselves to promote SOLVIT and we can help raise awareness about it among our colleagues at national parliament level .
The exchange of good practice between Member States with regard to promoting SOLVIT and resolving this network 's operational problems is another measure which this report strongly encourages .
In fact , good ideas can be spread and applied at European level for the benefit of all .
Finally , we cannot ignore the fact that SOLVIT often faces many cases which do not come under its remit or which are especially complex , requiring solutions using alternative methods .
Petitions submitted to the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions may offer a solution for those cases which are too complex to be resolved at SOLVIT level .
This is why one of the proposals suggested by this report is for the SOLVIT portal to forward such cases to the website of the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions , as well as to the specialist committees in the national parliaments .
These are just a few of the ideas on which the SOLVIT report is based .
I believe that these proposals are able to improve the network 's operation in terms of offering high-quality assistance to consumers and companies .
SOLVIT has enormous potential and we must constantly analyse its performance in order to utilise its potential to the full .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I think it is very important that we should stand shoulder to shoulder with my colleague , Mr Dalli , to reply to your questions and to tell you about the implementation of these various tools and texts .
In my political life , ladies and gentlemen , I have often considered that the monitoring effect is at least as important as the announcement effect .
I therefore think it very important , when one is in a national parliament , or the European Parliament , when one is in the Commission , that one should have instruments to check and to evaluate the concrete , genuine implementation of the texts one is voting for .
I also think that in order to act properly , one needs to understand properly , and it is precisely on this point that your rapporteurs have focused with a great deal of skill and vigilance .
I would like to thank Mrs Thun Und Hohenstein and Mr Buşoi most sincerely for those matters which concern me more directly , as well as Mrs Hedh , for the quality of their reports .
What are we talking about ?
We are talking about the internal market .
I said quite late yesterday evening in this Chamber that , at this time of crisis and economic difficulty , we cannot afford not to make use of all potentialities .
If the internal market , the large European market , functioned normally , as it will have to function , we would be able to achieve by ourselves , between ourselves , between 0.5 and 1.5 % of additional growth .
At the moment , we cannot afford to lose this opportunity .
The internal market must therefore function fully in all its aspects and this is , of course , the task that President Barroso has entrusted me with , under your control .
This is why I attach importance to this scoreboard and to this SOLVIT instrument , and to their proper functioning .
I think that Mr Dalli will say exactly the same regarding the important issue of consumers .
Mrs Thun Und Hohenstein has just spoken about the good news and the not so good news concerning this scoreboard .
We are talking here about 1 521 directives or texts that enable the internal market to function , and that is a lot .
There is currently a transposition deficit which , precisely as you said , is at its lowest ever level .
This is good news , and we must thank all those who , in the Member States , and sometimes in the regions , are responsible for implementing this directive .
I would also like to include in these thanks my colleagues in the Directorate-General for the Internal Market .
There is also one piece of news that is not so good , and that is that the quality of transposition , the quality of implementation , is unsatisfactory .
We must therefore all work together , with the European Parliament , with the national parliaments , with the officials in each Member State .
This is the purpose , as I told you when I was heard by Parliament , of the visits I am going to make as of now - I have already begun - to each of the 27 capitals to meet in person , under the authority of the competent ministers , the officials responsible for implementing the internal market directives , and for working out the items on this scoreboard and getting SOLVIT up and running , as Mr Buşoi has clearly said .
This is also why I told Mrs Thun Und Hohenstein that I agree with this idea of a forum ; it is a very good idea .
We need to bring people together , and we shall do so together , here in Parliament , with the Commission , the national parliaments and all those responsible in each Member State for sharing , evaluating and exchanging good practices .
I fundamentally believe in the benefit of pooling those in charge : agreement rather than constraint , agreement first , mutual trust and shared labour .
As far as SOLVIT is concerned , Mr Buşoi has pointed out the importance of this tool , which is beginning to work well .
We currently have 1 500 cases that have been dealt with by cooperation , by resolution , by mediation , essentially on behalf of citizens , but also on behalf of a large number of businesses .
As Mr Buşoi quite rightly pointed out , this enables savings in terms of money and time and in this way , citizens , consumers and businesses are returned to their place at the heart of the single market rather than having to enter into excessively cumbersome procedures so that a solution to their problems can be found , included and provided in the implementation of this or that internal marketrelated provision that concerns them .
It is , to some extent , this same spirit that drives the action plan for the Single Market Assistance Services , the SMAS plan , the aim of which is to provide better information and a better service to citizens and businesses .
Progress has been made here as well .
This plan has enabled different services and common online forms between SOLVIT and the Citizens Signpost Service to be brought together .
As that has been suggested by your rapporteurs , I think that , under the control of Mr Dalli , we could make an effort , that we must make an effort to present all these documents , all these results , all these communications at the same time , in order to bring together and better coordinate these different tools that describe the implementation of the internal marketrelated texts or directives .
In any event , I am in favour of this improved coordination and confirm my personal undertaking to make good use of these various tools for evaluating and monitoring the 1 500 directives associated with the functioning of the internal market .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I will be commenting on the report about these two very key European policies - the Consumer Markets Scoreboard and the Consumer Enforcement Package - that has been presented by Ms Hedh .
I would like to thank Ms Hedh for her excellent work as a rapporteur .
Consumer policy lies at the heart of the economic and social challenges that we face today .
It is all about people .
Informed and empowered consumers drive innovation and competitiveness but , perhaps most importantly , making the internal market work for consumers is our trump card in reconnecting with citizens .
The central role given to consumer policy is reflected in a number of portfolios .
Indeed , the College will be working together closely on ensuring that the rules adopted translate into practical benefit for consumers .
I am here today with my friend Michel Barnier , just as an indication that this is the close way in which we will be working together .
This will be our working practice .
The consumer dimension is to be developed in all portfolios and benchmarks will be adopted across the Commission to measure progress or the lack of it .
The Consumer Scoreboard serves as an alarm system , telling us even when the internal market is letting consumers down .
The scoreboard also serves to monitor progress in integrating the retail side of the internal market for consumers , SMEs and other retailers .
It also helps to show whether Member States are doing enough to enforce new consumer law and to inform , educate and empower consumers .
Turning to enforcement , I am pleased to see that Parliament shares the Commission 's view about the importance of giving people in practice the rights they have on paper .
We have a long way to go in this regard .
The communication of July 2009 aimed at identifying ways of making enforcement more effective , efficient and consistent throughout the European Union .
It now needs to be translated into concrete action .
One priority will be to step up efforts to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of our cross-border networks , which must send strong messages to traders that there is no safe haven in the EU where they can hide from pursuit .
The same applies to cooperation with authorities in third countries .
To achieve this , national enforcers need sufficient staff and resources .
In tough economic times , all public services are under pressure , but cutting back on enforcement of consumer rights can only be false economy .
Free , open , well-policed markets encourage competition on quality and price and drive competitiveness .
This benefits not only consumers but also the EU economy as a whole .
Both the Commission and Parliament should work together to ensure that this message rings out loud and clear across Member States .
We also intend to continue the good work in establishing Europe-wide coordinated enforcement - so-called sweeps .
However , these sweeps have shown that sometimes , combining national efforts is not enough .
European solutions are needed .
I will therefore happily take up your invitation to explore the legal basis in the treaty with a view to strengthening consumer protection , in particular , enhancing the Commission 's capabilities , but this will be done and we will go down this road if we are first convinced that it will add value to work at national level .
Turning to redress , I agree that alternative dispute resolution mechanisms can offer cheap , simple and quick redress for consumers , while maintaining the reputations of businesses .
One element of this strategy relates to the handling of collective claims .
Here I intend to make sure , together with Vice-Presidents Almunia and Reding , that the Commission moves forward in a coordinated manner .
Finally , I count on your support to ensure that sufficient funding is made available post 2013 , when the current consumer programme expires , to support the ambitious consumer policy , not least the continued delivery of an enhanced scoreboard .
Together , I am confident we can meet the complex challenges of today and tomorrow and work in partnership to ensure the internal market delivers its full potential to all our citizens .
On behalf of the Committee on Petitions , I have drawn up an opinion on the SOLVIT network , which I fully support , since it is a means which helps citizens who encounter difficulties .
However , I would like to make an important point on which I will elaborate : the need for full cooperation between all the stakeholders who are contacted by the citizen .
What options are available to the citizen who encounters a difficulty ?
He may either file a petition in front of the European Parliament , which is endowed with such power under Article 194 of the treaty , he may present a complaint to the European Commission , or else he may file a complaint with SOLVIT .
The citizen may also seek redress by addressing a complaint to the European Ombudsman , but this creates great confusion with the result that the citizen would not know exactly where to seek redress and assistance .
Consequently , in my opinion , and on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , I appeal for greater cooperation between all institutions involved so that the citizen will know exactly where he needs to seek redress .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Internet service SOLVIT has been in operation for eight years now and has succeeded in resolving 83 % of complaints from citizens and enterprises caused by the incorrect application of European law in the Member States , and it has managed to do this within 10 days .
In 2008 , judicial disputes and damages amounting to EUR 32 million were avoided thanks to informal solutions from SOLVIT .
The problem revealed by our three reports has two levels : first and foremost is the tardiness of a number of Member States in implementing European law into national practice , with a shortfall of 100 directives that have not fully entered into force in connection with the internal market .
I know this is a small percentage , but it is an important percentage .
Secondly is the very poor use made of SOLVIT as a practical instrument .
For example , in the Czech Republic , it is well known among professionals , but only 7 % of registered entrepreneurs know anything about the service .
The situation in France is far worse .
According to the statistics , SOLVIT is looked after by just one individual on work experience .
I am delighted that our committee has also supported the proposals I presented as a shadow rapporteur ; for example , the measure to increase the professional administrative staff of the SOLVIT network in Member States .
However , it is mainly a matter of promoting the network among entrepreneurs , expatriates , various associations , national parliaments and also this Parliament .
I would like to mention the need to link SOLVIT with the unified points of contact and advisory services operated by the Commission and , of course , it is important for the Commission to inform all countries in a timely manner of the issues resolved through the SOLVIT network .
The Commission should present these analyses in annual reports and , in this way , we could of course improve the usability of the SOLVIT network .
I am delighted that our committee has backed all three reports to such a broad extent across the political spectrum , and I hope that the plenary will also back them .
I would like to thank all the rapporteurs for the work they have carried out .
Mr President , Commissioner Barnier , Commissioner Dalli , ladies and gentlemen , today we are talking about the internal market , consumer protection and the mobility of people within the European Union .
These are the key issues when we are discussing these three instruments and they are what I want to address in particular .
Bringing these three topics together provides a very great advantage for us today , because the economy and the rights of consumers and workers are not intrinsically opposed to one another ; they need to be brought together .
This is something that we need to make progress on for the future .
That is why it is good that we are having this joint debate today .
In order to make this a reality , we need , above all , to bring three political principles to the fore .
Firstly - and Commissioner Barnier put this very well earlier - protectionism , which is still very much in evidence in the national governments of the Member States , needs to be overcome .
That is something we need to do in any case and it is on the agenda .
The second political principle is that we must guarantee a high level of protection of the rights of both consumers and workers .
In other words , the internal market does not mean the abolition of rights and it does not mean deregulation .
It means ensuring that we preserve our very high level of common rights in these areas .
For this reason , there is one paragraph in Mrs von Thun Und Hohenstein 's report that we do not agree with .
This concerns the so-called Internal Market Scoreboard or internal market test .
This is the wrong approach .
It gives the impression that the only important thing is how the market is functioning .
That is not the case .
We need to ask what impact the European Union legislation will have on the rights of workers and on the rights of consumers .
We therefore reject this concept , because it is the wrong one .
Thirdly , we need good enforcement of these rights at European level .
For this , we need a system of collective redress so that consumers do not stand alone in this internal market , but are also able to really assert their rights .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , allow me say that I am very pleased to see this exchange regarding the internal market and consumer protection entered as a priority debate this morning .
In the context of economic crisis , Mr Barnier , the internal market is an asset that we really must develop .
Within this internal market , of course , it is consumption which is perhaps the most important driver that we need to support in the very short term .
Not any kind of consumption , however .
We need the sort of consumption that prepares for the future , that is in line with the challenges of sustainable development , responsible consumption that is not always seeking to promote discount products that are supposed to enhance the purchasing power of families but which , in fact , are often mediocre in quality and which derive from the almost systematic relocation of their production outside the Union .
We know who their main victims are : the consumers with the lowest income , the most vulnerable consumers .
In short , we must re-establish trust between consumers and businesses , especially distribution businesses , to strengthen and promote the development of our EU 's internal market .
I would like to address a very clear message to the Commission .
Yes , Mr Dalli , you will have our support , but we experience that unease born of the risk associated with the distribution of competences between yourselves .
We fear that this will lead to the fragmentation of your responsibilities .
At the same time , we shall be very much on the alert to see that you are really working together in a coordinated manner .
We expect consumers ' interests to be genuinely taken into account in all the European Union 's policies , in the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I shall give you an example immediately that links not only Mr Barnier and Mr Dalli , but also Mrs Reding .
It is time to follow up the Green Paper on collective redress .
We expect you to make progress on this matter .
Since you have referred to it , by the way , Mr Dalli , I would like to ask you whether you already have a schedule on this matter .
We also expect you to come up with a specific new European form so that this collective redress will avoid the all too familiar abuses of the US system , so that we come up with something that can benefit everyone , that does not pit the interests of one side against the other .
I would like to congratulate our fellow Member , Mrs Hedh , on her very complete report .
I would like to pay particular attention to the emphasis she rightly places , in her report , on consumer education , which is essential and which must continue throughout life , since it is not only a matter for young children but also for consumers , given the extent to which products change and marketing forces become more sophisticated .
( The President interrupted the speaker )
In conclusion , I would just like to tell you that the indicators , the scoreboards , are all very well - and this is from a former statistician-economist - but they are no substitute for political will , which is what really must spur us to action .
Mr President , I would like to follow on from what Mr Barnier said at the start about the considerable importance of the internal market in the current crisis .
This has been proven very clearly once again .
However , the internal market obviously requires citizens to have confidence in it .
Only then will it function in the right way .
This is still lacking at many levels .
In the debates in our own countries , we parliamentarians in particular very often notice that these fears of the internal market are still very much in evidence amongst the general public and that subjects like protectionism are , unfortunately , also well received because these sorts of things are not only propounded by governments , but are also supported by many citizens .
It is therefore all the more important for us in Parliament to do our utmost to boost confidence in the internal market .
Consumer policy is , of course , a key element in achieving this .
Consumer policy providing a high level of consumer protection can increase and safeguard people 's confidence in the internal market .
We therefore need to work harder in this area .
I welcome the fact that both of the Commissioners are here today .
You are , of course , aware that our group , too , was critical of the fact that there is no longer a single commissioner responsible for consumer policy , because the message sent out by Mrs Kuneva was a very positive one .
We therefore welcome the fact that you are giving us a very clear signal here that you want to cooperate in this area .
We were also concerned that , by dividing the responsibilities between different commissioners , consumer protection would ultimately receive insufficient attention .
I hope , however , that this is not just a one-off occurrence , but that you will cooperate on this very closely with us , because we have some very important issues to address ; for example , we still have to finish debating the subjects of class actions law and collective redress , and progress needs to be made in this regard .
Of course , that will also play a very important part in increasing the confidence of citizens .
We need more instruments that make it clear that citizens are protected in the internal market .
SOLVIT is a very important instrument in this regard .
We therefore wholeheartedly support Mr Buşoi 's report .
SOLVIT , which provides an opportunity for out-of-court solutions , creates confidence in the internal market and provides consumers with a better knowledge of the internal market and this is something that is very often lacking on the part of the authorities in the Member States .
SOLVIT can provide an important and key addition in this respect .
This year , I am rapporteur for the budget and I can assure Mr Dalli that we will be vigilant in budgetary matters and the allocation of resources in the area of consumer policy .
We have already approached our Committee on Budgets and emphasised that we , of course , want funds to continue to be provided and that we want the appropriate money to be used .
In this regard , you can count on our support .
To summarise once again , I think that , overall , these reports send out a very important and very positive signal .
Although we support them , we do have one point of criticism .
This relates to the internal market check , which we feel is rather one-sided .
If we are going to review the directives , they need to be reviewed from various different viewpoints .
Sustainability is very important here , as are social issues .
A review , if it is to be carried out , must not focus solely on the single aspect of the internal market .
It must be a comprehensive review .
The subject of subsidiarity must also be given adequate consideration in this regard .
We therefore find the one-sided focus on the internal market check regrettable .
In principle , however , we support the approach of the rapporteur , including with regard to the internal market check , and we will vote in favour of the report .
Mr President , the process of building the common market based on the four freedoms - the free movement of people , goods , capital and services - is still an unfinished process , especially if we are thinking of the fourth freedom , the free movement of services , and we still have a very great deal to do .
It is an extremely significant process , particularly at a time of sluggishness in the economy and in view of the economic crisis we are facing in Europe .
Indeed , it is at a time of economic slowdown that we ought to talk about the merits of the common market , and perhaps then we will see the political will for which Mr Rochefort has appealed .
I would like , for this reason , to congratulate the Bureau of the European Parliament for realising the importance of the matter and deciding to make the debate on these three reports a priority debate for this sitting of Parliament .
My thanks and congratulations are also due to Mr Harbour , Chair of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , for the effectiveness of his efforts in this regard .
I would also like to congratulate the three rapporteurs for these three reports of such importance .
I cannot but notice , however , a certain absurdity .
In plenary today , we are discussing Mrs Thun 's report - an excellent report , I would like to add - but it is a report about the Internal Market Scoreboard for 2008 .
However , several days ago , the Commission published the Internal Market Scoreboard for 2009 .
I think this is another reason why , in future , the Commission should publish all four important reports monitoring the internal market at the same time .
After all , the Internal Market Scoreboard , the Consumer Markets Scoreboard , the SOLVIT Report and the Citizens Signpost Service are all , in fact , about the same thing , and we should receive them at the same time .
Finally , I would like to express support for the two main proposals contained in the Thun report .
I support in full both the proposal to hold an annual internal market forum , as well as , and more importantly , the proposal of a compulsory test , the ' internal market test ' , which should accompany all European Commission proposals in future .
Mr President , there is now a pressing view , which is confirmed in the Treaty of Lisbon and by the position taken by the Commission itself , that consumer protection policy needs to focus on safeguarding a healthy market in which consumers can act with safety and confidence .
This reasoning is based on the fact that , if consumers feel comfortable and confident in the market and cross-border trade is encouraged , competitiveness will increase and consumers will have a wider selection of goods and services at more competitive prices .
We do not agree with the position and the view that more efficient and flexible consumer markets are fundamental factors for competitiveness and citizens ' prosperity .
The economic crisis proves that we need to be guided by the particular conditions in each state and not by the dogmatic application of a single standard , namely that of unadulterated competition .
We consider that competitiveness is not intertwined with citizens ' prosperity , because it tends to favour companies , given that , to date , price reductions as a whole have demonstrably not benefited consumers .
We need price controls for basic goods , for the benefit of the poorer classes and society as a whole .
The only policy that can consolidate and raise the level of consumer protection is one that revolves around man and his prosperity and not around increasing competition .
This being so , we agree with a scoreboard to record and evaluate European consumer satisfaction with the smooth operation of the market but , on the other hand , we should not move away from the essence and the objective , which is none other than to operate a people-oriented internal market which revolves around man 's prosperity , not around numbers .
We see a consumer scoreboard as a tool for recording the extent of consumer satisfaction within a specific framework and at a particular point in time .
However , this evaluation and these records alone cannot bring greater prosperity to citizens purely and simply because , apparently , they will give consumers greater self-confidence and security .
Furthermore , any evaluation needs to be made on the basis of quantifiable social targets .
We also note that , as the primary objective of the scoreboard is to record consumer complaints , particular emphasis needs to be given to the measures which need to be taken to prevent profiteering .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are discussing three measures relating to the health and protection of consumers , which we have already voted in favour of in committee and which we will vote in favour of in plenary .
We are on the side of the citizens , who are too often harmed by decisions taken by European bodies : I am thinking of the decision taken by the European Court of Human Rights to deny the freedom to display the crucifix ; the inability to effectively tackle illegal immigrants ; the endless stream of people from third countries who take jobs away from our people ; the reticence to give consumers proper information on what they are buying or the place of provenance of foodstuffs .
The Hedh report attaches importance to the point of view of European citizens , who experience the pros and cons of the internal market every day , and emphasises the wisdom of appointing , in 2007 , a Commissioner for Consumer Affairs .
The report also points out the need to harmonise Member States ' surveillance and monitoring structures , as well as those of third countries .
The Thun Und Hohenstein report criticises certain attitudes adopted in the past and calls for responsibility to be shared among Member States and the Commission .
The Buşoi report concerns the SOLVIT network , created by the European Commission to give citizens and businesses free help in asserting their rights within the Union , particularly in cases of dispute .
It also criticises certain inefficiencies of the network and advocates improved information for citizens and businesses , who are often unaware that this structure exists .
As legislators , our primary concern must be citizens and consumers .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , SOLVIT can and should make a substantial contribution to greater transparency in the enforcement and assertion of personal and civil rights in the internal market .
The SOLVIT online problem-solving network is based on a pragmatic approach , which will benefit both citizens and enterprises without huge amounts of red tape .
However , the report from 2009 also shows that almost 40 % of questions raised by citizens related to residence conditions in another EU country .
This gives rise to the question of whether residence rights are still not being implemented in a transparent way .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we will vote on the own-initiative report on consumer protection , a very important instrument for which , among other things , I must thank the rapporteur , Mrs Hedh , and the other rapporteurs for the excellent atmosphere in which we have managed to work together .
There were many points on which we were in total agreement , and others I hope we can work on in the future : specifically , the European consumer scoreboard promoted by the European Commission , a very important instrument that nonetheless , in my view , still does not provide standardised data to enable people to make clear decisions .
If we were a company and we decided on the future of the company based on data that was still inaccurate , we could go bankrupt .
That is why , in future , I hope that we can work on a database that enables people to make clear decisions .
We must also consider , including in this report , the great burden put upon consumers but , in my view and on behalf of the group , I believe that a better balance is necessary in the future , since European citizens are not just consumers but also workers in companies that operate in the internal market .
We must therefore always consider the balance that must exist between those who provide services and provide goods and consumers themselves , since this is our objective .
An informed consumer is a free consumer - so any initiative to provide additional information is welcome - but we said no to school schemes because we must not take the place of the consumer when it comes to exercising their own freedom of choice and we believe that parents should be the first point of reference for young children in terms of what should be their consumer education .
Moreover , parents also have control over their children 's consumption , especially when they are young .
As for adults , it is true that consumers sometimes have difficulty protecting themselves via the appropriate legal channels , which is why we are in favour of non-judicial redress , but we believe that a greater effort could be made , particularly in times of crisis , to make what already exists work , rather than seeking to increase the number of consumer ombudsmen .
I will finish by mentioning services provided by the public administration .
I am sorry that due consideration was not taken of the fact that the public administration , municipalities , bodies , provinces , and even states , are also a point of reference for the consumer .
I hope that in future , we can do more , because it must be possible for consumers also to be protected from those malfunctioning services provided by the public administration .
( FR ) Mr President , Madam President , I thank Mrs Thun Und Hohenstein for the conscientiousness of her work and the overall quality of her report .
As shadow rapporteur for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , I am delighted that the vote in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection has made it possible to integrate into the final report a number of ideas that we wanted to see emerge .
The first is the need to adopt a more qualitative approach in respect of the implementation of the Internal Market Scoreboard , enabling the causes of the transposition deficit to be identified .
We do not underestimate the usefulness of the statistical data and the pressure that comes from promoting the EU 's good and bad students , but in our opinion , the Commission ought to be more ambitious and try to make this scoreboard a tool designed to appreciate the difficulties encountered by the Member States within the context of the transposition process .
All the more so since we all know that the transposition deficit may sometimes be due not to ill will by the Member States , but to the mediocre quality of the European legislation to be transposed .
The second aspect I focused on is the need to strengthen dialogue between the Commission and the Member States throughout the transposition period .
The more the information exchanges take place upstream , the more it will be possible to prevent the risk of nontransposition or incorrect transposition .
The report does , however , pose a problem on one point : this relates to paragraph 10 , which did not initially appear in Mrs Thun Und Hohenstein 's draft report .
This paragraph proposes the creation of an internal market test for all new proposed legislation .
We are strongly opposed to this since such a test seems to us to be pointless at best and dangerous at worst .
Indeed , the review of any barriers to the internal market already takes place during the impact studies carried out by the European Commission with each new legislative proposal .
We would not like this internal market test to be used as a pretext for undermining social or environmental advances .
We could not agree to it in those circumstances .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Barnier , Commissioner Dalli , the fact that we are discussing three own-initiative reports on consumer protection and the internal market today shows that , despite all of our successes in these areas , there is still much that is in need of improvement .
Admittedly , the Member States ' transposition of the internal market directives has , on average , greatly improved , but seven Member States have failed to meet the target set by the Commission of reducing the transposition deficit for the internal market directives to 1 % .
The main problem , however , has more to do with the application of EU law than with its transposition .
Thus , in the event of treaty infringements by Member States , it takes , on average , 18 months - in other words , still far too long - for them to comply with the judgment of the European Court of Justice .
This can be seen from the current internal market scorecard , and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe finds that unacceptable .
This deficit will lead to problems for citizens and , in particular , for small and medium-sized enterprises , which depend on harmonised rules within the internal market , but which meet with unexpected , time-consuming and bureaucratic obstacles when they want to operate across borders .
This is why it is important for SOLVIT to be developed further .
SOLVIT is an online problem-solving network in which the Member States work together in a pragmatic way to resolve problems that have arisen as a result of the misapplication of internal market rules by public authorities .
All Member States must ultimately provide the financial resources and adequately trained staff for the SOLVIT centres .
The ALDE Group calls emphatically for people to be made more aware of SOLVIT in the Member States in order to facilitate the cross-border sale of their products and services .
For this purpose , the involvement of the relevant associations in large-scale information campaigns is just as necessary as a uniform , easy-to-understand and easy-to-find Internet portal for receiving all kinds of complaints .
Mr President , as chairman of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , it gives me great pleasure first of all to say how much we all appreciate the fact that Commissioner Barnier and Commissioner Dalli are both here today , as a number of my colleagues have observed , and secondly also to remark that I think this is a remarkable occasion for Parliament .
We have one committee that has put together three own-initiative reports focusing on monitoring and implementation of key legislative instruments and , as you , Commissioner Barnier , have said , part of your success will be judged not just in the number of legislative proposals you bring forward but how well they are working .
I think this is a really significant development that all committees in this Parliament need to engage with .
I want particularly to thank all the coordinators on the committee who have worked with me to move forward in the work that we are doing and also to engage national parliaments , to have forums of national parliaments .
I very much hope , as both Commissioners indicated , that we would have a wider internal market forum , but we would like to have your reports brought together so this can become an annual event in Parliament for this really important subject .
I think it is significant - if we look at the EU 2020 proposal - that the completion of the single market is now relegated to a paragraph that says missing links and completing networks .
Well I hope all my colleagues agree this is absolutely not acceptable .
The EU 2020 initiative is calling on Member States to contribute and we have heard from the rapporteurs ( whom I thank greatly for their reports ) about the fact that Member States need to contribute to the completing of the single market .
This must be a flagship initiative and not relegated in the way that it is in the EU 2020 initiative , and I hope that both of you will help us to make sure that that happens over the next few weeks .

Mr President , the first note of dissension this morning : these reports wholeheartedly support the implementation of EU laws on consumer protection in Member States and the monitoring of the integration process of markets , which will be reported on in an annual report .
One of the main recommendations is the establishing of a Consumer Markets Scoreboard concerning topics such as complaints , prices , satisfaction , switching and safety , plus a whole host of additional long-term indicators .
The Commission intends to carry out in-depth analysis of all so-called problematic sectors identified in the Consumer Markets Scoreboard .
This bureaucratic web of interconnecting enforcements and self-perpetuating regulation will do for the small-business retail trade in Britain what the common fisheries policy has done for the British fishing industry : it will kill it .
Yet again , the small-business entrepreneur is being targeted and disadvantaged by bureaucratic interference and overregulation .
However well-intentioned these proposals are - and I am sure they are - yet again , this is an EU solution desperately looking for a problem .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I wholeheartedly endorse the sensible contributions made by my fellow Members - with the exception of the last one - and I would therefore like to come straight to the most important points .
The report by Mrs von Thun is a very successful example of how we , as the European Parliament , can show that we are serious about actually implementing what we have decided on together with the Council , and this implementation is the job of the Member States .
We , as Parliament , together with the Commission , must therefore pay greater attention in the next few years to ensuring that this implementation is actually successful .
The second thing that his report shows is that the division that the socialists clearly want , namely that they themselves be responsible for the good deeds , for consumer protection and for the protection of workers , while the Commission should keep the internal market under control , will not work .
Therefore , our request , which the report takes up with the internal market test , is that we bring together all of the essential elements that we value in the internal market , and that consumers like and enterprises need , and undertake a clear evaluation .
We do not want to bulldoze workers ' rights , but we do want these workers to also be able to buy the products that they value .
We do not want to cause problems for social structures in the Member States , but we do want these social structures to adapt to the future .
This requires a balance , which Parliament needs to find in cooperation with the Commission .
It must not be the case that the Commission is responsible for the problems while Parliament promises the good deeds .
Secondly , the report by Mrs Hedh , which , like all reports that we debate here , has been added to superbly by the shadow rapporteurs , shows that we need to attach just as much importance to consumer confidence as to the confidence of entrepreneurs .
That will be a task for the future , for which a solution can only be found by putting the long-term focus on the goal of the internal market , putting an end to the fragmentation into individual directorates general and different political approaches , and actually seeing the internal market as the grand aim of the European project that we have rather neglected in recent years .
I am very pleased , Commissioners , that both of you are here today and that you will take this impetus for the next five years with you to the Commission .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioners and rapporteurs .
I was the shadow on SOLVIT , and that is what I would like to concentrate on , on behalf of my group , the Socialist Group .
SOLVIT is a great concept and I think Commissioner Dalli summed it up by saying it is all about people .
It is citizen-centred , and it tries to help those who come up against barriers and problems created by the EU and to solve the problem in 10 weeks .
I know that some people would shirk from the idea that ' I am from the government and I am here to help ' , but SOLVIT is , in essence , a network across 27 Member States which is there to do exactly that : help .
I would like to put on record and pay tribute to all those who work in Member State SOLVIT centres .
Just last year , I met with the small-staffed team who run the SOLVIT centre in the United Kingdom .
The way the SOLVIT centre works in the UK is a model of best practice because it tries and uses a SOLVIT + model , going further in helping businesses and individuals who contact them with a problem .
The team are integrated into the European Regulatory Division within the Department for Business and Industry .
One of my many amendments sought to make sure that centres are suitably staffed across the EU with no exceptions .
Commissioner Barnier , in December , I raised the issue of SOLVIT in the Chamber when you were present and mentioned that in the autumn in committee , we were told that in your own Member State , the person running the SOLVIT centre was an intern .
Members of the committee were horrified .
Can I ask , as I did in December , whether that situation has changed ?
If you are not able to provide the House with that information , can I ask you to clarify it ?
It is important that SOLVIT centres are well staffed .
The internal market is at the centre of what binds us .
It is important that our legislation is clearer and easier for Member States to interpret so that the internal market can operate in the smoothest fashion and consumers can reap the benefits of the best price and the highest quality .
In conclusion , why is there not a SOLVIT day in the European Parliament ?
Why do we not have a poster in all our constituency office windows advertising SOLVIT ?
What can we do to inform all national politicians and their political offices of the benefits of SOLVIT ?
I hope we will continue to support SOLVIT and help the people we are here to represent .
( DA ) Mr President , I am shadow rapporteur for the report on the scoreboard for the internal market and I will therefore concentrate on that , and in that respect , this is a day of rejoicing .
It is a day on which we can all agree that these scoreboards are working extremely well .
They are a great success at a fundamental level , and therefore I presume we can only agree that more should be done to promote them .
I am also pleased to note that it looks like the Social Democrats have found out that it is not a good idea to vote against it in any event .
With regard to the famous test that has been proposed , we in the group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe naturally support this proposal ; moreover , we find it a little difficult to comprehend what the slightly defensive argument against this proposal is really about .
We can come back to that , however .
I will merely note as a general observation that it is excellent that there is broad agreement on the proposals and the report otherwise .
I will concentrate on what I think are a couple of the good things that have been included in the report .
Firstly , we have succeeded in focusing on the need for greater powers in the Member States ' administrations , not only nationally , but also regionally and locally .
I feel that one of the problems with the scoreboards is that some powers are still lacking as regards how we get things to work .
It is good , therefore , that this has been included in the report .
Another good thing is the focus on enforcement .
The SOLVIT centres have received a lot of praise , and I fully support this .
As the last speaker mentioned , we could in fact instigate a SOLVIT Day here in Parliament .
I feel that SOLVIT 's greatest problem at present is that it is not sufficiently known .
There really is a great need to bring SOLVIT into focus much more than is happening at present - which brings me to my last point , which concerns emphasising that this is a communication issue , as is also made clear in the report .
We really must ensure that we bang the drum in respect of the press and the rest of the public and ensure that much more focus is put on areas such as SOLVIT and the scoreboards .
In general , I would like to say on behalf of my group that I am really pleased to be able to lend this report our wholehearted support , and naturally I hope that the Commission - and I gather ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by saying something that has not been said here in this Chamber , and that is that we should surely thank Commissioner Kuneva .
Just like all other Members , I am delighted that the two Commissioners are sitting here today , both Mr Dalli and Mr Barnier , who was a member of our committee prior to his appointment .

I have personally met the staff who are responsible for SOLVIT in the Czech Republic .
It must be said that this is certainly a very good opportunity for the internal market , but it is also necessary to mention the differences of approach in various countries .
It is clearly important here to have a cross-border element and I hope that both Commissioners will contribute towards opening up the cross-border consumer market and especially towards breaking down barriers in the form of various national exemptions , and that we will thereby achieve full harmonisation of the consumer market .
Personally , I think that opening up the cross-border market will bring greater competition and will ultimately serve as an effective instrument for combating the economic crisis which we face today .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , let us take up the statement made by Commissioner Barnier in his hearing and make the internal market our friend .
If we are to take this task seriously , we need to make the internal market a domestic one .
If we make the internal market into a domestic market , we will make it into a place where the citizens of the European Union can live .
We are Europe .
Making it into a place to live , but not into a homeland , is a different matter entirely .
The internal market is not yet complete .
It still has a lot of potential for development .
The Commission must highlight all obstacles and propose measures for their removal .
The euro and the internal market represent our most successful response to the challenges , both internal and external , of globalisation .
The strengths of the internal market are the qualifications of European citizens and the small and medium-sized enterprises , which make up 90 % of the economy .
We therefore need to transpose the Small Business Act in all Member States as quickly as possible .
Let us make this Act a hallmark of the internal market .
However , 80 % of the economy in the European Union is credit-financed and only 20 % is financed by the capital market .
This is something we need to bear in mind in the re-regulation of the financial market .
The third strength is the competitive export economy .
We also have a few tensions to resolve . These include the horizontal approach versus sectoral concerns , the four freedoms versus the different social realities , the skills imbalance , above all , in the areas of taxation , education and research , and the yet to be implemented sustainable social market economy .
We need a one-stop shop for business and consumer protection-related information that is relevant to the internal market .
The internal market forum and the joint debate on these three reports on the same day every year will give us the opportunity to ask ourselves all these questions and to make the internal market into a domestic market for all citizens .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to have the opportunity to mention during a priority debate these three reports concerning citizens ' everyday lives .
I would like , moreover , to congratulate our rapporteurs on their work and , more specifically , to mention the SOLVIT network .
The network has now been in existence for eight years ; it has resolved many problems effectively and yet it is completely unknown .
How many times have I had to refer people to this network , the existence of which they did not even suspect , even though this tool could strengthen the image of a Europe protective of its citizens ' rights .
I must admit - and I am very glad that Mr Barnier is here - that I understand that my country 's government does not really promote it .
The increased number of cases would consequently be very tricky to manage for the sole trainee who , currently in 2010 , is in charge of the SOLVIT network in France , a country which , it is true , has only 60 million inhabitants and which is only the second Member State in the EU from the point of view of the number of cases submitted in 2009 .
Indeed , the resolution rate is amazingly good , but the time periods are dreadful , with an average of 15 weeks before cases are dealt with , which is five weeks beyond the maximum allowed .
I would therefore ask the Commission and the Member States to grant real financial and human resources and to conduct major information campaigns , aimed especially at businesses , which submitted no more cases in 2009 than in 2004 .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioners , I would like to thank the rapporteurs concerned for their constructive work .
Despite its shortcomings , the EU 's internal market is a great success and I find it difficult to comprehend Mr Colman 's criticism .
The aim of the internal market is to give consumers a wide range of high quality goods and services at good prices , while at the same time guaranteeing a good level of consumer protection .
I therefore think we should work towards full harmonisation of consumer rights with a high level of protection , so that consumers can genuinely exploit the advantages of the internal market .
This is of particular importance with the increases in cross-border trade and e-commerce .
I am convinced that the class action would be an effective way to strengthen Europe 's consumers - based not on an American model , but on a European model .
In this respect , we must stop hesitating and finally get down to action .
I am pleased that Commissioner Dalli is taking this up .
We all know that these days , most jobs are created in the services sector .
It is therefore important that the EU has a truly European services sector in which entrepreneurs and consumers can act freely not just nationally , but in the internal market .
We need a functioning market in health care services .
That will result in better care , more freedom of choice and shorter waiting times .
At present , we have an almost unregulated situation and I am relying on Commissioner Dalli to deal with this .
Another area to which we must pay more attention is financial services , where we know problems still exist .
We therefore need clear and credible rules , not least in view of the financial turbulence , and Commissioner Barnier is going to rise to this challenge .
Balanced , reasonable and correct rules are good for consumers .
( PL ) It is good that Parliament has drawn up a report on SOLVIT containing suggestions for the European Commission and the Member States .
As shadow rapporteur for the report for the European Conservatives and Reformists , I stressed , while the report was still at the committee stage , the significance of promoting SOLVIT among EU residents , especially the possibility for citizens and , in particular , businesses , to assert their rights .
We probably all agree that it is essential to run an information campaign promoting the SOLVIT network as an alternative dispute resolution mechanism .
This is so that information about the existence of SOLVIT will reach interested parties .
The Internet is crucial here , so it would be good if the Commission listened to the suggestions of Parliament and initiated the creation of a common Internet address with the domain name solvit.eu for all national SOLVIT centres , and Member States which , up till now , have not done so , set up Internet pages with national domains linked to the European SOLVIT portal .
Of course , promotion is not everything .
It is also important to increase the efficiency of national SOLVIT centres by providing competent civil servants and by subsidising SOLVIT at European level .
( PL ) I warmly congratulate all the rapporteurs , because the reports for which they are responsible have two very important features .
Firstly , they do , in fact , very consistently defend the internal market , pointing to shortcomings in its visibility , but , at the same time , very consistently defending it .
The second great quality of these reports is that they are generally accepted .
I mean that we are dealing with a situation in which the entire European Parliament , including those fellow Members who are very sceptical of the free market , in general defend the internal market and its values - this is a great quality of these reports .
I would like to draw attention to several specific matters .
As for SOLVIT , we are dealing with the paradoxical situation , as Mr Kurski has said , in which the instrument which is supposed to even out those differences itself functions in different countries with different levels of efficiency .
In my opinion , this requires some kind of coordination , because it must be a consistent system which not only functions well , but functions everywhere in the same way .
Something which is very important in Mrs Thun 's report is the means which the Commission should find so that a model can ultimately be developed to ensure that none of the legislation we create will be incompatible with the free internal market .
This would appear to be a crucial matter in the report .
If we managed to build such a mechanism , we would also not need to worry about the future of the new market .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , this joint debate this morning and the high quality of all three reports indicates the high priority given to internal market and consumer policy in Europe .
I would like to thank all three rapporteurs and the many shadow rapporteurs and fellow Members who have produced this joint work .
I would like to focus on two crucial points .
The first is that we , that is , the Commission and those of us in this House , are assuming that everything runs relatively harmoniously in the internal market and that we have enlightened consumers and fair suppliers .
That is often the case , but not always .
There are irresponsible suppliers who only see their short-term profits and therefore , we need stronger market surveillance and supervision .
However , there are also uninformed consumers .
We need better information .
It is not enough for the package leaflet to be readable .
We need continuous information .
Someone has just said that we need confidence .
However , confidence comes from knowledge .
I have heard that in Germany , only one in two 14 to 15 year olds understands the meaning of inflation .
I do not even want to ask what the results of the questionnaire were when it came to the word ' deflation ' .
We need schools to be better networked along with information on the conflict between the interests of suppliers and consumers .
That is mentioned in the reports by my fellow Members ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I just wish , in particular , to congratulate all my colleagues on the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection who worked on the future of the Internal Market Scoreboard .
It is an issue that is close to my heart as it provides an excellent communication tool for how Member States treat EU directives .
It is also close to my heart because I am constantly hearing about overzealous EU regulation , particularly in my home country , Ireland , and this needs to be digested .
Well , a quick glance at the scoreboard will show you that Ireland has misapplied EU directives on no less than 67 occasions and is in danger of missing out on the 1 % transposition deficit target as agreed .
This raises the question : who is at fault for this supposedly overzealous regulation ?
If a Member State is not transposing EU legislation correctly , or is adding more regulation onto directives , then is it the fault of the EU or the Member State ?
I think possibly and probably the latter .
Perhaps an idea for the scoreboard in future might be to directly address the matter of overregulation , or ' gold plating ' , as it is known .
I think this would be a positive outcome .

Mr President , firstly , I would like to compliment the person who came up with the title ' SOLVIT ' : it is simple , it is clear and , as they say , ' it does exactly what it says on the tin ' .
Since SOLVIT was established in 2002 , its workload has been growing exponentially year on year , so much so that in 2008 , there was an increase of 22 % of cases coming before it , leading to 1 000 cases , and with an 88 % resolution saving EUR 32.6 million .
That is an impressive statistic .
However , the downside is that the days taken to solve the problems rose , on average , from 53 to 69 days .
That brings us to the solutions that are required .
Obviously , there is a shortage of staff .
That must be dealt with .
They must have proper resources .
There is a need for continuous training in line with the EU 2020 strategy on lifelong training , and an exchange of best practice , and it is important to meet regularly .
I would also suggest that , since many of the problems are local , there could be a local aspect to this to deal with inquiries at an early stage .
Consumers also need to have greater awareness .
I think an online address would create that and create more confidence .
I think it is important , as a previous speaker said , that what is happening in individual states in the transposition of EU regulations is looked at very closely .
Finally , a previous speaker said that this was an ' EU solution desperately looking for a problem ' ; I would say that it is an EU problem successfully finding a solution .
( EL ) Mr President , congratulations and thanks to the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs of the three reports .
The fact that there is agreement makes me optimistic about the future of the internal market .
I should like to highlight two points : the first point has to do with paragraph 10 of the Thun report .
I consider it fundamental and I think that the best thing that could happen would be if we could clarify that workers ' rights , social rights and environmental protection are not obstacles to progress in the internal market .
The second point concerns SOLVIT .
It is an extraordinary mechanism but it still requires a great deal of help .
To tell you the truth , I was thinking about putting pressure on my government in Greece to do something about this , because we only have two employees .
However , when I heard that France only has one trainee , I thought I would wait first for Mr Barnier to put pressure on his government .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the new online problem-solving network concerning cases of misapplication of internal market law , known as SOLVIT , is a very successful system insofar as it provides redress , without formal procedures , within approximately 10 weeks .

Created in 2002 , this network saw its workload increase by 22 % in 2008 .
Even though the resolution rate remains quite high at 83 % , the number of cases resolved is decreasing .
It would seem to be time , eight years after it was created , to think about strengthening this institution by giving it the means to function effectively .
These new measures would make it possible to help European citizens and businesses to assert their rights , especially with regard to the recognition of qualifications and of their social and residence entitlements .
I therefore support the idea that not only should there be more SOLVIT staff in the Member States , but also that support and training measures should be put in place so that staff can function as efficiently as possible .
It seems essential to me that governments and we ourselves , as elected representatives for our respective constituencies , should promote the SOLVIT network , which enabled cost savings of EUR 32.6 million in 2008 .
Furthermore , promoting this new tool would limit excessive recourse to the judicial system .
I therefore call on the Member States to transpose all the European directives and make citizens and businesses aware of their rights within the internal market through national forms of media and information campaigns .
To conclude , on behalf of my political group within the Committee on Petitions , I hope that cooperation between SOLVIT and our parliamentary committee will be strengthened so as to facilitate the work of these two bodies .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on their very good reports .
Recently , we have been saying a lot about the need to revive the internal market .
The Commissioner also spoke about it during the hearing before the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
This will also be the case with Professor Monti 's report , for which we are waiting .
In my opinion , not enough of the internal market itself is to be found in the European Union 's 2020 strategy .
The internal market is something which we need .
However , we do not need an internal market in name only , but an internal market which is really operational .
It cannot be said that we have this at present . There are too many barriers to the free flow of the four freedoms , and they limit the market 's potential , while the protectionist policies of Member States are inconsistent with the principles of the internal market .
On the one hand , we need proper implementation of the law by Member States and we need support instruments which function well , such as SOLVIT , but we also need deeper ( ... ) .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , I can only endorse the conclusions in the report by our fellow Member , Mrs Hedh , especially with regard to the need for an active consumer policy aimed specifically at protecting vulnerable consumers and those on low incomes .
I would also like to focus on a few other essential points of this policy .
Admittedly , the Internal Market Scoreboard is an important statistical tool , but it is completely inadequate since it concentrates exclusively on the functioning of the consumer sector , but without attempting to resolve the problems of EU consumers within this market .
The Internal Market Scoreboard should not merely look at market demand and consumers as passive recipients at the end of the chain .
It is becoming increasingly clear that consumers must , from now on , play a responsible , active role by engaging in sustainable , ethical , socially responsible and ecological consumption .
The scoreboard should therefore be revised and indicators incorporated into it concerning the social and environmental aspects of these choices , which are becoming more and more important .
Finally , the laws concerning energy consumption , transport , the environment , digital technology and so on need to be included in the review of the acquis .
( The President cut off the speaker )

( DE ) Mr President , I would like to talk about proposals relating to consumer protection and would , of course , like to start by mentioning the positive aspects : the means of informing and empowering consumers by providing more information at all levels , from municipal , local and regional spheres right up to EU cross-border dealings , the promotion of the consumer - like we do in Austria through anti-trust law - and , of course , tougher penalties for careless banks that grant ill-considered credit .
A standardised credit form is also an extremely positive move .
However , I would also like to touch on some problematic issues , namely serious prejudice in the law relating to guarantees and improper contractual clauses , which are punished more severely in places like Austria .
I would like to propose that the favourability principle be applied so that , where national rules provide better protection for consumers , these rules should be used accordingly .
Mr President , consumer protection : we are all in favour of it .
The difficulty is that some Member States pay lip service to the SOLVIT mechanism , as other speakers have addressed .
That needs to be looked at so that there is proper staffing .
But can I tell you about some practical examples of consumer problems that come to my office .
Just this morning , I had one relating to property transactions across the European Union .
I know the EU does not have competence in this area , but could I ask Member States , where there are problems , to deal with citizens as they would with their own , and I do think there is an issue here that we need to take action on .
The second one relates to business directories .
European City Guides has caused us enormous headaches in Parliament and they continue to operate because they receive some level of protection within the Member State where they are based .
This needs to be addressed because the attitude of citizens to the internal market is affected by their experience in these areas , even if there is not competence for the EU in them .

( DA ) Mr President , thank you for a good debate here today .
I am pleased that Mr Barnier and Mr Dalli have given such support to the need for the consideration of consumers in the internal market .
However , I would like to draw attention to one particular paragraph in Mrs Hedh 's report - namely paragraph 40 , in which we propose the establishment of a European Consumer Agency .
I can well imagine that it is something you would like to work towards .
Such an agency could help to compile data , to prepare studies on consumer behaviour and , of course , it could also act as a watchdog in respect of the Commission 's work and in respect of Parliament 's work on consumer issues .
I would therefore like to hear your view on the idea , whether it is something you would like to work towards - as far as I am concerned , we could easily locate such an agency in either Malta or France if that would help the process .
Mr President , Mrs Schaldemose has just highlighted the quality of this debate , particularly on the specific point of the consumer agency which , unless I am mistaken , already exists in Canada , and Mr Dalli will tell us how things stand today .
I agree with this assessment of the quality of the debate and the quality of all the constructive , critical speeches and proposals that have been made on the implementation and evaluation , on the monitoring of these 1 500 - I repeat , for all those listening to us - 1 500 directives or texts which regulate this large European market .
I might add that I am not sure whether I prefer to talk about the large European market rather than the single market , since it would be clearer for citizens and consumers .
Under the supervision of the Chair , Mr Harbour , who heard me say this in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , and in response to Mr Triantaphyllides 's speech , I would like to remind you of the principle behind the action I will be taking within the Commission over the next five years .

Ladies and gentlemen , my aim , day after day , law after law , is to ensure that the European market once again serves the men and women who live on our continent .
I have a second aim , and that is to ensure that the markets - since I am also responsible for regulation and supervision - to ensure that the financial markets , about which much has been said over the last few months , once again serve the real economy , that they serve men and women .
I want citizens , consumers and small businesses to take ownership of this market again .
This is what will guide the action that I shall have the honour of directing in the College .
It is a matter of trust , to adopt the word used just now by Mr Rochefort and Mrs Rühle , of mutual trust .
This is why I thank Mrs Thun Und Hohenstein once more for her high quality report on the scoreboard published by the European Commission .
There are many ideas , in this report and in all I have heard , that are worth adopting or examining .
Mr Bielan has supported the idea of indicators on the application of the rules included in Mrs Thun Und Hohenstein 's report .
Mrs Gebhardt has also mentioned the economic and social assessment of the directives and the impact studies .
Perhaps at this stage , I might respond to the constructive criticism of Mr Harbour concerning the 2020 strategy .
Furthermore , I also heard Mrs Handzlik say that we were not talking enough about the internal market .
Frankly , when you actually read the 2020 strategy that the Commission published last week , the internal market is at the heart of this approach and it is everywhere : intelligent growth with patents and other tools ; green growth with proper use of procurement contracts ; and inclusive , equitable and fair growth .
The internal market is everywhere - it must be everywhere - but , Mr Harbour , the 2020 text is not designed to talk about everything .
For example , it does not talk about foreign policy and defence policy , nor does it aim to relieve the Commission of its task , which is to properly enforce , supervise and monitor the correct implementation of all the texts .
Please believe that I do not feel relieved of the need to check and take action , sometimes even through infringement proceedings , to ensure the proper application of the internal market .
However , I will always , I repeat , prioritise agreement , trust and explanation over constraint .
There are other good ideas in Mrs Thun Und Hohenstein 's report : the partnership with Member States and the creation of this internal market forum , which I support .
Incidentally , perhaps we could pull together other initiatives today concerning some of the same matters we are covering with Mr Dalli , such as the implementation or highlighting and promotion of the SOLVIT network , and get things done at the same time .
I have talked about attaching as much importance to the monitoring effect as to the announcement effect .
This is my way of doing politics and , from that point of view , I believe that the scoreboard , the evaluation , must enable us not only to make a quantitative evaluation - how many directives are transposed - but also a qualitative one .
I believe Mr Hoang Ngoc mentioned , and very clearly too , the quality of the implementation of the laws , the quality of transposition and , as you said , the quality of the laws themselves , which , for a legislator or a commissioner , is a good exercise in clarity .
At any rate , all these ideas are worthwhile , as Mr Schwab and Mrs Roithová stated just now .
With regard to SOLVIT , to end with a few brief comments , I support the idea - the good idea - that someone mentioned of creating a SOLVIT.EU website . It will disseminate information or refer the user to national sites .
We will work very quickly on this SOLVIT.EU site with my departments in conjunction with another project relating to the Your Europe site .
As Mr Kelly and you said , though , the word SOLVIT is at least a clear and simple one , and I agree with this positive assessment .
SOLVIT is working well , but it could work better .
There are too many citizens and businesses that are still unaware of their rights and the ways in which they can assert them , and I uphold Mrs Werthmann 's remark calling for greater transparency .
I believe , too , that a number of you , Mrs Vergnaud , Mr Rossi , Mrs Stihler , Mrs Rapti , have referred to the inadequacy of the resources made available to SOLVIT , not only in France , by the way , even though I clearly heard what you said .
This is not a French minister addressing you , even though I am a former French minister , and please believe that I will look very closely at what happens in that country - of which I am still a citizen - so that it functions properly , just as I shall do in all the other countries .
Indeed , we require the appropriate , necessary resources , and I will check that during each of my in-situ visits .
Once again , these tools are necessary in order to check properly how the internal market is functioning ; this market , I say in turn , is not complete .

We must relaunch it and develop it further - several people have mentioned this , Mr Stolojan , Mrs Gebhardt , Mr Karas , Mr Kožušník - from the cross-border perspective or even within each country .
We must remove the barriers , and that is why , Mr Harbour , it is important to determine where the missing links are , which is something that is perhaps not emphasised enough , but which is nevertheless laid down in the 2020 strategy .
I will endeavour to do this with my 12 or 15 colleagues in the College who are responsible , one way or another , for applying the directives on the internal market .
Mr President , I will conclude by mentioning three specific points .
Yes to close cooperation - it was Mr Busuttil who raised this matter - between SOLVIT , the Ombudsman and the work of the Committee on Petitions .
This is the approach that I shall be taking .
I thank Mrs Rühle and the other members of the Committee on Budgets for their willingness to defend SOLVIT 's budget .
I support Mrs Gruny 's idea of organising consultations and seminars .
We already have one or two of these a year - but I will check that this is enough - between all agents in the Member States , sometimes even in the regions , who are in charge of the SOLVIT project .
Finally , with regard to the matter criticised by several members of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , namely the internal market test , without dramatising this matter , I would remind you , ladies and gentlemen , that any legislative proposal must respect the treaty .
This is what the rapporteur means ; in other words , it must undergo a test of compatibility with the principles of the internal market .
That is one thing , and I am also going to keep an eye on a number of social , environmental and economic criteria , since I am committed to all laws being evaluated in advance .
These are the obligations required upstream and downstream of any legislation if we are to try to construct the finest body of legislation to serve the citizens , consumers and businesses working and living on European territory .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , like my colleague , Michel Barnier , I find it very heartening to be part of such a lively debate and to hear such expert views relating to consumer issues .
This augurs well for our working together in a true spirit of partnership and achieving our objective to put consumers first .
If I may , I will repeat one point I made in my initial address .
In addition to the economic arguments for a strong , effective and properly enforced consumer policy , we should keep our sights firmly on the central role this can play in reconnecting Europe with its citizens - perhaps the biggest prize of all .
I know that one of my main tasks is to coordinate this effort in the Commission , and your vigilance will be most welcome and comforting .
The consumer scoreboard is a tool which enables us to detect failures in the market and allows us to move to a further study on how to address such failures .
I believe that it is a crucial mechanism that serves a very real purpose , and we can usefully benefit from its further development and strengthening .
The scoreboard will be our eyes and ears alerting us to problem hotspots .
A better reflection of the consumer angle across EU policies and our joint commitment to effective enforcement will result in a stronger EU consumer , and the economic benefits that will follow .
Following a public consultation last year , the Commission is evaluating the comments about collective redress and intends to find a solution that meets European consumers ' needs without importing US practices .
Alternative dispute resolution is going to be our key mover in this regard .
My friend , Michel Barnier , has already explained the central position that the internal market has in the EU 2020 strategy .
If you look closely at the text , there is a clear understanding also that consumers must remain at the heart of the single market .
Consumers are positioned as drivers of the single market and we intend to continue to consolidate the centrality of consumers .
I see the issue of consumer education as a key issue for consumer empowerment .
We are indeed looking at how our Dolcetta Programme can be further enhanced to cover new areas .
On the last point raised about a European consumer agency , it must be emphasised that enforcement is the exclusive obligation of the Member States and they need to provide adequate resources for its proper functioning .
However , the treaty does provide a legal basis for the Union to support and complement their efforts .
It has to be carefully evaluated in what areas the EU can complement national public enforcement and what is the right institutional structure for that .
The Commission will carefully evaluate the different options .
I very much look forward to making serious and sustained progress with you over the time I am responsible for this sector .
Above all , I would like to thank everyone for this fascinating debate , for the lively reactions and the serious reflections .
The presence and statements of both Commissioners and the presence of numerous Commission staff show that this new Parliament and this new Commission are going to work together closely and well on the matter of further development of the common market .
The common market is one of the greatest achievements of the European Union , and I would like to express my thanks for the positive reactions to the proposals which I have included in my report .
To fellow Members who are socialists and are worried about paragraph 10 - the ' internal market test ' - I would like to remind you that , firstly , this is nothing new .
This proposal was adopted by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection as long ago as 2003 and is part of the internal market strategy .
We should not be afraid of it .
The test does not threaten any of the European Union 's social achievements .
After all , a moment ago , we heard here from the Commissioner that the European Commission evaluates new directives from the social , economic and ecological point of view , and so there is no need to panic .
What we are all concerned about is that the common market should develop further , and we are also concerned to ensure that protectionism does not creep into the European Commission .
European integration will develop only when the citizens are aware and active , and public institutions are competent , effective and citizen-friendly .
In this report , I have proposed a number of solutions so that you - fellow Members - can engage your electorate effectively and well in the process of European integration and , in this case , by actually strengthening the common market , increase their share in the common market , that great success of the European Union .
We must continue to develop instruments which will help in development of the common market .
The simultaneous publication of the four reports is a very important element , as is better coordination and better transposition of legislation .
We should not react negatively to the word ' market ' .
In the part of the world which I come from , we could not use this market for many decades , and we know what that led to .
Finally , we are reminding the citizens that at the heart of the common market are the four freedoms , and this is stressed in my report .
It is extremely important not to limit the freedoms of this market , to help the citizens make increasing and fuller use of these freedoms and to develop them , and not to spoil anything we have achieved so far .
Mr President , I have listened with interest to all the intelligent and interesting contributions to this debate .
I am also very pleased that both the Commissioners responsible are promising to work together to develop and improve the EU 's consumer policy .
I would like to add a few points of my own .
The consumer organisations have an extremely important role to play in drawing the authorities ' attention to the everyday problems faced by consumers .
Consequently , the instruments that are available to the consumer organisations should be improved to make it easier for them to act effectively at EU level and at national level .
In addition , we must call upon the Member States to consult the consumer organisations as much as possible at all stages of the decision-making process where consumer policy is concerned .
I am also pleased that Commissioner Dalli brought up the matter of the importance of Member States ensuring that there is adequate financing and personnel available to develop the scoreboard further .
Finally , the scoreboard should not just be used to bring about better consumer policy , but rather must influence all policy areas that are of significance for consumers and ensure that consumer issues are integrated into all EU policy to a greater extent .
Furthermore , the scoreboard should stimulate a more general discussion of consumer policy issues , both at EU level and at national level .
I would really look forward to having another debate on the internal market and consumer protection in this Chamber in a year 's time .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - It is unbelievable that , in two essential areas such as health and consumer protection , in Malta and Gozo , the official structures are completely passive in spite of blatant transgressions .
In the Maltese Islands , medicines are much more expensive than in another EU country , namely Belgium .
I will give the following examples :
Galvus 50 mg ( diabetic pills )
Price in Malta for a box of 28 : EUR 27.84
Price in Brussels for a box of 180 : EUR 135.13
For 180 pills , the price in Malta is EUR 178.97 as compared to EUR 135.13 in Brussels .
Tegretol 200 mg
Price in Malta for a box of 50 : EUR 17.00
Price in Brussels for a box of 50 : EUR 7.08
Zocor 20 mg
Price in Malta for a box of 28 : EUR 34.94
Price in Brussels for a box of 84 : EUR 21.71
For 84 pills , the price in Malta is EUR 104.82 as compared to EUR 21.71 in Brussels .
These are only a few examples of a situation which is contributing to the hardship being suffered by the majority of Maltese families .
The EU prides itself on health and consumer protection but in the Maltese Islands , the price of medications has spiralled for no justifiable reason .
The efficient functioning of the internal market is a precondition for an adequate guarantee of the rights bestowed by a treaty in respect of the free movement of persons , services , goods and capital within the Community .
In a time of crisis , it may also assist in creating a stable and prosperous economic environment .
However , the internal market cannot fulfil its function without the proper implementation , application and enforcement of legislation .
The Member States have an obligation to implement laws on time , if they have committed to do this under an agreement .
An implementation deficit of 1 % may seem small , but if we include the number of overdue or non-implemented directives , it has a significant effect on the functioning of the internal market .
Doubts repeatedly arise in the case of certain Member States .
I support the provision of more detailed information on the Commission website concerning directives that have not yet been implemented .
This information should contribute to greater awareness among the broader public and constitutional bodies in the Member States .
I welcome the challenge to Member States to adopt essential measures , including the allocation of resources to secure the functioning of cross-border networks of electronic information systems for the timely exchange of information , especially for hazardous non-food products ( RAPEX ) and food and fodder ( RASFF ) , or the network for cooperation in the area of consumer protection ( CPC ) .
These systems still do not function properly and cannot be relied on in all Member States .
It is also necessary to pay attention to the correct application of directives .
This can be achieved through effective cooperation between bodies at national , regional and local levels .
in writing . - Serious consideration has to be taken as regards existing Union-wide redress mechanisms such as SOLVIT .
This alternative avenue for redress is underused due to a lack of knowledge of its existence on the part of citizens , consumers and businesses , as well as because of the inadequate resources in place at national level .
SOLVIT centres that are currently present in each Member State ( as well as in Norway , Iceland and Liechtenstein ) are understaffed and underfunded - training for staff and funding to improve the administrative capacity of the centres must be stepped up .
I call upon the Commission to complete the Single Market Assistance Services ( SMAS ) project as a matter of priority .
I propose that the Commission consider including in the Consumer Markets Scoreboard a detailed account of the progress , achievements and shortcomings of SOLVIT .
Furthermore , in an attempt to raise awareness , Member States must promote SOLVIT as an expedient and accessible alternative dispute resolution mechanism , in the form of a nation-wide information campaign .
Finally , there needs to be marked improvement on the part of the Commission and the Member States to raise awareness of the opportunities that the Single Market offers for citizens , consumers and businesses .
A society which freely makes use of the possibilities offered by the single market is the foundation for the success of the process of European integration .
We will not build a truly unified European Union if people are not convinced that the whole of Europe is their home .
This end can , principally , be served by SOLVIT .
It is safe to say that the establishment of the SOLVIT system in 2002 was one of those events in the history of Europe as a united continent which appear inconspicuous , but which , with the passing of time , have brought unexpected results .
The idea of the system refers directly to the sources of European integration or , in other words , to the fact that it is primarily to serve the citizens of the Union , and not particular Member States or governments .
Can there be anything better than giving ordinary people a simple instrument enabling them to solve problems which restrict their freedom of activity in the single market ?
However , the experience of nearly a decade has shown that there are numerous barriers which prevent people from making full use of the system 's possibilities .
We should , therefore , agree with the proposals of the report drawn up by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
Above all , we should concentrate on promoting SOLVIT in the Member States , among the citizens , because they know very little about it .
Giving greater financial and staffing resources and additional training , or appointing a SOLVIT liaison officer , will be pointless if people do not know they have such an instrument at their disposal .
In my opinion therefore , all the measures we take should start with this , although we should not give up the other ideas .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the smooth operation of the internal market must remain a priority for the European Parliament , with services like SOLVIT being essential to ensuring this is the case .
The report highlights this point and focuses attention on the problems this service is facing .
Although we are all aware that aspects such as communication and raising the SOLVIT service 's media profile are of paramount importance , we can still see that these remain some of the recurring problems which the service has been facing right from its early years .
Member States and the European Commission must ensure that European citizens , the business sector and , in particular , small and medium-sized enterprises which need support to be able to make full use of the facilities offered by the internal market , have access to resources which can provide information and a rapid solution .
Furthermore , the SOLVIT centres require additional resources .
I am referring here to qualified staff and , by extension , ongoing training courses for them .
Member States must realise how important these centres are and how instrumental they are in ensuring the correct implementation of the internal market 's regulations .
I believe that the benefits which this service can offer both citizens and the business sector are far from being fully utilised .
Consumer protection in the European Union must be designed in such a way that citizens can take advantage , within the internal market , of a wide choice of high-quality products and services , while at the same time having confidence that their rights as consumers are protected and that they can exercise them effectively if the need arises .
It goes without saying that , to do this , it is also necessary for consumers to be duly aware of their rights and obligations under the applicable law .
The initiatives mentioned in the report for providing clarification and information to EU citizens are therefore important and must be implemented quickly .
The increasing complexity of the services sector , in particular , presents a huge problem , making it increasingly difficult for consumers to make an informed choice when purchasing goods or services .
The knowledge , as well as the needs , of consumers , which have also been brought up by the consumer barometer , must be taken into account by the EU institutions in their policies and lawmaking .
We should aim for greater harmonisation of consumer protection regulations - and by that I mean an adjustment upwards - on account of the increasing cross-border use of services .
However , in all our attempts to improve the internal market , we must not forget the numerous imports from third countries .
In this regard , we need greater cooperation between the customs authorities and consumer protection authorities in the Member States in order to protect consumers from unsafe imports .
Over the years , the scope of EU consumer protection policy has changed to reflect changes in people 's needs and expectations .
With nearly 500 million consumers , the EU internal market has a significant role in the achievement of the objectives in the Lisbon action plan ( economic growth , employment and increasing competitiveness ) , as consumer spending brings wealth to the EU .
Above all , owing to the rapid development of e-commerce , the cross-border dimension of consumer markets in the EU has grown significantly , making it even more important to have high-level consumer protection .
Unfortunately , however , today 's EU consumer protection regulations have not been implemented and enforced to the same extent in all Member States .
In my opinion , stronger supervision of the market and the mechanisms of enforcement , and their effective and comprehensive implementation , are essential for increasing consumer confidence .
On this basis , I support the rapporteur 's suggestions that the European Commission should observe closely the adoption and implementation of EU consumer rights in the Member States and help them with this in every way .
I think that the European Union should consider the idea of creating a European consumer protection office which could function as a coordinating central office dealing specifically with the resolution of cross-border incidents , in order to support and complement the relevant consumer protection offices in the Member States in implementing and enforcing EU consumer protection regulations .
I think that the EU consumer protection regulations will not be of much benefit if they are not properly adopted , implemented and enforced at a national level .
Movement of persons with a long-stay visa ( debate )
The next item is the report by Carlos Coelho , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement and Regulation ( EC ) No 562 / 2006 as regards movement of persons with a long-stay visa - C6-0076 / 2009 - .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are speaking about absurd situations such as that of a student who obtains a visa in order to take a course in Belgium .
Not falling within the remit of Directive 2004 / 114 / EC , he may not go to the Netherlands to gather information from a specialised library for the purposes of writing his thesis nor benefit from a weekend getting to know Barcelona because he will be arrested in the country which issued the visa .
The Schengen Convention stipulates that holders of a long-stay visa may only reside in the territory of the Member State which provided the visa .
They may not travel to other Member States nor pass through other Member States on their return to their country of origin .
Schengen stands for freedom of movement .
Any person who legally resides in a Member State should be able to move freely within an area where there are not internal borders .
The ideal solution would be for the Member States to comply with their obligation to provide a residence permit to nationals of third countries who are holders of this type of visa .
However , this does not happen in the vast majority of Member States .
Member States have temporarily got around this situation by issuing type D + C visas , which allow the holders of a long-stay visa to move freely within the Schengen area for the first three months .
This type of visa will be abolished from April 2010 with the entry into force of the Community Visa Code which will make it even more urgent to find a solution to this problem .
The amendments which I have proposed and which have the support of the majority of the members of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs contribute towards the resolution of this problem without reducing security in the Schengen area .
The obligation to consult the Schengen Information Service during the processing of requests for long-stay visas is the same procedure as the one which already exists for nationals of third countries who are holders of residence permits .
In this way , we have responded to any fears of decreased security .
The truth is that various Member States have been providing long-stay visas and , subsequently , residence permits , without first consulting the SIS , in particular , with respect to the requirements of Article 96 on the effects of a refusal of admission .
This practice weakens the security of the Schengen area and creates problems on its external borders in cases where individuals with a valid visa are recorded in the SIS .
This creates complicated and unnecessary situations for individuals and border guards who have to attempt to discover whether visas have been falsified , whether a reference on the SIS system is incorrect and should be removed , or whether the visas should never have been granted .
The initiative on which we are going to vote will allow the holders of long-stay visas to move freely for a period of three out of every six months .
This is the same period as holders of residence permits are allowed and , at the same time , it also ties the Member States to their obligation to provide residence permits in cases where stays of more than one year are authorised .
It also recognises the need to strengthen the level of data protection which exists under the Schengen Agreement and recommends that the Commission should present the necessary initiatives if SIS II does not enter into operation before 2012 .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the two initial proposals were merged together and a new legal basis was provided .
The text upon which we are going to vote in this plenary session is the result of the negotiations which continued under the Swedish and Spanish presidencies .
This resulted in an agreement at first reading , hence allowing this regulation to be adopted before the entry into force of the Visa Code .
Mr President , I would have liked to invite the Spanish Presidency , which is absent from this debate , to guarantee to Parliament that the regulation can enter into force before 5 April 2010 .
It is essential for this to occur in order to avoid an omission in the law .
I congratulate the European Commission for this timely initiative .
I am grateful for the faithful collaboration of the Council , particularly that of the Swedish and Spanish presidencies , and the cooperation of the shadow rapporteurs , which has allowed a broad consensus in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
With this measure , we can resolve a troublesome problem faced by thousands of citizens of third countries and do it well , strengthening both freedom and security along the way .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , as the rapporteur pointed out , the aim of this proposal is to facilitate movement within the Schengen area for third-country nationals who are legally residing in one of the Member States on the basis of a long-stay or ' D ' visa .
According to the current Schengen acquis , third-country nationals who hold a residence permit can travel freely within the Schengen Area because the residence permit is equivalent to a visa .
However , there has been a recent trend in Member States not to convert long-stay visas into residence permits upon arrival .
That is why we are having this discussion here today ; obviously , the Commission , the Council and the Parliament had to find a solution to the problem .
The legal and practical situation has considerable negative consequences for third-country nationals legally staying in our Member States on the basis of a D visa .
These persons can neither legally travel to another country nor can they transit through the territory of another country when they want to return to their country of origin .
The absurdity of this situation was illustrated by the example that the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , raised .
The best solution would , of course , be that all Member States issue the necessary residence permits and that they do this in time .
Unfortunately , this is not the situation today , and therefore we have the present proposal which aims at extending the principle of equivalence between a residence permit and short-stay visas to long-stay D visas .
A third-country national holding a long-stay D visa issued by a Member State will thereby be able to travel to the other Member States for three months in any half year under the same conditions as the holder of a residence permit .
This would restore the basic philosophy underlying the creation of an area without internal borders , namely that the person can travel around in the Schengen area for short stays with the documents based on which he or she is legally present in a Member State .
I was very pleased to learn that Mr Carlos Coelho had expressed his support for this proposal from the very beginning and the rapporteur , together with the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs , has understood that action needs to be taken in order to facilitate the life of third-country nationals , because we want to encourage people legally residing in our area .
I want to thank the rapporteur for his constructive approach to this .
I do not need to remind you that we have to find a solution quickly , especially due to the Visa Code which will be applicable from 5 April this year and will abolish the so-called D + C visas which were intended to partly remedy the situation of D visa holders .
I believe that the final text on the draft regulation satisfied all the parties since the compromise text was agreed between all the institutions .
In order to tackle some of the concerns expressed by the European Parliament and the Member States - for instance , concerning security - several amendments have been made to the initial text .
To give a few examples , the proposal shortens the period of validity for long-stay visas .
They should have a period of validity of no more than one year .
After this one year period , the proposal established the obligation for Member States to issue a residence permit .
The requirement of systematic checks in the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) is also reinforced .
Where a Member State considers issuing a residence permit or a D visa , the responsible authority should systematically carry out a search in the Schengen Information System in order to avoid a situation where we have an alert at the same time as a long-stay visa .
In order to give a response to the security concerns regarding biometrics - and this is , of course , a major issue for many Member States - a political declaration has , as you know , been attached to the draft regulation in which the Commission is invited to study the possibility of the use of biometric identifiers with respect to long-stay visas and to present the results in the study to this plenary and the Council by 21 July 2011 .
The Commission also accepts that a reporting obligation has been included in the draft regulation on the application .
To conclude , in order to find a compromise response to the major concern of the European Parliament concerning the guarantee for high-level data protection in cases where an alert has been issued in the SIS , a joint declaration has been agreed .
The Commission is invited by the Council and the European Parliament to present the necessary legislative proposals amending the relevant data protection provision for the Schengen Convention if there are further substantial delays in implementing the SIS II that go beyond 2012 .
I believe that , with these changes , we have reached a reasonable , well-balanced solution that will considerably facilitate the lives of the third-country nationals that are residing legally in our countries .
It will also very much correspond to the philosophy of a Europe without internal borders .
I want to thank once again the LIBE Committee , the JURI Committee and the rapporteur for their very constructive approach to this .
Mr President , EU cooperation is based on values , and the most fundamental of these values is freedom .
The subject of our discussion today is people 's ability to move about freely .
In my EU , there are no restrictions on this .
It is here that I believe the EU 's greatness lies .
All of us who live here enjoy freedom of movement , but it should also apply to all those who come to reside here for a lengthy period .
Under the Schengen Convention , the holder of a long-stay visa is not currently entitled to freedom of movement ; instead , as Mr Coelho has pointed out , he or she may only stay in the Member State that issued the visa .
As a result , for example , a visiting professor from India who lives and works in my home city of Uppsala in Sweden cannot travel to Paris to attend a conference without applying for a visa to visit France , and a student from China cannot travel to Germany to visit a friend for the weekend without first applying for a visa to go there .
This type of barrier to freedom of movement must not exist within the EU .
We are now changing this .
The purpose of the present proposal is to secure freedom of movement throughout the Schengen area for third-country nationals who are resident in a Member State for a lengthy period .
I would like to thank Mr Coelho , who has done an extremely fine job as rapporteur , and who has taken account of the views that I put forward in my opinion on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs as well as the views of other shadow rapporteurs .
We have the result before us now : it is a positive proposal that forms another link in ensuring freedom of movement within the EU , including for third-country nationals .
It develops things further , and that is the EU that I am proud to live in and work for .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the opportunity to pass a resolution in Parliament to facilitate travel for third-country nationals legally residing within the territory of the European Union , and I congratulate my fellow Member , Mr Coelho , for the excellent job he did in Parliament regarding this issue .
This proposal facilitates in a tangible way travel within the European Union for third-country nationals holding long-stay D visas issued by a Member State .
This is to provide a solution for situations when , for one reason or another , some Member States are unable or unwilling to issue a residence permit in time for third-country nationals residing in their territory .
That is to say , they do not use the framework provided by the Schengen regulations properly .
And I am glad that we are able to make a step forward regarding this issue .
Our aim is to avoid third-country nationals arriving in the European Union having the impression of entering an impregnable fortress .
The integrated border management and the visa policy should serve these purposes .
As a Hungarian Member , I urge that the borders of the European Union are made permeable to persons travelling in good faith .
Contact between citizens living on the two sides of the border should not be restricted .
It is in the interest of third-country nationals living in neighbouring countries to the EU - including the members of the Hungarian minority - to be able to reside legally within the area of the European Union without any bureaucratic or administrative burdens .
This requires appropriate laws , both at Community and Member State level , which do not counteract each other but rather reinforce the objectives of one another .
I hope that instead of remaining a high-sounding idea , the new Community legislation will indeed provide practical support particularly to young people , students wishing to study in Member States .
They should be the most important beneficiaries of this regulation .
On this point I can only agree that the Commission should submit a report on the enforcement of this regulation by April 2012 at the latest and , if necessary , a proposal for the amendment of the regulation in order to accomplish the objectives .

I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , for the preparation of this report and also agree that it is important to ensure the free movement within the Schengen area of third-country nationals in possession of a long-stay visa who are lawfully present in a Member State as soon as possible .
According to the current practice of Member States , for various reasons , it takes rather a long time for third-country nationals to replace a long-stay visa with a residence permit .
I could quote many examples from European Union Member States , including my own country , Lithuania , where , for instance , a long distance lorry driver who has received a D visa cannot carry out his principal job .
The practice that has evolved in this area undermines the legitimate expectations of third-country nationals who have come to the European Union to work or study .
The Member States should also take appropriate measures to simplify the procedures for issuing visas .
A long-stay visa should have the same impact on a person 's movement within the Schengen area without internal borders as a residence permit .
The most important aspect here is not the length of time a holder of a D category visa visits another Member State but the opportunity itself to better meet his needs within the Schengen area .
Therefore , I agree with the proposal that a third-country national , holding a long-stay visa issued by a Member State , should be able to stay in another Member State for three months within any six-month period under the same conditions as a holder of a residence permit .
At the same time , it is very important to ensure that the simplified movement of third-country nationals within the Schengen area does not pose additional threats to the security of the Member States .
Therefore , I call on you to adopt this partly amended regulation immediately .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in a sea of difficulties , stages take shape .
This is the case with this text , which has just been explained very well by all my fellow Members , on all sides , and which concerns all third-country nationals living legally - I would emphasise - in Europe .
It is , in fact , high time that this text was adopted ; it is high time that freedom of movement for third-country nationals was established within the EU , and I am glad we have reached the point at which we lay another brick in the construction of a Europe of freedoms , in an area that we want to be made increasingly secure .
It represents both an obvious fact and a step forward .
An obvious fact , as people have mentioned : there is basically no major controversy surrounding this text , and the few amendments show that we all want to build a Europe where no one is stuck in a Member State without being able to explore the rest of the European area .
Then , it is a great step forward because it represents rights for third-country nationals , students , researchers or others who live on EU territory .
Finally , to conclude , this will clearly encourage people outside Europe to think of Europe as a single area , a united Europe , a common area , and it will forge European culture and identity beyond our borders .

Mr President , I firstly wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , whose proposal I , like the other shadow rapporteurs of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , support .
I have already had the opportunity to say here that Mr Coelho has given good service to the principle of freedom of movement within the European Union , to the rights of citizens , be they European citizens or citizens of foreign countries , and to European democracy itself .
This does not only mean its own citizens , but also its reliance on the contribution of thousands and thousands or even millions of citizens of third countries who pass through the European territory , who reside here , and who come here for long or short periods in order to work and to study .
Mr Coelho , with the input of the shadow rapporteurs , has worked in an excellent atmosphere of cooperation and willingness to provide information .
Above all , he has done so on time and in this matter time is crucial , given that we are dealing with the lives of individuals .
Like other speakers before me , I could give examples of students , researchers and scientists who arrive in Europe because of the recognised quality of their work but who subsequently cannot cross our borders , which are , as a matter of fact , very closed indeed in the cases of some people from other continents .
In two hours , a researcher can leave Portugal and enter Spain , making for the border of another Member State , or rather , he cannot leave if he has , as happens in some cases , a visa to study for a two year Masters degree which does not allow him to leave the country to share his work or to undertake research in another Member State .
We ourselves have even had to deal with such cases on some occasions when , for example , we wish to hear someone 's input in a debate in Brussels , for example .
We should note that this is not only an unnecessary and unjust burden for the citizen of the third country in question .
It is a waste for those of us who were relying on their contribution .
It is a waste in terms of our competitiveness when we compare , for example , the mobility of this type of foreign citizen in the United States , for example , or in China , India or Brazil , and then see the obstacles to their mobility within the European Union .
It is a waste in terms of the mobility of our workforce , of our scientific community when we recognise that this growing mobility is very important in periods of crisis such as the one we are undergoing at present , and it is also a waste for the knowledge society .
It is therefore time that the Council implements these proposals before the Visa Code comes into force in April and causes more unnecessary obstacles to the mobility of such individuals .
It remains for me to say therefore that , on behalf of our group , we support the proposal of the rapporteur and we shall vote in favour .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , the report proposes that Member States may issue long-stay visas for up to 12 months for third-country nationals which will be recognised by other states within the Schengen group .
Britain is not a member of the Schengen group , so would not appear to be directly affected .
However , the proposals would make it easier for the citizens of non-EU countries who enter one Member State to travel to other EU states .
Britain has a massive problem with illegal immigration .
There are at least one million illegal immigrants in Britain .
Under these proposals , people who wish to migrate to Britain illegally may come to another EU state perfectly legally , obtain a long-stay visa that gets them to France , for example , from where they may gain illegal entry into Britain .
The UK Independence Party MEPs will therefore vote against this report in the interests of protecting our borders against further illegal immigration .
( NL ) Mr President , in this report , I came across what is indeed a most bizarre example of why we absolutely must relax the rules in this way , namely that of a foreign student who has been granted a visa to study in Belgium and , as a result of the new arrangement , can now look up information in a Dutch library and then travel on to Barcelona .
That is nice for him !
Yet that is not what this is about , of course .
In practice , Schengen , and European visa policy as a whole , means something quite different from freedom to travel for students .
It means the complete demolition of our borders , giving free rein to organised crime and illegal immigration without there being any watertight external borders - which were supposed to be the cornerstone of the whole system - to keep this in check .
One of the direct results of Schengen , for example , is that the masses of regularised Spanish illegal immigrants are free to move to the other Member States .
In my opinion , this Parliament would do better to reflect on the impact of such decisions on ordinary Europeans for once instead of thinking about the day-to-day practical worries of foreign students .

( ES ) Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating Mr Coelho on his excellent work and , in particular , on the high level of consensus achieved between the Council , the Commission and the different political groups in Parliament .
Thanks to his work , I think there is going to be very little disagreement here .
The European Union constitutes the greatest space of freedom that has ever been established .
We should eliminate all of the obstacles that prevent free movement , both of European citizens and of third-country nationals legally residing in a Member State .
We should put a definitive end to the absurd situations so often faced by holders of long-stay D visas .
As you know , a long-stay visa allows the holder to reside in the Member State that has issued it .
However , the holders of such visas cannot move freely within the European Union except to travel to the Member State that issued the visa .
Paradoxically , situations such as the ones already described arise very frequently .
I will give one further example : a student preparing his PhD thesis in Lisbon on the history of the Americas is unable to consult the files and documents housed in the General Archive of the Indies in Seville , which is one hour away by plane .
Ultimately , the aim of the proposal is for long-stay visas to provide the same rights as those provided by a residence permit .
Ladies and gentlemen , we need to improve the principle of mobility : mobility that is essentially for work , scientific and academic purposes .
Although it would appear completely unnecessary from what I can see , I shall finish by asking all of you to support Mr Coelho 's report , not only because of its extremely high quality but also because it constitutes a further guarantee of the great space of free movement that we defend .
I also support Mr Coelho 's proposed timetable .

( FR ) Mr President , I should first like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , for his work , and to pay tribute to the cooperation there has been between Parliament , the Council and the Commission during the consolidation of the two reports , and the first reading , which should also be the last .
It was crucial for this report to be adopted before the end of April 2010 so that it could be implemented at the same time as the Visa Code .
It is extremely important for all residents of the European Union to be able to travel throughout all the Member States .
That way , we can solve the twin problem of the application of the ' D + C ' visas and the rules for residence permits .
Thanks to this report , all third-country nationals who hold a long-stay visa will have the right to travel anywhere in Europe for six months a year .
All persons concerned should receive all necessary information when they receive their visas and , above all , should be informed that this visa will automatically become a residence permit before the expiry of its one-year period of validity .
Finally , it is important to emphasise that , for security reasons , each individual who applies for a D visa will have to be subject to investigation but will not have to be registered in the SIS .
The contracting party must take due account of any information already included in the SIS by another contracting party .
Furthermore , if SIS II is not implemented from the end of 2012 , we urge the Commission and the Council to present the legislation required to provide the same level of data protection as that afforded by SIS II .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , these proposals seek to make it easier for third-country nationals legally residing in a Member State to move in the Schengen area on the basis of a D long-stay visa .
Essentially it wants to extend - and this concerns us - the existing principle of equivalence between a residence permit and short-stay C visas to long-stay visas .
A long-stay visa will thus have the same effects as a residence permit as regards circulation in the Schengen area .
In other words , it wants to make it possible for anyone in possession of a document showing that he is legally resident in a Member State to move freely in the Schengen area for short periods of no more than three months in any half year .
We would point out to the Commission and the Council the security problems that may arise from this free movement .
It is already very difficult to perform checks in one Member State : let us be mindful of the risks we run by abruptly implementing this principle .
( DE ) Mr President , a few months ago , there was not only a festive atmosphere in this Chamber but also a feeling of joy for most people here because the visa regulations were being eased for many countries in Europe .
So , what is the reality ?
With the lifting of the visa obligation for citizens from Montenegro , Macedonia and Serbia in December 2009 , there was a wave of people travelling from the Balkans , via Austria , to Central Europe and up as far as Scandinavia .
A real migration of peoples !
In just seven weeks , around 150 000 Macedonians have taken advantage of this new freedom to travel , according to the Ministry of the Interior .
Two thirds of these people are not making the homeward journey .
In many villages , particularly Albanian-Macedonian villages , five buses start out every day towards Central or Western Europe , equipped with a tourist visa , which expressly prohibits gainful employment .
This means , therefore , that , after 90 days , these people go underground and the supposed tourists then find themselves once again on the cheap labour market earning ' dumping ' wages .
That is the difference between the reality of the situation and the European Parliament 's pipe dream .
The consequences of this will have to be borne by our home countries .
They have to suffer the consequences of what is decided by the majority in this Chamber .
They will have to put up with scarcely controllable illegal immigration and illegality and the associated undeclared employment .
( MT ) I would also like to congratulate my fellow Member , Carlos Coelho , for his report on this initiative which is granting third-country citizens the possibility of greater freedom of movement within the European free zone .
However , Mr President , I must point out an irony which has surfaced in this debate , namely : whereas we are granting greater rights to third-country citizens , at this very moment , the European Union and its citizens are facing serious problems with travel to a country such as Libya , for instance .
This is due to the ongoing problem between Switzerland and Libya , which has resulted in Libya blocking travelling for all European Union citizens and not just for the Swiss .
So while we are granting more rights to third-country citizens , our own citizens are being given fewer rights to travel to third countries such as Libya .
What are the consequences ?
The consequences are very serious .
There are workers who are unable to go and work in Libya , companies who have invested in Libya are being prevented from sending over their workers , while other workers are currently in Libya and must remain there until their replacements are granted entry .
This is a precarious situation and I appeal to Commissioner Malmström to intervene in this issue with urgency .
I understand that this is a diplomatic issue between two countries who are not even European Union members , but it has serious repercussions on European Union citizens whose interests lie in travelling to Libya in order to earn their living .

( SK ) The report from my fellow Member , Mr Coelho , and also the draft regulation , concern the free movement of people , which is an essential element of democracy in the European Union , and it is therefore unacceptable to have persons holding long-stay visas in one Member State of the European Union not able to travel across the European Union .
There are several reasons to support the above initiatives .
The first is respect and the upholding of fundamental human rights which , without doubt , includes the freedom of movement .
If a Member State legalises the stay of a national from a third country , there is no reason why that person could not move freely within the Schengen area .
Naturally , the details relating to not downgrading the level of security within the Schengen area should be elaborated .
There has also been talk here about students and scientists who were unable to travel to another Member State .
I would like this group to be expanded further to include businesspeople , because if we do not allow them this , we will be reducing the European Union 's competitiveness .
And therefore , I believe this proposal will find support and I congratulate the rapporteur .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Coelho very much .
My opinion has been incorporated into the regulation .
I have also had the opportunity to work on the regulation itself .
I would like to say that the nature of Mr Coelho 's report is not only urgent and important , but it is also symbolic .
Today , as a representative of one of the new Member States , I can say with pride that we can change the rules enabling free movement around the Schengen area , where , until recently , some of the present countries of the European Union were encountering similar difficulties .
I think the symbolic nature of these changes is , today , something which cannot be overvalued , and I hope the consensus which has been reached in this House will be a huge success for all of us .
Secondly , I would like to say that doing away with the ' D + C visas ' and the fact that Member States cannot issue residence permits force us to take very urgent action .
I will give only a few examples of matters which have been mentioned in this Chamber today .
Two Ukrainian students , who were travelling from Wrocław to Berlin last year , were detained just as they were crossing the border , mainly because the young people were not aware of the rules , and they only wanted to make use of our intellectual resources .
I think the voting today will be very significant and important for us .
I would just like to draw attention to the last matter - the question of security .
We should , today , have a good system for exchange of information collected in Schengen , we should most certainly work on the second generation Schengen Information System and the Visa Information System , and , above all , perhaps have even more frequent reviews and reports .
I would like to appeal strongly here to Mrs Malmström to ensure that coordination between Member States on security will be equally as good as it has been until now , and once again , I would like to thank Mr Coelho very much for a splendid report .
( HU ) Mr President , I would like to say that I quite agree with and support the rapporteur and also Commissioner Malmström in finding a solution for this issue that is in line with the rule of law , respect for human rights , data protection and , of course , safety considerations , too .
A lot of concerns were voiced .
I would like to point out a few issues .
In order to make this regulation work , first of all we need to study and learn more about the practices of each Member State .
We are aware that some Member States are able to issue the residence permits in good time .
These best practices can mean a lot to us .
We need to coordinate Member State practices in order to increase trust .
All Member States should use the SIS system - we know that not all of them do so today - and introducing SIS II and operating the VIS systems are extremely urgent tasks because these systems will provide guarantees in the long term .
It is in Europe 's interest that third-country nationals residing here - students , businessmen , researchers - should be able to move freely indeed .

( EL ) Mr President , I , too , should like to start by thanking Mr Coelho for his excellent work on this report and to state the following :
First of all , the Schengen acquis is exactly that : freedom of movement within the borders of the Schengen area .
Therefore , in this debate , we need to draw the first basic and simple conclusion : that it is vital for this regulation to move forward .
The example of the student is illustrative ; anyone with a long-stay visa should have the right of freedom of movement .
The problem arises - and this is what I should like to highlight - of whether this will facilitate illegal immigration , albeit indirectly , if there will be security problems , and if a person who exercises this right will , at the same time , not have the means to move , which is something the Member States need to take into account .
Obviously , each Member State will have to be very careful when issuing visas .
At this point , as stated in the report , a very important parameter arises , the most decisive parameter of all : that processing of data prior to long-stay visas will now be mandatory in the Schengen Information System .
Thus , in the final analysis , we are not only safeguarding the Schengen acquis , but also strengthening security in connection with precisely that .
As such , we should all be positive about these prospects and the SIS II system , which is a necessity , must , come what may , proceed quickly .
Finally , we must , in cooperation with the Member States and the services of the Member States , not only facilitate the Schengen acquis and strengthen it , but also simultaneously strengthen security , which is the necessary element for every Member State , for all of us , and for the Schengen acquis .
( Applause )
( SL ) Freedom of movement and the abolition of internal borders are two of the most important factors of European integration .
We have to facilitate movement in the Schengen area for citizens of third countries who are legally resident in a Member State .
It is unacceptable that , because of red tape , we should restrict the movement in Europe of students , researchers and companies .
Similarly , we have to enable freedom of movement as soon as possible for the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania , and the people of Kosovo , who paradoxically have fewer rights to free travel today than they did years ago .
Obviously , conditions have to be right for that to happen and we should not allow ourselves to be misled by data on mass illegal immigration .
The people of the Western Balkans have been isolated by the visa regime for far too long .
They need to strengthen contacts with the citizens of the Union but , more often than not , rejection of their visa applications prevents them from doing this .
Let us not risk engendering an even stronger sense of isolation and discrimination , particularly amongst young people , who may never have had a chance to discover the Union .
Let us therefore waste no time once either Bosnia and Herzegovina or Albania comply with the visa liberalisation criteria .
Any action we take to facilitate travel in the Schengen area will be a step forward and will be in the interests of the European Union .
( PL ) Mr President , the proposal under discussion concerns one of the fundamental principles of the function of the European Union - the removal of internal borders and the free flow of people .
For this reason , it deserves special attention .
It is incomprehensible and , as a consequence , unacceptable , that the holders of long-stay visas have less freedom of movement within the Schengen area than people who have short-term visas .
For this reason , I am sympathetic to the European Commission 's proposal .
I think , however , that we should make amendments to the proposal to guarantee security .
Therefore , I support the proposal of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs that , as part of the Schengen Information System , there should be a flow of information between Member States about undesirable persons .
The European Commission should also be required to present a report on application of the regulation not later than 5 April 2012 .
The amendments which have been prepared merit serious reflection and - in most cases - support .
( PL ) Mr President , it is not only the citizens of third countries who would like it to be easier for people from these countries to move around within the Schengen area , for we , the residents of the European Union , are also waiting for this .
It is paradoxical that the holder of a short-term visa today has greater freedom of movement than the holder of a long-stay visa , and a person from a third country who holds a legal permit for a long-term stay , for example , in Poland , cannot travel to Germany or France .
Freedom of movement should not apply only to residents of the European Union .
Researchers , students , school children and business people from third countries should be able to move freely , visit friends and learn the traditions , customs and culture of other countries .
They will be good ambassadors for the idea of the European Union , and we , the residents of the European Union , will take a step towards realisation of the idea of a Union without borders .
( DE ) Mr President , the visa system of the Schengen countries is apparently so complicated that the consulate employees no longer know what they are doing and are allowing honest visa travellers to fall into the visa trap .
The fact that consular staff are not aware of the visa categories ' D ' and ' C ' seems rather strange .
It is downright negligent if someone omits a Schengen Information System check to make the work easier .
It is clear that this will create numerous , unnecessary problems at the external borders and this situation urgently needs to be changed .
In this connection , it makes little sense to discuss national visa alert lists if the EU alert system and the EU alert regulations are not even applied consistently .
The liberalisation of visas for the Balkan countries goes hand in hand with an increase in futile asylum applications from these countries .
It is especially important now , when , since the relaxation of the visa regulations for the Balkans , there is a real threat of a wave of immigration , when , within seven weeks , almost 150 000 people from Macedonia have made use of their new freedom to travel and , according to estimates , almost two thirds of them will probably not make the homeward journey , to whip the enforcement of the visa regulations into shape .
( HU ) As Hungarian Members of Parliament , we are in a special position when we are to vote and decide whether to make it possible for third-country nationals to move more freely within the European Union or , on the contrary , try to impede it .
Due to the tragedy of Trianon , Hungary lost a great part of its territory , and we have a large number of Hungarian compatriots living outside the borders of present-day Hungary , and thus outside the current borders of the European Union , in the former Southern Region and Subcarpathia .
Our compatriots are in a very humiliating position when they study or work in research or other areas in their own truncated country , and are not allowed to leave the territory of Hungary .
This is an extremely poor and intolerable situation we need to take action against .
This is why we , Hungarian Members of Parliament of Hungarian sentiment , will vote for this proposal in order to bring an end to this ridiculous position .
Mr President , this proposal is based on the assumption that all persons from third countries entering the EU are persons of good faith and that , if they say they are coming here to study , they really are .
The EU is rich in bogus colleges , and even genuine colleges frequently have students on their books who never appear in a lecture room .
If their movement to other states is facilitated , it will be much more difficult to check the genuineness of their status and more difficult to locate them when their status is found not to be true .
Although the UK is not in the Schengen area , the EU has a track record of regularising illegal immigrants .
Today 's holder of a long-stay visa or a residence permit might be tomorrow 's illegal migrant , and the day after , an EU citizen with complete freedom of movement .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , two questions were raised , not particularly related to this issue , but I would like to take the opportunity to briefly touch upon them anyway .
Mr Busuttil raised the issue of Libya .
I can assure him that it is a very complicated issue , but we are involved actively in dialogue with Libya , with Switzerland , with the Member States , in order to find a solution to this very complicated problem before it escalates even further .
So I hope to be able to come back to you soon on developments on this .
To Ms Fajon , I want to tell you that , of course the situation of Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina is another track and we are right now finalising a mission there to evaluate how these two countries are doing according to the criteria .
The Commission will very soon , after consultation with Member States and experts , make a report on that and the assessment of that report will be shared with members of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs before we put a possible proposal on the agenda .
On this proposal , I can assure Members and the rapporteur that the Commission is extremely dedicated to making this work , and we will do our utmost to make sure that the regulation is implemented .
It might sound like a technical problem , but it is not .
It concerns individual citizens and we want to encourage people to come here legally with all their papers in order , whether students , researchers , experts or scientists .
It is good for them and it is good for us .
It is also within the philosophy of the European Union to have an area of no internal borders .
Therefore , we should avoid making life unnecessarily complicated for these people .
I think , within this proposal , we have found a good balance .
We have been able to take the security considerations into consideration in a satisfactory manner and we can congratulate ourselves .
This is the Union working at its best with three institutions trying to identify a problem and trying to find a concrete solution to the benefit of the citizen .
So , thank you very much for your work , Mr Coelho , and thank you for a good debate in this plenary .
Mr President , four final points .
The first is that it is regrettable that the Council 's chair is empty during this debate .
The second is to thank Commissioner Malmström for her kind remarks and also to ask her , together with the Council , to guarantee the entry into force of this regulation on 5 April .
Otherwise we shall have a legal loophole , with consequences for real people .
The third point is that it is regrettable that the Members who have participated here in the debate and who have raised the issue of security problems have not been able to recognise the improvements which Parliament has introduced by means of this regulation , in particular , the obligation to consult the Schengen Information System in advance .
As I emphasised in my initial statement , I believe that Parliament has performed its task well because it has strengthened both freedom of movement and security .
Not to recognise this means looking at it in a one-sided way , and not seeing the whole picture .
My final point , Mr President , is to thank all those who have worked together towards this aim , namely those who allowed us to have an agreement on first reading , particularly the Commission and the Council , but also all those political groups within the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Justice Committee who made this broad consensus possible .
I believe that when we participate in finding a solution in this manner , we are performing our work in the best possible way .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I support the efforts made as part of this report to successfully extend the freedom of movement for holders of long-stay visas in the same way as that for holders of permits and short-stay visas .
The agreements currently in force have entailed numerous disadvantages for third-country nationals who are legally resident in one of the Member States and who wish to travel for various reasons throughout the European Union .
There are discrepancies between Member States with regard to the time required , method and criteria used for granting visas .
What has been observed in practice is that visa applicants who are rejected by one state try their ' luck ' in other Member States .
This is down to the fact that some states are more demanding , while others are more lax when it comes to granting visas and residence permits .
To avoid creating an influx of visa applications via certain states which adopt a more liberal policy for granting visas , I propose standardising the checks and method for approving visa applications between all Member States .
This procedure will ensure a standard approach to all applications , thereby eliminating the risk of any ' gateways ' to the Schengen area appearing .
1 .
Allocation of FISIM for the establishment of GNI (
2 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Germany - redundancies (
3 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Lithuania - redundancies (
4 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Lithuania - construction of buildings (
5 .
Additional Protocol to the Cooperation Agreement for the Protection of the Coasts and Waters of the North-East Atlantic against Pollution (
Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( DA ) Madam President , I asked to have the floor because the timeframe for this important additional protocol did not allow for debate - either in committee or in plenary .
The subject of this additional protocol will allow EU Member States to fight collectively to combat pollution in the Atlantic .
The agreement forms part of a network of regional marine agreements that the EU has concluded with a number of individual Member States and neighbouring third countries .
Each of these agreements covers various parts of the sea surrounding the EU Member States and aims at individual and / or collective intervention on the part of the parties to the agreement in the event of pollution or the threat of pollution of the waters or coasts .
I make no secret of the fact that it is my great hope that this additional protocol will make it possible to combat a great many forms of pollution of the Atlantic .
It is , after all , a protocol that has been far too long in the making .
It has taken twenty years because of differences between Morocco and Spain concerning the Western Sahara .
Those are twenty lost years .
The marine environment cannot get those years back , but that only emphasises the importance of not prolonging the process further in this House .
I therefore hope that , just as when we dealt with this matter in committee , there will be broad support among the Members of this Chamber and I am most grateful to you for your support .
6 .
Consumer protection (
7 .
SOLVIT (
8 .
Animal health requirements applicable to the non-commercial movement of pet animals (
9 .
Movement of persons with a long-stay visa (
Before the vote :
Mr President , this is a short statement to remind you that the Community Visa Code enters into force on 5 April - that is , next month - and , therefore , it is essential that this new regulation enters into force before that date .
In the absence of the Council , let the record reflect that these are the wishes of Parliament if , as I hope , it will make the implementation of my report possible .
The absence of the Council is noted and is unfortunate .
10 .
Report on Competition Policy 2008 (
11 .
Internal Market Scoreboard (
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( ET ) Over the years , the scope of European Union consumer protection policy has developed very much to reflect changes in people 's needs and expectations .
Above all , owing to the rapid development of e-commerce , the cross-border dimension of consumer markets in the European Union has grown significantly , making it even more important to have consumer protection and , specifically , high-level consumer protection .
In my opinion , stronger supervision of the market and mechanisms of enforcement , and their effective and comprehensive implementation , are essential for increasing consumer confidence .
Therefore , I supported the adoption of the report , and I supported its proposals for change .
Madam President , I supported this report .
Effective consumer enforcement policy is central to the functioning of the single market .
We need to have a real and well-functioning internal market with a high level of consumer protection , which , unfortunately , is not the case today .
We have the legislation in place , but it is not enforced properly in the Member States .
Most importantly , our consumers do not feel safe because they do not know the rules and , in many cases , the compensation mechanisms are not working in the way they should .
The Commission should increase its efforts , ensuring that Member States apply directives correctly and that citizens are informed about their rights and , most importantly , that they are able to exercise those rights in practice .
( LT ) Rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , I definitely agree with this initiative .
In particular , I agree with the strengthening of the SOLVIT network and the broadening of its activities .
No expense should be spared in having information about this European structure 's activities and opportunities spread in the national media , on the Internet or on television programmes .
However , I can tell you all that there are double standards , the legislation is not applied in a uniform manner and there are even different penalties for the same activities .
Thank you , that is exactly what I wanted to underline .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the Buşoi report because I believe that the service provided by SOLVIT is of fundamental importance in terms of a clear and transparent link between the institutions , citizens and businesses , which is one of the cornerstones of the European Union .
SOLVIT has proven to be an important tool for resolving the problems of citizens and businesses that want to make full use of the possibilities offered by the internal market .
Many countries in the European Union still have barriers in their national legislation , which must be removed .
I therefore feel that we should support the allocation of further funds , the recruitment of further specialised staff and improvement of the visibility of this service , including at local authority level , where it could be very useful .
( CS ) As the shadow rapporteur , I would like to thank all Members for the fact that our report on the SOLVIT network has been passed by Parliament with such an absolute majority .
It gives a clear signal to the Council and the Commission to take our recommendations seriously , which should ensure that this useful instrument for citizens and entrepreneurs is better exploited .
All that is required is for entrepreneurs and citizens actually to know about this instrument .
I would like to believe that next year , the Commission will present Parliament with a fully-fledged annual report where the public will learn about complaints concerning the denial of rights that are otherwise supposed to be guaranteed by European legislation .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to give reasons for the way I voted on Mrs de Brún 's report .
Thank you very much for drawing up this document .
Having requirements for the transport of animals means that we are not only protecting animals but , above all , that we are caring for the safety and health of people .
I would like to express support for measures intended to prolong the transitional regime and , as a result , to end the problem of rabies in the European Union .
Of course , we should be careful and reasonable on the question of the free flow of pets in the Union , and should also take into account the opinions of experts from research institutes .
( CS ) I voted for an extension of the transitional period during which some states can apply exemptions , because these states have undertaken not to apply in the future for a further extension of exemptions in relation to veterinary conditions .
I understand the concerns of Ireland , Malta , Sweden and the United Kingdom , because they have stricter requirements regarding documentation for pets travelling with their owners to their home countries .
The main risks are rabies , echinococcosis and diseases transmitted by ticks .
It must be said , of course , that the inconsistency of allowing some states to have a transitional period is something we must eliminate in the future and that it is essential for us to act jointly and to have harmonised legislation .
( DE ) Madam President , on the one hand , I can understand it being in the interests of the individual Member States to insist on an extension of the special arrangements in connection with the import of pets .
On the other , however , we must always be careful to ensure that the expenditure is proportional to the benefits .
In this case , we have not managed to do that to a satisfactory extent .
This is why I have abstained from voting .
What we particularly need is , on the one hand , suitably effective external protection with regard to imports within the European Union , but also , increasingly , on the other hand , harmonisation within the European Union , because that is also in the interests of consumers who , after a certain point , can get rather lost if different conditions apply to importing into country A than to importing into country B.
Madam President , I voted against the proposal , mainly because I come from the United Kingdom .
I think we have good laws in place to deal with this already and we do not want the threat of rabies hitting our island .
I am also rather perplexed as to why this proposal only refers to dogs , cats and ferrets , and I would also make the observation that a certain Screaming Lord Sutch proposed this 25 years ago and he must be looking down very pleased today .
But then , many of my electors in the West Midlands of the United Kingdom will think that many of the policies coming from this House are Monster Raving Loony policies .
Madam President , it is a pleasure to see you back in the chair .
We occasionally get these messages coming out of the Commission that the EU is doing enough .
It should do less , but do it better , concentrate on the really big things .
And then we have all these motions on things like what pets we are allowed to take where .
I think there is an issue of proportionality here is there not ?
Countries have different national conditions .
Our country is an island without land borders and we are perfectly capable of reaching sensible proportionate bilateral or multilateral agreements with each other .
Do we really think that we would be better off creating a new administrative bureaucracy in the hands of the same geniuses who brought us the common agricultural policy , the common fisheries policy , the unaudited budgets and all of the rest of the apparatus of acquired EU law ?
Surely this is something that could be left to the Member States .
( ET ) The objective of the Schengen area is freedom of movement .
It is illogical that many holders of long-stay visas have considerably less freedom of movement in the Schengen area than those who have short-term visas .
The Union 's Visa Code should take effect in a month 's time , although , as the analysis of the actions taken by Member States on long-stay visas and the awarding of residence permits shows , various versions and implementations are in place , with the consequence that citizens ' fundamental rights have been violated .
With the help of the Commission 's proposals , practical problems and delays with the awarding of residency permits would be avoided , which - as I have mentioned - have thus far been observed in many Member States .
This is a very pressing matter : the Visa Code should be coming into effect very soon , and I supported the proposals in the report .
( CS ) I have supported this regulation , which will facilitate the movement of persons with long-stay visas in the Schengen area .
It is logical that students , research workers and entrepreneurs from third countries should have the right to move around the entire Union if they have acquired a visa in any Member State .
However , I would like to appeal again to other countries to show solidarity with the Czech Republic , which is fighting in vain against the introduction of visa requirements by Canada .
This amounts to an unprecedented disparity between citizens of the European Union .
Canada is now considering the introduction of visas for other countries , for example , Hungary , and we cannot take this lying down .
It is the over-generous and therefore tempting conditions for asylum seekers that are to blame for this .
They literally provoke abuse of the system .
Canada has promised to amend them , but is doing nothing .
I would like to apologise for again taking the opportunity to draw attention to this issue .
( HU ) As we heard during the debate , the proposal is to facilitate travel within the European Union for third-country nationals holding a long-stay D visa issued by a Member State .
This is to provide a solution to situations when , for one reason or another , some Member States are unable or unwilling to issue a residence permit for third-country nationals in time , or they do not apply the framework provided by the Schengen regulations properly .
The Hungarian Fidesz delegation abstained from final voting on this law because so far , Hungary has been able to transpose legislation correctly , there were no problems , and by using the opportunities provided by Schengen , we were able to provide this more efficiently .
At the same time , we would like to emphasise that it is in the interest of Hungarian minorities living as third-country nationals in the neighbourhood of the European Union to be able to reside legally in EU Member State territories without any excessive administrative burdens .
This requires laws both at Community and Member State level which do not counteract each other but reinforce our objectives .
Madam President , there are a lot of good things in this report but I simply cannot support paragraph 35 which calls for the introduction of a common consolidated corporate tax base ( CCCTB ) .
One of the things we are told about CCCTB is that it will be more efficient and that it will simplify matters .
But , given that , as it now stands , companies can opt in or opt out , we would end up with 28 tax bases instead of the current 27 , and that is hardly simplification .
Also , as it is currently proposed , CCCTB would mean the redistribution of European profits across the EU , so a country like my own , Ireland , which exports a lot of what it produces , would be penalised because the profits , of course , would be at the point of sale .
It does seem a little bit strange since at the core of the EU , we have the free movement of goods , so therefore we would end up , if we use CCCTB , by penalising exporting countries .
Finally , I also believe that its introduction would damage Europe 's capacity to attract foreign direct investment , because the rules as such would not apply to the Member State in which it was located but would be by some reference to a complicated formula which can only be calculated in retrospect , so I believe that would certainly damage our capacity to attract foreign direct investment .
( PL ) Madam President , at the outset , I would like to thank my colleague for preparing this report , a report which is significant for economic growth .
I fully endorse the author 's observations and remarks about introducing and enforcing Community law in the Member States .
An efficiently functioning single internal market is an indispensable element of a stable economy , something which is very much needed in times of crisis .
Effective use of the potential of this market depends on effective cooperation between the institutions at national and European level .
Reducing the administrative burden , efficient communication between the appropriate offices , simplification of procedures and harmonisation of legislation will result in the rapid and effective transposition of directives in the Member States .
Furthermore , publication of current data and effectively informing citizens and business people about their rights and the situation in the market will help improve the market 's function and will improve transparency of its principles , ensuring equal conditions for competition .
( LT ) Madam President , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with the initiative and trust that it can help people and companies at national level .
However , without clear and strictly regulated monitoring of the situation of the internal market and legal system , I doubt whether it will be possible to effectively save these market players , regardless of their size and the services used .
Strict penalties must be laid down if , following an analysis , obvious violations are found .
Practices absolutely must be observed when investigating complaints at international level and to lay down criteria .
Unfortunately , the sad statistics in my state show that in eight out of ten international cases currently being investigated , State institutions or courts are found to have acted improperly .
Therefore , I think that without the clear regulation of penalties , it will be impossible to achieve the desired result .
I would like attention to be drawn to this .
( ET ) In order to create a stable and innovative economic environment , it is absolutely necessary to have a properly working internal market .
The internal market will not work properly , however , unless the provisions of the Union affecting its operation are adopted by all its Member States .
Their adoption can , in turn , only be successful if the parliaments of the Member States are involved in the process of adopting the legislation .
Their adoption is also essential from the point of view of parliamentary supervision .
Since these positions were also reflected in the report , I wholeheartedly supported the adoption of the report .
( CS ) Parliament has , as expected , approved all three reports on the functioning of the internal market .
In the case of the report of Countess von Thun Und Hohenstein , however , the Socialists and the Greens have taken exception to the proposal for the performance of regular checks into the functioning of the internal market .
They argue that it would damage the agreed social and environmental standards .
We all know , however , that these standards come at a price , and we also know that they make possible a higher quality of life in the European Union .
The left have not explained in today 's debate why they are so afraid of this value being quantified .
I have voted in favour of everything .
Written explanations of vote
The Commission 's proposal relates to the allocation of the financial intermediation services indirectly measured ( FISIM ) for the establishment of the gross national income ( GNI ) of the Member States used for the purposes of the European Union 's budget and its own resources .
The FISIM represent a part of the product of financial institutions which does not come from direct sales of services at a fixed price , but rather by charging an interest rate on the loans which is higher than that applied to deposits .
The Commission proposes to proceed to the allocation of FISIM for the establishment of GNI and considers that this should be effected retroactively from 1 January 2005 , the date of the entry into force of Regulation ( EC ) No 1889 / 2002 .
However , the proposed retroactive implementation from 1 January 2005 poses problems for the precise extent of this retroactivity .
Therefore , we agree with the rapporteur 's position , advocating that the allocation of the FISIM for establishing the GNI should not begin until 1 January 2010 .
This ensures that the allocation of the FISIM is properly carried out from 2010 , resulting in a more accurate calculation of the GNI .
The allocation of financial intermediation services indirectly measured ( FISIM ) for the establishment of the gross national income ( GNI ) of Member States used for the purposes of the European Union 's budget and its own resources is an old issue , and one that should have been implemented in 2005 .
However , the need to test this method in order to assess its accuracy and gauge whether it has actually been providing reliable results for the correct assessment of the economic activity in question has delayed its implementation .
I agree that the implementation of this method should not have any retroactive effect , so as to avoid conflict between Member States and possible legal action .
Using the Globalisation Adjustment Fund as a useful instrument to tackle the consequences of the economic and financial crisis is a very worthy initiative that makes a practical response in terms of financial aid .
It is important to point out that mobilisation of this fund should be an incentive for redeploying redundant workers .
I hope that the requests of other countries , such as Italy , which need to ask for intervention of this special fund to support employees of those companies that are paying the price of the crisis and which are forced to make cuts , are also upheld .
In this regard , I would nevertheless like to ask the Commission for more flexibility in assessing admissibility criteria for the fund , which should also be activated in the case of structural problems in small and medium-sized local industrial zones .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was set up to provide additional assistance to workers affected by the consequences of major changes in the structure of international trade .
The remit of the EGF was increased for potential recipients nominated from 1 May 2009 , so that it now includes , and correctly so , assistance to workers made redundant as a direct result of the global financial and economic crisis .
I support the present proposal to mobilise the sum of EUR 6 199 341 to assist Germany , in response to the German request made on 13 August 2009 , with the intention of providing assistance to workers made redundant within the Karmann Group , an automotive firm .
In 2008 , the three institutions confirmed the importance of guaranteeing that there would be a quick procedure to approve decisions to mobilise the fund , with the aim of being able to help people within a useful time period .
Seven months were required to adopt this decision .
I hope that the procedure to activate the Solidarity Fund will be undertaken more quickly , in order to make it possible to confront calamitous situations which require an immediate response , such as the recent tragic case of Madeira .
The German Karmann Group , once a prosperous and competitive firm , has been grappling with the crisis in the automotive sector and has filed for bankruptcy , having recently undergone a partial purchase by Volkswagen .
The mobilisation of EUR 6 199 341 from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is needed to support and assist 1 793 redundant workers from that group .
According to the Commission , the eligibility criteria for the mobilisation of this fund have been met , which means that the European Union is fully justified in quickly assisting workers who are experiencing difficulties .
I hope that this difficult period in the lives of the redundant workers will allow them to improve their abilities and qualifications , and that these improvements will allow them to be reintegrated into the labour market swiftly .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was set up to provide additional assistance to workers made redundant as a consequence of significant changes in the structure of international trade .
In this way , solutions are being sought for their reintegration into the labour market .
The interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 allows the mobilisation of the EGF within the annual ceiling of EUR 500 million .
The present proposal relates to the mobilisation of a total sum of EUR 6 199 341 from the EGF to assist Germany , with the intention of providing assistance to workers made redundant within the Karmann Group , an automotive firm .
According to Article 6 of the EGF regulations , we must ensure that this fund supports the individual reintegration of workers made redundant in new firms .
The EGF is not a replacement for actions that are the responsibility of firms under national legislation or collective agreements , nor does it finance the restructuring of firms or sectors .
It needs to be emphasised again that , within the context of mobilising the EGF , the Commission must not systematically transfer subsidies for payments from the European Social Fund , as the EGF was created as a specifically separate instrument , with its own objectives and prerogatives .
The requests for action by this fund have been successful .
This instance involved responding to a request for assistance by Germany as a result of redundancies in the car industry , within the Karmann Group .
Before saying anything else , it is important to note that this fund can only partially alleviate some of the consequences of the serious economic and financial crisis , in view of the imposed budgetary restrictions ( which limit it to EUR 500 million per year ) and the restrictive eligibility criteria with which it operates .
It has already been some time since the number of workers made redundant as a result of the so-called ' restructurings ' significantly exceeded the initial estimates of the Commission regarding the number of workers who would come to benefit from the fund .
What is needed is a clear break with the neoliberal policies that are causing an economic and social disaster within the countries of the European Union before our very eyes .
Obviously , responses to this disaster also need to be more than merely palliative .
Neither can we omit to point out the injustice of a regulation which benefits countries with higher incomes to a greater extent , particularly those with higher levels of salaries and unemployment support .
We emphasise the urgent need for a real plan to support the production and creation of jobs with rights in the countries of the European Union .
I am very pleased that the European Parliament has today decided to grant EUR 6.2 million in assistance to workers made redundant from the automotive supplier Karmann .
The European Union is thus contributing 65 % of the EUR 9 million available in total .
These funds are to be used to offer around 1 800 people additional re-education and training measures to enable them to find work again as quickly as possible .
This is a tangible contribution by the European Union to assisting people during the crisis .
By doing this , the EU is showing very clearly that it is willing and able to provide support even to individuals in crisis situations .
It is important now that the money is made available smoothly and immediately to enable these people to return to the labour market quickly .
However , in addition to this individual assistance for the workers affected , the European Union also needs to take additional measures to deal with the effects of the financial crisis .
Globalisation in the sense of the division of labour at international level ( sharing of prosperity ) is appropriate and important .
However , the Commission , the European Parliament and the Member States must work harder to promote fair competitive conditions in their international economic relations in order to avoid disadvantaging individual countries or sectors .
in writing . - This proposal on behalf of the mobilisation of EGAF for German workers - as well as the proposal from the Lithuanian refrigeration sector - was to be among the first beneficiaries of the fund in 2010 .
Both are worthy applications .
I welcome the new Commission 's commitment to continuing this fund which provides people with a ' hand up ' as opposed to a ' hand out ' following redundancy .
My own constituency has benefited from this fund and I hope it continues to do so in future The global downturn has severely reduced the demand for luxury items and even though this makes the current troubles of the motor car industry understandable , it makes it no less saddening .
The situation in Germany is particularly difficult due to sheer numbers ; 2 476 redundancies are concentrated in the same area , around the same industry .
It is my hope that the EUR 6.199 million will help produce a successful way out of the crisis for the workers , their families and the area
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and victims of relocations that occur in a globalised context .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of reduced labour costs in various countries , particularly China and India , often to the detriment of countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is aimed at helping workers who are victims of the relocation of companies , and it is fundamental in helping them have access to new employment in the future .
The EGF has already been used in the past by other EU countries , particularly Portugal and Spain , so we should now grant this aid to Germany .
I voted in favour of the report on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
In this instance , Germany requested support in connection with redundancies in the automotive industry - specifically in the Karmann Group .
In this connection , it is important to mention that the money from the fund is used for the reintegration into the labour market of individual workers who have been made redundant and not to compensate for any necessary restructuring measures for companies or sectors .
Out of solidarity with our neighbouring country and with the workers , the money that is , unfortunately , made necessary by continuing globalisation and the economic and financial crisis caused by speculators on both sides of the Atlantic , should , in my opinion , be made available immediately .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on the mobilisation of the EGF to support the 2 476 people made redundant in Germany 's automotive industry .
The period of unemployment will be used by the German authorities for a broad upgrading of skills levels , not only with regard to vocational training and higher education , but also to allow migrant and low-skilled workers to achieve basic skills to help them become reintegrated into the labour market .
At European level , we are facing in the automotive manufacturing industry similar situations in Sweden , where 2 258 workers have been made redundant , in Austria , where 774 redundancies have been made in companies manufacturing motor vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers , and in Belgium , where the industry has made more than 2 500 employees redundant .
Throughout Europe , more than 8 000 jobs will be lost due to restructuring of the automotive manufacturing industry .
The financial assistance offered to redundant workers should be made available as quickly and efficiently as possible .
However , this is a short-term measure which will not resolve the problem of disappearing jobs .
The EU needs a strong industrial policy in the automotive manufacturing industry in order to keep existing jobs and even create new ones .
Today , we voted on three applications for assistance from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
I supported all three applications , since I believe that the assistance provided by this fund is particularly needed by our people at this time .
In May 2009 , the European Commission allowed deviation from the provisions of the regulation in exceptional circumstances and taking into account the situation that has come about during the economic and financial crisis allowed assistance to be targeted at the unemployed .
I am very sorry that some Member States where unemployment is particularly high , and the level of poverty is very high , were unable to apply for assistance on time and benefit from the opportunities provided by this fund and to offer assistance to the unemployed .
I think that the European Commission should also explain whether the assistance provided from this fund is being used effectively and whether this assistance is bringing real added value to the people for whom it is intended .
I voted for this report since financial aid from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) will help redundant workers to return to and integrate into the labour market .
During the financial and economic crisis , the level of unemployment in Lithuania grew significantly over 12 months , and it is therefore necessary to adapt to the effects of the crisis and ensure at least temporary financial assistance in order to provide jobs for the redundant workers of the company Snaigė .
In this case , we are not talking about a few workers made redundant by the company , but about a huge number of people , around 651 workers , in the 25-54 age group .
I am pleased that the long awaited vote on the allocation of temporary financial assistance took place today , as this sensitive matter concerning the Lithuanian company and its redundant workers was delayed and some of the workers of the company in question lost their jobs as far back as November 2008 .
I hope that the funds approved by today 's vote will be allocated purposefully and effectively .
One of the characteristics of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is that it seeks to promote the entrepreneurial spirit .
This promotion must be understood by the European institutions and national governments as a crucial element in confronting the challenges facing the European productive sector .
I recognise that public action should take place not only through this form of promotion but also , and crucially , by removing artificial and bureaucratic obstacles to entrepreneurial activity .
There is still much to be done in this respect .
It is right that there should be measures seeking to test , reallocate and retrain those who have become unemployed as a result of globalisation , for example , the workers in the Lithuanian refrigeration sector , particularly in the company AB Snaigand two of its suppliers .
However , it is no less right that there should be measures that , by preserving justice and healthy competition , seek to strengthen companies and their workforces in the context of an economy that is open and increasingly competitive .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and victims of relocations that occur in a globalised context .
An increasing number of companies are relocating , taking advantage of reduced labour costs in various countries , particularly China and India , often to the detriment of countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is aimed at helping workers who are victims of the relocation of companies , and it is fundamental in helping them have access to new employment in the future .
The EGF has already been used in the past by other EU countries , particularly Portugal and Spain , so we should now grant this aid to Lithuania .
Today 's resolution that the European Union supports the use of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund with three reports , of which two deal with Lithuania and one with Germany , is to be welcomed in every way , and shows concretely that the European Union can directly alleviate the situation of people who have been made redundant , and that it can help with their retraining .
In Estonia , over 30 000 people in the building sector have lost their jobs in the last eighteen months , and I would therefore call on the Estonian Government and the Ministry of Social Affairs to ask boldly for help from European Union funds , which were envisaged for this type of situation .
It is worth noting that although today , Germany and Lithuania received support , according to Eurostat data , unemployment is highest in Spain , Latvia and Estonia , which might also think about how the European Union could give them direct help .
Rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome this initiative to support company workers who have suffered from the globalisation process .
I support it wholeheartedly and am pleased that in this instance , people in Lithuania will receive aid .
In general , I believe that this fund 's total should be increased several times over , by reducing allocations elsewhere .
I am convinced that such a fund must also cover company owners .
Often , they suffer so much that later , they are unable to get back on their feet and start a new business .
In many cases , company owners suffer more than their workers : to take risks while doing business , to create jobs and to pay taxes , they put up not only their shares , but their personal property as well .
Therefore , it would be beneficial if - taking each case individually - we were to examine the possibility of also providing assistance to company owners , who have suffered from globalisation and the global economic crisis .
I am pleased that today , we had a vote on the allocation of funds from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , with the aim of earmarking EUR 1 118 893 in financial assistance for workers made redundant from 128 companies in the construction sector in Lithuania .
The construction sector in Lithuania is going through tough times , since there has been a huge decline in construction demand due to the financial and economic crisis , and in the recession , it is very difficult for Lithuanian citizens to obtain loans to build or purchase a home .
I voted for this report , since this EU financial assistance will help people who have become victims of globalisation to find work and return to the labour market and will help them to escape the grip of the recession .
Therefore , in this situation , we must show solidarity with the workers who have been made redundant precisely because of changes in the global economy and the reduction in jobs in certain sectors caused by the financial crisis .
The fact that more and more European countries have sought the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) makes it clear that the effects of this phenomenon have been felt by all sides , justifying in itself the name which has been given to the fund .
Whilst globalisation has been shown to be beneficial at a global level , it is nevertheless necessary to pay attention to the occasions where , due to its effects , the less competitive sectors are affected .
One such case is that of the Lithuanian construction sector .
The fact that the fund is a prompt , specific and time-limited form of assistance requires all political decision makers , business leaders and workers to develop new ways of restoring lost competitiveness and accessing new markets .
Otherwise , assistance such as that of the EGF will be merely palliative and will end up being shown to be insufficient .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was set up to provide additional assistance to workers made redundant as a consequence of significant changes in the structure of international trade .
In this way , solutions are being sought for their reintegration into the labour market .
The European Union must use all measures at its disposal to react to the consequences of the global economic and financial crisis , and within this context , the EGF can play a crucial role in aiding the reintegration of workers who have been made redundant .
The interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 allows the mobilisation of the EGF within the annual ceiling of EUR 500 million .
The present proposal relates to the mobilisation of a total sum of EUR 1 118 893 from the EGF to assist Lithuania , with the aim of supporting the workers made redundant in the 128 firms operating in the civil construction sector .
It needs to be emphasised again that , within the context of mobilising the EGF , the Commission must not systematically transfer subsidies for payments from the European Social Fund , as the EGF was created as a specifically separate instrument , with its own objectives and prerogatives .
The requests for action by this Fund have been successful .
This instance involved responding to a request for assistance by Lithuania as a result of the redundancies that have occurred at 128 firms active in the civil construction sector .
Before saying anything else , it is important to note that this fund can only partially alleviate some of the consequences of the serious economic and financial crisis , in view of the budgetary restrictions imposed ( which limit it to EUR 500 million per year ) and the restrictive eligibility criteria with which it operates .
It has already been some time since the number of workers made redundant as a result of the so-called ' restructurings ' significantly exceeded the initial estimates of the Commission regarding the number of workers who would come to benefit from the fund .
What is needed is a clear break with the neoliberal policies that are causing an economic and social disaster within the countries of the European Union before our very eyes .
Responses to this disaster also need to be more than mere palliatives .
Neither can we omit to point out the injustice of a regulation which benefits countries with higher incomes to a greater extent , particularly those with higher levels of salaries and unemployment support .
We emphasise the urgent need for a real plan to support the production and creation of jobs with rights in the countries of the European Union .
The EU is an area of solidarity , and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is a part of that .
This support is essential for helping the unemployed and victims of relocations that occur in a globalised context .
In this particular case , the aim is to help those made redundant by more than 120 companies in the civil construction sector that were forced to close their doors due to the great crisis affecting the sector .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is aimed at helping all those affected by the consequences of major structural changes in the patterns of global trade and to assist in their reintegration into the labour market .
The EGF has already been used in the past by other EU countries , particularly Portugal and Spain , so we should now grant this aid to Lithuania .
In September 2009 , Lithuania submitted a request for assistance to use the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in connection with the redundancies which were made in 128 firms in the civil construction sector .
I voted for the European Parliament Resolution on the mobilisation of the EGF for building construction in Lithuania .
I believe that an eco-efficient economy and construction of energy-efficient buildings can help bring about economic recovery in the EU .
It is estimated that these sectors can create around 2 million jobs across Europe by 2020 .
In 2006 , there were approximately 2.9 million firms operating in the construction sector , generating EUR 510 billion and providing jobs for 14.1 million people at EU-27 level .
As a result of the economic and financial crisis , during the first and second quarters of 2009 , the volume of activity in the construction sector in Lithuania fell by 42.81 % and 48.04 % respectively , compared with the early part of 2008 .
This is having an adverse impact on Lithuania at a time when it has one of highest unemployment rates in the EU .
The construction sector has been particularly affected , accounting for the loss of nearly 10 % of jobs in Lithuania in 2008 alone .
I wholeheartedly support this initiative and am voting in favour of the assistance for construction company workers , who have suffered from the current global crisis and the globalisation process .
I am sure that all of us are more than a little guilty in being unable to stop the bubble inflated by estate agents and construction organisations .
It was clear that it would lead to a crisis .
The duty of politicians is to serve the people and prevent misfortune .
Therefore , in voting for this project , I propose and ask for the financial assistance to be increased , since EUR 1 one million is only a drop in the ocean for the hundreds of companies that have suffered and which employ tens of thousands of workers .
Speaking to people who work in precisely such companies , I have heard that people no longer believe in either their own state or the European Union .
Thus , by increasing this type of assistance , we would improve the image of the European Union itself and strengthen faith in the national states .
in writing . - I fully support the two reports by Reimer Böge that have been adopted by Parliament on financial support for redundant workers in Lithuania from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , and I am grateful to other colleagues who supported them .
Unfortunately , I was late for this vote because on my way to the plenary chamber , the lift was not working .
Both reports - on the situation in the construction sector and on the company Snaig- represent the most acute unemployment cases in Lithuania .
The EU financial support will alleviate the hardships Lithuanian workers are facing .
The construction sector is one of the hardest hit in Lithuania .
Now more than a hundred companies have been forced into bankruptcy .
The EUR 1.1 million will target almost 1 000 workers in this highly sensitive and hard-hit sector .
The situation is very similar with Snaig- the support of EUR 258 000 from the EGF would target 650 redundancies in a city that has one of the highest unemployment rates - nearing 20 % now .
Even though this might be only the tip of the iceberg of the unemployment problem in Lithuania , the financial support will help those in most need .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was created in 2006 in order to provide additional assistance to workers affected by the consequences of significant changes in the structure of international trade and to assist in their reintegration into the labour market .
From 1 May 2009 , the remit of the EGF has been expanded and it now includes assistance to workers made redundant as a direct consequence of the economic and financial crisis .
At this time when we are facing this severe economic and financial crisis , one of the principal consequences is an increase in unemployment .
The EU must use all the means at its disposal to respond to the consequences of the crisis , particularly in terms of the assistance to be provided to those who are facing the reality of unemployment on a daily basis .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of the present proposal on the mobilisation of the EGF to assist Lithuania , with the objective of supporting the workers made redundant in the 128 firms operating in the civil construction sector .
in writing . - Whilst we are opposed to EU membership and therefore EU funding , the money in this fund has already been allocated and is not therefore ' new ' money .
We would prefer help for redundant workers to be funded by national governments .
However , for as long as the EU is the competent authority , help for redundant workers must , apparently , come from this fund .
There will be critics in the UK of this money being paid to German and Lithuanian workers .
However , if it were to be proposed to provide funds for ( say ) our steelworkers from Corus , we could not oppose such a contribution .
Therefore , we cannot logically oppose these contributions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we voted in favour of Mr Böge 's reports on mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , thinking , above all , of those workers being made redundant .
However , in doing so , we also felt a degree of unease .
For in truth , this fund is as much good as a sticking plaster on a wooden leg in view of the wideranging social consequences of your irresponsible , excessively free market policy .
At times , it gives the impression , despite your denials , of using European taxpayers ' money to fund policies designed to relocate and restructure large companies , while simultaneously giving the Europe of Brussels the cheap option of declaring itself ' in solidarity with ' the unemployed it is creating .
Another reason for our unease : the thresholds required to qualify for these funds , especially in terms of the numbers of redundancies .
For it is primarily and , once again , except in exceptional cases , the very large companies which benefit from them .
It would appear that the workers of medium-sized , small and very small enterprises , the small businessmen and women who are shutting up shop , have been passed over yet again where economic and social policy is concerned .
We voted in favour of this resolution so as to ensure the environmental sustainability of the Atlantic regions , particularly the islands of the European Union .
These constitute an essential part of its maritime area and are facing problems and specific needs , such as environmental problems .
The case of the Azores is worth noting , as it has the largest Exclusive Economic Zone in the European Union .
Under the scope of the present discussion , it is necessary to ensure environmental surveillance of the waters of the Atlantic , as the people of these islands depend on the good environmental condition of their marine waters .
It is therefore important to clearly define minimum objectives for environmental quality along with monitoring programmes that can ensure this sound environmental condition .
There is also a need to address the cases mentioned by the rapporteur , such as navigation accidents or plastic bags , which can have devastating consequences for economic , social and environmental sustainability in the Atlantic regions .
This calls for the implementation of specific measures appropriate to the environmental and socio-economic reality of the marine ecosystems within the Atlantic .
This is why the signing of such agreements is important for the sustainable development of populations that depend on the Atlantic .
I welcome the signing of this additional protocol to resolve a political conflict which has prevented Spain and Morocco from ratifying the Cooperation Agreement for the Protection of the Coasts and Waters of the North-East Atlantic against Pollution ( Lisbon Agreement ) .
The protection of coasts and waters is strategically important for the socio-economic well-being of coastal communities , local development , employment , and the preservation and creation of economic activity .
It needs to be ensured that all the European Union 's marine waters are kept are in a good environmental condition in order to guarantee sustainable development .
The present protocol is directly linked to issues such as environmental protection , climate change , safety , public health , regional development , relations with third countries and development cooperation .
This protocol , which will allow a variety of forms of pollution in the Atlantic to be combated , is crucial for ensuring the fight against contamination or the risk of pollution in seas or on coasts , through a mechanism that is aimed at ensuring cooperation between the contracting parties in case of a pollution-causing accident , and which will oblige them to establish and implement their own emergency structures and plans .
in writing . - I voted no to this report and in doing so , was mindful of a good news story in respect of our marine environment .
The rapporteur mentions the ' plastic soup ' , the drifting mass of plastic and rubber in the Pacific Ocean , and notes what is described as an increasing problem in the Atlantic Ocean of lost fishing nets .
In this respect , it is worth mentioning the work of KIMO International and their ' Fishing for Litter ' Project .
Originally started in March 2000 by the Dutch Government and Dutch fishermen , the project was aimed at clearing the North Sea of litter , using fishing nets .
KIMO International has since expanded this project to harbours in the UK , Sweden and Denmark , with EU financial assistance .
Since 2001 , EU fishermen have removed hundreds of tonnes of rubbish from our seas and returned it to land where it is collected and disposed of responsibly .
All of the EU fishermen involved in this project need to be applauded for their dedication , which removes waste permanently from the sea , benefiting the fishing industry , wildlife and the environment .
The EU has signed a group of agreements with individual Member States and neighbouring third countries relating to the sea , including the Helsinki Convention , the Bonn Agreement , the Barcelona Convention and the so-called Lisbon Agreement .
The aim of these agreements is to secure individual and collective measures in case of the risk of pollution , or pollution that is already happening at sea or in coastal areas .
Although the Lisbon Agreement was signed in 1990 , it never entered into effect , due to a territorial dispute between Spain and Morocco .
A supplementary protocol resolving this dispute was signed by all the signatories in 2008 and therefore nothing should prevent the adoption of the Lisbon Agreement .
The rapporteur mentions in the report two persistent and growing problems relating to pollution of the sea and the coastal areas , the first of which is the vast floating mass of plastic and rubber items in the Pacific Ocean , covering an area 34 times greater than a medium-sized Member State such as the Netherlands .
The second persistent problem which Anna Rosbach mentions , and for which she seeks a solution , is the quantity of old , discarded and lost fishing nets .
This report is an example of constructive work aimed at solving the main problems in the area of marine and coastal pollution , and I am therefore supporting it with my vote .
Twenty years after it was signed , the Cooperation Agreement for the Protection of the Coasts and Waters of the North-East Atlantic against Pollution , agreed between Portugal , Spain , France , Morocco and the EU , is now ready to enter into force , following ratification by all the contracting parties .
The Council now proposes to conclude , on behalf of the European Union , an additional protocol which will finally allow the agreement to enter into force .
This agreement is of supreme importance to Portugal , bearing in mind the length of its coastline and the importance of the sea for its national economy , and not forgetting the Erika and Prestige disasters .
I therefore congratulate the Council and the Member States on the conclusion of this additional protocol and I hope for the swift and effective entry into force of the agreement as this will provide our coastlines with greater protection against environmental disasters such as those which , unfortunately , have blighted our coasts in the recent past .
I am delighted at the adoption of this report as it will allow the entry into force of a network of regional agreements on marine pollution which have been signed between the EU and certain Member States and neighbouring third countries .
In this case , we have the Lisbon Agreement , which was signed in October 1990 but which has never entered into force due to a territorial dispute between Spain and Morocco , two of the contracting parties , over the southern boundary ( Western Sahara ) endorsed in subheading c ) of Article 3 of the agreement .
The additional protocol , which found a solution to the conflict and an acceptable wording for subheading c ) of Article 3 , was only signed in May 2008 by Portugal , Spain , France and Morocco .
With the conclusion of this additional protocol , the Lisbon Agreement can enter into force , 20 years after it was signed .
As well as its security aspects , this protocol covers environmental protection .
We are all aware of the ecological disasters which have threatened the coasts of our countries in recent years .
It is hoped that these rules will help to avoid accidents like the Erika and the Prestige , as the sea does not have any physical or political boundaries and requires sharing of efforts and concerted action .
The European Community has participated in different regional agreements on maritime pollution which facilitate mutual assistance and cooperation between Member States .
This network of agreements appears in the Cooperation Agreement for the Protection of the Coasts and Waters of the North-East Atlantic against Pollution ( Lisbon Agreement ) , promoted by Portugal , which has not entered into force due to a territorial dispute between Spain and Morocco .
I believe that , in the name of the environmental rules promoted by the EU , and once an agreement has been reached on the additional protocol , the Lisbon Agreement can finally be put into practice .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Additional Protocol to the Cooperation Agreement for the Protection of the Coasts and Waters of the North-East Atlantic against Pollution forms part of a network of regional agreements concerning the protection of the marine environment , which the EU has concluded with individual Member States and neighbouring third countries .
The protection of our oceans , which function as a source of food for millions of Europeans , is also an important task for the EU , which is why I have unreservedly voted in favour of this report .
In this connection , it should be mentioned that , in addition to the Lisbon Agreement dealt with here , there are also the Helsinki Convention , the Bonn Agreement and the Barcelona Convention .
Each of these agreements covers different parts of the seas surrounding the EU Member States and is intended to enable individual or collective intervention by the contracting parties in the event of pollution or the threat of pollution of the seas or coasts as a result of an accident .
The Lisbon Agreement was signed in October 1990 , but never entered into force on account of a territorial dispute between two contracting parties , Spain and Morocco , in respect of the ' southern borders ' ( Western Sahara ) .
The additional protocol , in which the dispute was settled and an appropriate wording was found , was signed as recently as May 2008 by Portugal , Spain , France and Morocco , and finally , on 25 March 2009 , it was also signed by the European Union .
in writing . - ( PT ) Almost 50 % of the population of the European Union lives in coastal regions , and this fact alone demands redoubled attention to the integrated preservation and management of these regions .
In view of this , it is crucial that Integrated Coastal Zone Management is ensured within the EU , as recommended by the European Commission in a statement published on this matter .
It is also important to point out that 80 % of the rubbish and pollution in the sea originates from the land , which is why there needs to be a concerted strategy which also involves combating this problem on the land .
Apart from environmental issues , oceanic pollution and European coastal degradation present an economic problem .
This is because in certain countries , such as Portugal , the practice of tourism which is aimed at maritime activities like whale watching , diving and others , constitutes a significant source of income for some regions , including the Azores , Madeira and the Algarve .
Like what is happening with overfishing , the pollution of the waters has also contributed substantially to the current state of depletion in certain stocks of species that are important fishery resources .
Therefore , the Marine Strategy Directive , an environmental pillar of the strategy for integrated maritime policy , needs to be implemented in full .
Oceans and coastal zones must be a strategic priority for Europe , and for this reason , I wholly support this report by Parliament .
I voted for this report in order to help bring the Additional Protocol to the Lisbon Agreement into force .
This agreement creates a mechanism for ensuring cooperation between the contracting parties in the case of accidents causing pollution and obliges them to devise and implement their own emergency structures and plans .
This agreement forms part of a network of regional marine agreements which the EU concluded with some individual Member States and neighbouring third countries .
The network consists of the Helsinki Convention , the Bonn Agreement , the Barcelona Convention and , in this case , the Lisbon Agreement , each of which covers different parts of the sea around EU countries , aiming at individual or collective intervention of the contracting parties in case of pollution or a threat of pollution of the seas or coasts , in order to protect the environment and citizens ' health .
The policy of consumer protection aims to promote the health , safety , economic and legal interests of consumers , along with their right to information .
Consumer protection is an overarching and fundamental policy of the European Union , focusing on the guarantee of healthy markets in which consumers can act with safety and confidence , encouraging innovation and cross-border trade .
I voted in favour of the present report as I consider it essential to strengthen European consumer protection policy and to render it more effective and meaningful for the public .
Confident and well-informed consumers who have the capacity to make choices are essential to the efficient functioning of the internal market .
This must aim to provide consumers with a significant amount of choice over products and services of a high quality and which are competitively priced whilst , at the same time , offering a high level of protection , thus playing a fundamental role in making the EU competitive , dynamic and innovative at a global level .
The European Union 's internal market has expanded considerably in recent years , currently covering nearly 500 million consumers in 27 Member States .
Standardising consumer protection principles and rules at European Union level and improving the mechanisms supporting their application is an achievable objective , without any assumption that the products and services offered in all 27 Member States will reach the same level of quality in the short or medium term .
The current difficult economic situation which the whole of Europe is going through is highlighted by a fall in incomes and rise in unemployment , which is reflected across the Community in the real need to manage the daily shopping better .
The attitude of European consumers , which is directly affected by the impact of the economic recession , is particularly evident in relation to the goods and services which they buy and want at good quality so that they can consume as many of these items as possible .
As a result , consumer protection measures are steadily growing in importance .
The consolidation of the structures for monitoring the market in all Member States to ensure that the products being marketed meet the highest safety standards is a solution to suit how things stand at the moment .
EU consumers have a vital role in enhancing growth , employment and competitiveness , and their interests are a main priority in forming key policies such as health , business and industry , the environment , and energy and transport , among others .
Regarding energy , the internal market cannot function properly and competitively due to the existence of so-called ' energy islands ' such as the Baltic region , which is isolated from the rest of Europe in terms of energy , and is dependent on a single external supplier .
The existence of an electricity grid and gas pipeline covering the whole of the European territory must be a priority , as Europe is highly dependent on energy imports .
The electricity market must also adopt a set of measures aimed at total openness , for the benefit of European consumers .
Favourable conditions need to be created for genuine and fair competition and the creation of a real single market .
Member States must take all measures necessary to carry out clear objectives , particularly the protection of vulnerable consumers , the protection of basic consumer rights , and economic and social cohesion .
The promotion of the rights and well-being of consumers is a fundamental aspect of the European Union .
I support all the efforts that have been made in this regard , which are restoring public confidence in the markets .
Consumer protection becomes even more important within the context of the economic crisis which has increased the pressure upon the least protected consumers - those with low incomes .
It is necessary to institute a coordinated approach which will allow consumers to exercise their rights in a confident manner .
In view of this , I emphasise the need : firstly , to promote policies to inform and educate consumers ( on the part of the EU and the Member States ) through campaigns , information points and increasing the resources of the European Consumer Centres ; secondly , to apply the rules that already exist effectively , strengthening monitoring of the market and regulatory mechanisms and applying pressure on the Member States for the correct collection of Community resources .
I reiterate that only in this way will consumers be able to make well informed choices without being subject to all sorts of pressures from producers .
This reinforces their confidence in the market , generates increased competition , improves the quality of products and services , and increases consumption ( an important factor for economic recovery ) .
Consumer protection is closely linked to the capacity of the market to offer a wide choice of high-quality goods and services at competitive prices .
It is clear that greater consumer trust , awareness and responsibility call for increasingly high-quality goods and services which , in turn , increases competition between suppliers , which will be encouraged to improve their products , while keeping prices at competitive levels .
I agree with the importance attached by the Commission and the Member States to launching a communication strategy on consumer rights via web portals , awareness-raising campaigns and information points , while also promoting use of the ' eYouGuide ' website , and , at the same time , ensuring the reliability , credibility and impartiality of the organisations responsible for management and organisation .
Furthermore , the five Consumer Markets Scoreboard indicators identified by the resolution - although not exhaustive - will certainly allow people to obtain useful information for improving , if necessary , the reference regulatory framework , provided that the information provided by Member States is comprehensive and can be compiled on an easily comparable basis .
I voted in favour of the report even though I am confused as to the appointment of the Consumer Ombudsman and the means of collective redress .
I believe that following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , and during the current economic crisis , the interests and protection of consumers must be robustly guaranteed .
Consumers need to be provided with specific instruments to ensure that their interests are integrated effectively into all of the European Union 's policies
The rapporteur takes as a starting point the results of the Consumer Markets Scoreboards , which is a logical and pragmatic approach .
Both the satisfaction and the problems of consumers can be deduced from the statistical reports which are focusing on the matter .
Further development of the confidential database on consumer problems is essential for the identification of markets .
However , it is necessary to improve data collection in such a way that it can take account of the differences between the various systems in the Member States which , because of the diversity , are sometimes extreme .
In my opinion , the most problematic issue is the enforceability of legislation and of contractual obligations .
In the case of trade on cross-border markets in particular , the enforceability of the law is non-existent .
Establishing rules to protect the consumer in the EU will have no effect if these are not properly implemented in national law and applied and also enforced at the Member State level .
The rapporteur has taken up the issue of consumer protection on the basis of the scoreboards in an acceptable way .
I would , however , welcome more concrete proposals for improving the current situation .
Despite this reservation , the report contributes to consumer protection in the EU and I will therefore vote for its adoption .
The European Union 's consumer policy is a fundamental component in consolidating the internal market .
For this reason , this policy must allow European consumers and members of the public to have access to high quality products and services at competitive prices , whilst at the same time benefiting from a high level of protection of their rights .
Increasing education and awareness of both their rights and obligations , as well as a responsible attitude on the part of companies , will contribute to a more dynamic form of cross-border trade and , as a result , to the close integration of the internal market , with an impact on European competitiveness .
The correct balance must also be struck between the rights and obligations of consumers and the impact of relevant adopted legislation regarding the rights and obligations of firms and service suppliers .
The Treaty of Lisbon refers to consumer protection as an overarching and fundamental policy of the European Union , which establishes that consumer protection requirements must be taken into account .
In this context , it is essential to strengthen European consumer protection policy and to render it more effective and meaningful for the public .
It is crucial to respond to the needs and problems of the European public .
In this sense , instruments for monitoring the market , such as the Consumer Markets Scoreboard , are justified .
A good consumer protection policy must ensure healthy markets , and security and confidence , whereby cross-border trade and innovation are encouraged .
I advocate a transparent policy where brand name of origin is obligatory .
Consumer protection is important in the face of imported products that are unsafe , and this requires closer cooperation between market monitoring authorities and customs authorities .
The safety of products circulating in the domestic market requires a combination of efforts with the authorities of third countries , and therefore justifies the Commission 's initiative to step up international cooperation and sign formal agreements with the relevant authorities of third countries , especially China , the US and Japan .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Hedh report .
Scotland currently lacks a voice in EU consumer matters : we have no independent representation in the Council and consumer legislation is largely reserved to London .
Given our separate legal institutions , it is essential that these powers are returned to the Scottish parliament so that Scotland can play a full role in the ongoing EU debate on these matters .
Consumer protection is , and has always been , one of the EU 's priorities , and it was consolidated following the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Consumers who are well informed of their rights and obligations contribute to a more transparent and competitive market .
With the present economic crisis , it is vital to protect the most vulnerable consumers and those with lower incomes .
The increasing complexity of retail markets , particularly those related to services , is making it more difficult for consumers to make the best choices .
In order to effectively evaluate markets and adopt policies that produce the best possible results for consumers , market monitoring instruments are required .
For this reason , the Consumer Markets Scoreboard is very important .
In order to ensure that we have effective consumer protection , it is important to improve the information provided to , and the education of , consumers .
The aim is to have ' empowered consumers ' in the internal market .
However , the report does not adequately address the problems associated with a completely unregulated market .
European standards are not always met , whether they be quality and safety standards or even environmental and health regulations .
I therefore abstained from voting .
Consumer protection is an extremely important matter for the Commission to tackle .
Simply implementing effective measures on this matter will , of course , be insufficient if there is no involvement on the part of consumers .
Consumers must be aware of their rights .
Making maximum use of the possibilities of the single European market is a tremendous challenge for the Commission .
In order to meet this challenge , effective consumer protection must be one of the priorities chosen by the EU .
I think using the Consumer Markets Scoreboards , which are a tool for monitoring markets , could not be more beneficial from the point of view of the consumer .
The scoreboards clearly show which markets are not sufficiently meeting the needs of consumers .
By analysing them , we can ascertain , among other things , that consumers are experiencing particular problems in the market for services , and that Internet trade between particular Member States is being restricted to a large extent by trans-border barriers .
I am pleased by the fact that further scoreboards are being planned .
In addition , I hope they will supply us with yet more detailed information than before .
Thanks to such tools , it is significantly easier to understand the problems of consumers and to respond to their needs .
There is no doubt that introducing EU regulations on consumer protection in individual EU countries is beneficial to our citizens .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Hedh on consumer protection .
This own-initiative report rightly recognises the crucial role of consumer organisations , which are the ideal organisations for alerting public authorities to the problems consumers experience in their daily lives .
Naturally , I also support the requirement for Member States to adequately consult consumer organisations at all stages of the decision-making process and of the transposition and implementation of consumer law .
Very important as well is the matter of also including in the Consumer Markets Scoreboard long-term indicators such as those relating to market shares , quality , advertising , transparency and comparability of offers , indicators relating to enforcement and consumer empowerment , social , environmental and ethical indicators , and also indicators to measure redress and consumer detriment .
The only two drawbacks of this report , as I see it , are the failure to adopt the amendment tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance to learn from the market failure in the energy sector , and our amendment requesting a revision of the Toys Directive .
The fact that this amendment did not prevail remains regrettable .
Nevertheless , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur and her colleagues in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection on this sound report .
in writing . - I welcome this contribution to the consumer scoreboard from Parliament . The consumer scoreboard is an important indicator of how effective and efficient Member States are at implementing legislation from the EU .
I welcome the rapporteur 's calls for greater transparency and visibility of the surveillance measures and support her call for improved collective redress mechanisms in the EU .
in writing . - ( SV ) The free market within the EU makes the Union a strong player , but also means that consumers must be given good , clear information about the range available on the market .
The position of consumers needs to be strengthened .
I therefore voted in favour of the report on consumer protection today .
However , the report contains certain wording that is problematic .
There is a risk that consulting consumer organisations at all stages of the decision-making process will make this process rather drawn out .
Civil society plays an important part in achieving relevant consumer protection , but this may take different forms in different countries without this having a detrimental effect on the result .
The principle of subsidiarity must apply in the matter of the establishment of consumer protection authorities and consumer ombudsmen , as well as in the wording concerning the curriculum in schools .
The EU must set minimum levels and objectives for common consumer policy , but should not decide in every detail exactly how the Member States are to achieve these objectives .
The report calls on all Member States to collect and record information on accidents and injuries in a common database .
Such a database must not give rise to the need for excessive administrative work .
Its administration must be reasonable and proportionate to the benefit to individuals .
However , consumer rights and consumer protection in the internal market are so important that I voted in favour of the report despite the concerns that I have just outlined .
Rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased that we are seriously trying to take care of the protection of consumer rights .
However , this has been going on for several years now and we are still unable to create an ideal mechanism and tighten the compulsory conditions by fulfilling these tasks at national level .
Sometimes , this almost seems like a game or hypocrisy .
Until we strictly regulate the activities of monopolies , in whatever area , so that their profits are clearly limited , and the operating costs , salaries and bonuses are strictly controlled - i.e. , the provision of raw materials , manufacturing , product provision - then it is hard to imagine consumers receiving cheap and high quality goods or services .
As I have considerable experience in this area , I am ready to collaborate in this matter .
in writing . - I welcome the adoption of this report .
I feel it is important to protect consumers and to put a greater focus on strengthening market surveillance , so that products destined for citizens meet the highest standards possible .
I welcome the move to step up international cooperation on safety products and to pursue formal agreements with enforcement authorities in third countries .
I support calls to set up a special Consumer Ombudsman for the extra-judicial settlement of disputes and believe that more effective cross-border cooperation mechanisms will help to improve protection for consumers across the EU .
Article 12 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union reaffirms that consumer protection requirements shall be taken into account in defining and executing other Union policies and activities .
The Commission must ensure that consumers ' interests are genuinely integrated in all policies and must examine in its impact studies the potential effects of any new legislative act and of policies that directly or indirectly affect consumers .
While consumer complaints are an important indicator of market failures , their absence does not always mean that markets are working well , since there are times when consumers tend to complain less , because of different consumer traditions or because of their perception of the likelihood that their complaint will be taken into account .
Consumer organisations have a crucial role to play in alerting public authorities to the problems that consumers face .
The instruments should be optimised so that they can operate more effectively at all levels .
I call on the Member States to ensure that consumer organisations are duly consulted at every stage of the decision-making process and during the transposition and implementation of consumer legislation .
I voted in favour of this report on SOLVIT .
European consumers should be fully aware of their rights and this problem-solving network should be easily accessible to everyone .
In the European Union as a whole , the number of people contacting SOLVIT seeking advice and help is increasing , and from this it can be understood that the importance of SOLVIT as a problem-solving tool for European citizens and businesses is growing .
I fully support the demand in the report for better and wider advertising of SOLVIT 's services and I agree that information about the rights of citizens and businesses in the internal market should be clarified so that everyone can take advantage of these rights in their everyday lives .
in writing . - To enjoy the benefits of the internal market , consumers must have an effective means of redress following misapplication of internal market law .
The SOLVIT network was created to guarantee quick redress without having to use judicial proceedings .
I believe that this network could be of great use but at the moment , it is not functioning effectively and is not using its potential to the full .
Many of our citizens and small businesses are unaware of such a network .
Thus , I believe that Member States should put greater efforts and means into promoting SOLVIT and raising awareness amongst citizens and businesses .
Moreover , some SOLVIT centres receive more cases than they are able to resolve because the centres are understaffed .
I believe that Member States need to strengthen the role of national SOLVIT centres by ensuring cooperation among national , regional and local authorities and to engage in an active exchange of views and best practices with other Member States in order to fully exploit the potential of the SOLVIT network .
In operation since 2002 , SOLVIT is an online problem-solving network in which the Member States of the European Union participate , with the aim of providing a pragmatic response to the difficulties which arise as a result of the incorrect application of Community legislation by the public authorities .
Although the internal market presently works relatively well , it is also true that , on occasion , errors or problems of interpretation arise with respect to the rights of members of the public and firms who attempt to make the most of the advantages that the internal market provides .
I voted in favour of the present report since the SOLVIT network has shown itself to be of huge importance to the resolution of all sorts of problems , from the member of the public who is searching for another Member State in which to study , work or be reunited with a partner , etc . , through to firms who have encountered problems with the public authorities , problems with VAT refunds or other issues .
The SOLVIT network aims to provide members of the public and firms with a high level of service , on the basis of important quality and performance criteria .
I welcome the Buşoi report on SOLVIT .
This informal network for solving problems related to the internal market has been crucial in providing free assistance to both members of the public and businesses in solving specific problems with the public authorities .
Its importance is reflected in the growing number of cases brought over the last year .
However , given the cross-cutting problems identified at national level , it is vital to consider a series of measures for improving the effectiveness of these centres .
I believe , therefore , that Member States must intensify their efforts to provide information to members of the public and businesses on the rights that they enjoy within the internal market by making use of the increase in financial and human resources and the training of employees on the SOLVIT network on internal market rules .
It is also important for its employees to have a solid knowledge of English , as well as their native language .
I call on the Member States and the Commission to promote greater access to the SOLVIT network for members of the public and businesses , with a view to the effective implementation of the internal market rules .
The internal market is not , nor should it be , a merely bureaucratic structure .
To truly benefit from its obvious advantages , firms and the European public must be able to exercise their rights in practice by means of rapid , responsive and efficient mechanisms .
On this basis , the SOLVIT network assumes a fundamental importance .
Given the increasing number of cases in which SOLVIT centres have been involved over the last year , I consider it to be vital for the good of consumers that we should move towards a range of reforms and improvements which Parliament has proposed with this in mind .
For example , the strengthening of Commission control over the effective application of the rules of the internal market ; clear increases to the resources provided to SOLVIT centres ( the commissioning of experts on the elements of the internal market , an increase in funds for the national centres , specialised and up-to-date training of existing specialist personnel , coordinated online links between local centres and Commission services ) ; and significant investment in the promotion and advertising of the SOLVIT network by the Member States and Commission through all social communication methods , promoting a high level of connection with the public and firms .
For all these reasons , I support the Buşoi report on SOLVIT .
The SOLVIT network has shown that it is a very useful instrument for solving the problems - without legal proceedings - encountered by citizens and businesses as a result of the misapplication of internal market law by public authorities .
It should therefore be supported in several ways , by means of better cooperation between the Commission , Parliament and Member States .
Above all , it is necessary to better promote awareness of its existence among citizens and businesses and to strengthen cooperation among national , regional and local authorities .
Greater importance should also be given to the training of public officials who work in this area , such as training of the SOLVIT network staff , which , as the Commission 's communication stresses , should also be developed by means of the European Social Fund .
I voted in favour of the report because I believe that strengthening the SOLVIT network can really help improve the legal framework of the internal market , which we are trying so hard to build .
Promoting transparency of data with an interactive online database increases awareness of standards , enables problems to be resolved faster and increases trust in operators .
The SOLVIT network was set up by the Commission and the Member States in order to resolve , via non-judicial means , any problems that members of the public and businesses face as a result of the incorrect application of legislation concerning the internal market .
This network has shown itself to be effective in the resolution of problems , but it is still underutilised by the general public .
For this reason , the Commission intends to promote the rapid and complete application of the SOLVIT network , increasing transparency in order to overcome obstacles to freedom of movement and providing the public with information on their rights , so as to fulfil the potential of the internal market .
With this in mind , the Commission is urging the Member States to duly promote the SOLVIT network amongst the public and firms , bearing in mind its capabilities and the added value which it represents .
Given that many of the problems which could be dealt with through the SOLVIT network are currently resolved judicially , increasing the time and money wasted by members of the public and firms , and given that the SOLVIT network could provide an alternative and more rapid and efficient solution to legal disputes , I believe that making the SOLVIT network fully operational will benefit the workings of the internal market as well as the protection of the interests and rights of members of the public and firms .
The SOLVIT network became operational in July 2002 , having been created by the Commission and the Member States with the aim of resolving the problems that were being experienced by members of the public and businesses as a result of the misapplication of internal market legislation , allowing a swift , free and effective response without recourse to the courts .
All the EU Member States along with Norway , Iceland and Liechtenstein have created SOLVIT centres at national level , mostly integrated with their respective ministries of economy or foreign affairs .
These centres cooperate directly through an electronic database in order to find rapid and pragmatic solutions to the problems submitted by members of the public and businesses .
The Member States must intensify their efforts to provide information to members of the public and businesses on the rights that they enjoy within the internal market , thus allowing them to exercise these rights .
The services provided by SOLVIT must be made known to members of the public and businesses in an effective way .
The SOLVIT network , which aims to be an effective solution to the problems of the internal market , has been very successful in solving these problems .
This SOLVIT network was set up in 2002 in order to address problems that members of the public and businesses face as a result of the incorrect application of European legislation relating to the internal market .
The SOLVIT network replaces the courts in a more effective and less bureaucratic manner , finding solutions within 10 weeks .
However , the increased flow of SOLVIT cases has resulted in several deficiencies with its response .
This means that it is very important for there to be an effort towards an increase in human and financial resources , along with adequate training of the SOLVIT network officials , so that they can improve their effectiveness in addressing the increasing number of cases submitted to them .
The internal market offers citizens and companies a host of opportunities .
The internal market operates well , on the whole . However , sometimes mistakes can be made too .
SOLVIT is a network for resolving problems where EU Member States work together to resolve , without resorting to legal proceedings , problems which have arisen due to the inappropriate application of internal market legislation by the public authorities .
There is a SOLVIT centre in every Member State of the European Union ( as well as in Norway , Iceland and Liechtenstein ) .
I voted for this report to give SOLVIT centres a boost in resolving the complaints submitted by both citizens and companies .
The internal market , with more than 1 500 frequently complex documents , seems to Europeans to be a pretty incomprehensible ' big contraption ' , which , to boot , is not always correctly implemented in the Member States ( I am thinking , in particular , of the recognition of professional qualifications ) .
Consequently , SOLVIT is proving to be an invaluable tool : a genuine support service for consumers and businesses in matters relating to the single market , this cooperative network has , for several years , worked to solve , informally , problems linked to the misapplication of internal market law by the public authorities .
I voted in favour of the report on SOLVIT .
Nonetheless , despite its excellent success rates ( more than 80 % of cases are successfully resolved ) , and despite the fact that it represents a rapid , extrajudicial and free solution to the problem of obtaining redress , SOLVIT is still relatively unknown among the general public .
We must do more to raise its profile .
Finally , I regret that in certain Member States , including my own , the SOLVIT centre is so poorly provided for in terms of budget and personnel .
The time has come , I believe , for Member States to appreciate how useful these centres are and to provide them with the means to function properly .
The report by Mr Buşoi on SOLVIT is very important .
In the performance of my parliamentary duties , I am contacted many times a week by citizens asking me what are often very personal and very specific questions on the operation of Community law .
I am often able to help them promptly by directing them to SOLVIT .
The report we adopted today clearly describes the benefits of this instrument .
It is an extremely balanced piece of work in that it states very clearly what action must be taken to improve the instrument .
A good media strategy is certainly needed in order to raise awareness of SOLVIT .
Making a unique Internet address available can contribute to this .
It is clear that SOLVIT 's efficiency needs to be further increased .
This can indeed be done by enhancing cooperation between civil servants with a sufficiently high level of knowledge .
Also crucial is the recommendation for Member States to increase the staffing of SOLVIT centres in order to build up administrative capacity in the various ministries at national level .
The objective must be for all SOLVIT centres to answer the questions quickly and come up with genuine solutions ; the very purpose for which SOLVIT was created .
Rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , I support this initiative and agree entirely with the strengthening of the SOLVIT network and the broadening of its activities .
No expense should be spared in having information about this European structure 's activities and opportunities spread in the national media , on the Internet or on television programmes .
However , I can tell you all that there are double standards : the legislation is not applied in a uniform manner and there are even different penalties for the same activities .
SOLVIT was created in order to resolve the problems faced by citizens and businesses as a result of the poor application of legislation on the internal market .
All the Member States , as well as Norway , Iceland and Liechtenstein , have established a national SOLVIT centre .
They cooperate directly in order to devise rapid and pragmatic solutions to the problems submitted by citizens and businesses .
The centres need sound legal advice on the legal merits of the problems submitted and the solutions proposed .
They have access to legal advice both within their centre and within the competent administration .
Where there are differences of legal opinion on cases being handled jointly , complex legal issues or simply no proper access to legal advice in their country , SOLVIT centres often turn to the Commission for advice .
Member States should ensure that the centres have proper access to legal expertise within their administration .
The Commission should speed up the provision of informal legal assessments to the centres on request .
I welcome the Member States ' commitment to monitoring European legislation and its application .
It is not good enough that the European colegislators should implement laws that create more problems than they solve .
We have very high standards of animal health requirements in Ireland and , as a result , I voted in favour of this important report , which will protect the health status of Irish animals .
The report 's recommendation with regard to extending the transitional system for the movement of animals until the end of December 2011 is necessary and timely .
These rules establish a general system for identifying pets ( cats , dogs and ferrets ) travelling between Member States and all animals will have to have passports with them showing that they have been vaccinated against rabies .
These protective measures are necessary as the health standards in Ireland are extremely high at present and , as a result , the country is free from rabies , from certain ticks and from tapeworms which could endanger the health of both humans and animals .
Madam President , I voted in favour of the report on the proposed resolution of the European Parliament and the Council concerning veterinary conditions for the non-commercial movement of pets , even though I do not agree with the entire text of the proposal .
I am particularly concerned that it provides for an extension of the transitional period during which the importation of dogs and cats into Ireland , Malta , Finland , Sweden and the United Kingdom is subject to stricter requirements .
For example , Malta , Ireland and the United Kingdom are requesting that pet dogs and cats be subject to additional examinations for ticks , which must also be certified in their animal passports .
This is already the second consecutive extension of the transitional period , which I consider to be highly irregular from the perspective of EU legislative practice .
The Commission should , as soon as possible , assess the possibility of expanding the general regime to the Member States which currently fall under the transitional regime , for the purposes of which it should order the drafting of a consultative opinion by the European Food Safety Authority .
I firmly believe that repeated extensions of the transitional period are not in the interests of European citizens .
The existing differences in the protective measures of the previously mentioned Member States , such as different time limits for inoculations and serological examinations and different deadlines for anti-parasite examinations , make it more difficult and more costly to travel with pets in the EU .
Community laws regulate the non-commercial movement of pets into the Community , within the framework of which they establish a so-called general regime , under which pet dogs , cats and ferrets , which are being moved between Member States in the EU , must be accompanied by identification documents and information on their mandatory inoculations against rabies and on the diseases they have had .
Regulation ( EC ) No 998 / 2003 also establishes a so-called transitional regime allowing Member States to apply stricter requirements for the entry and movement of these animals on their territory .
Great Britain , in particular , is making considerable use of this derogation .
The Commission proposes to extend the designated transitional regime up to 31 December 2011 , and the rapporteur Mrs de Brún supports this move .
In view of the fact that a compromise has been achieved in both the Council and the ENVI committee , of which this report constitutes a part , I have voted for its adoption .
Regulation ( EC ) 998 / 2003 , which the Commission proposes to amend , establishes harmonised norms on the non-commercial movement of pets inside the European Union , as well as their entry into it .
It envisages , however , a temporary system under which some Member States may impose more restrictive conditions in the case of certain illnesses such as rabies , echinococcosis and tick infestation .
The importance of the free movement of pets within the European Union area notwithstanding , I reiterate my conviction that it is fundamental that such pets must comply with all sanitary criteria so that they do not present a risk to human or animal health .
This report provides rules for the movement of pets within the European area and how this should be done in accordance with the objectives of preventing the spread of diseases , particularly rabies .
Freedom of movement is one of the key pillars of the European Single Market .
This issue is particularly pertinent for citizens of a Europe without borders , where we have witnessed an increased movement of pets between Member States .
We all agree that it must be possible to travel with pets , but we also all agree that this must be done in accordance with the set public health criteria in order to ensure a greater level of protection for human and animal health .
I therefore welcome the general passport system , which will harmonise hygiene measures , and the controls which facilitate the free movement of pets .
The report also provides a transitional arrangement until the end of 2011 , so that some countries can prepare to put the necessary infrastructure in place .
in writing . - I voted in favour of Mrs de Brún 's report .
The freedom of movement which lies at the heart of the single market means that this is an issue of importance to a great many citizens across Europe .
Public and animal health matters are also of vital importance and I consider that the rapporteur has done a good job in striking a balance .
The animal health conditions that must be placed on the cross-border movement of domestic animals which are not intended for sale are aimed at ensuring both a greater degree of protection for human and animal health and greater ease of movement for pets accompanied by their respective owners .
In this way , if the relevant rules are followed and a certificate of vaccination against rabies and an analysis of the immune system reaction to this vaccine performed by an authorised veterinarian is carried during journeys within the Community area , this will facilitate the non-commercial movement of pets .
I have voted in favour of this important report because in doing so , we are supporting the Commission proposal on the extension of the transitional regime as regards rabies , meaning that the end of the regime coincides better with the period when the European Commission expects to terminate EU funding of vaccination programmes to eradicate sylvatic rabies in some Member States , which is the main rabies problem in the EU .
In addition , the Commission has opted for a careful precautionary approach , giving priority to prevention and to additional health considerations related to the internal market and free movement of pets .
The different policy options have been compared and considered by the Commission , taking into account the various opinions of the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) .
The proposed date for ending the transitional regimes will allow the infrastructure to be converted and the staff in place to be retrained gradually and adapt to the new situation .
in writing . - I welcome this report , which will allow Member States to continue with measures to protect against the spread of rabies but which will also lead to the free , safe movement of pets throughout Europe after 2011 .
The extension of the derogation for certain countries until 2011 will allow them to continue with tests and health checks for diseases such as rabies .
This transitional period is an important step towards the eventual free , safe movement of pets in the European Union .
I would like to congratulate all those who worked to secure the agreement on the new comitology procedure .
It is a good compromise which will allow an effective response if Member States have justified concerns over the spread of other diseases .
It also ensures that , when using delegated powers , the Commission will consult a variety of experts - Commission experts , Member State experts , non-governmental experts and Parliament 's experts .
We must ensure that this commitment is upheld .
In the wider context , we have received written assurances that this report will not set a precedent for the future use of delegated powers .
This takes into account Parliament 's concerns about setting a precedent for the new comitology procedure under the Lisbon Treaty .
The EU 2020 strategy is a document that offers much hope .
In recent times , there has been much talk about the recovery of the EU economy , but the majority of Member States have yet to see the end of the crisis .
In public , discussion of the crisis is limited to the state of public finances , although the rapidly increasing unemployment in some Member States has already reached a critical level .
It is strange to hear EU high officials praising some governments for their excellent work , when each month , the number of unemployed in those countries is growing at a catastrophic rate , social guarantees are being reduced and the number of people living below the poverty level is increasing .
It is becoming very difficult for the people in such countries to understand whether the European Union is implementing a policy of poverty reduction or actually increasing poverty in the social area .
In my opinion , governments that have been unable to even solve unemployment stabilisation problems should not receive undeserved praise .
The European Commission should take greater responsibility and responsibly supervise the implementation of national government crisis management plans , while assessing very clearly the effects of such reforms on the people .
The Schengen Agreement is a treaty between European countries on the policy of freedom of movement of individuals within the Schengen area .
Any person who is in possession of a document which proves that he legally resides in a Member State should be able to move freely within an area where there are no internal borders .
However , not all countries are yet in compliance with their obligation to provide a residence permit to the nationals of third countries who are holders of this form of long-stay visa .
For this reason , it is inconsistent that a student who has obtained a visa to take a course in Portugal should not have the option to go , for example , to Belgium to gather information from a specialised library for the writing of his thesis .
For this reason , I voted in favour of the present report , bearing in mind that it is important to facilitate the freedom of movement within the Schengen area of nationals of third countries who legally reside in one of the Member States on the basis of a long-term type D visa provided by that Member State .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Coelho , for once more managing to achieve an agreement at first reading , which will allow this situation to be resolved before the Visa Code enters into force next month .
I voted for the new amendments to this regulation given that hitherto , third-country nationals holding long-stay visas have encountered problems with the restriction on free movement .
They have been unable to travel freely from one European Union Member State to another and even had difficulties returning to their native country .
This regulation extends the principle of equivalence between residences permits and short-stay visas issued by the Member States fully implementing the Schengen acquis to long-stay visas .
It must be underlined that a long-stay visa should have the same effects as a residence permit as regards free movement in the Schengen area without internal borders .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that it is very important that once the movement of third-country nationals in the Schengen area has been simplified , security guarantees in the Member States are not infringed .
The implementation of this regulation should not reduce security , since it provides for the duty of states to check a person 's data in the Schengen Information System before issuing a long-stay visa and , if necessary , asking other EU Member States about that person .
Hitherto , this was only done when issuing residence permits .
I welcome the adoption of this regulation by a very large majority - by 562 votes to 29 , with 51 abstentions .
From now on , any third-country national holding a long-stay visa issued by a Member State will be able to travel to the other Member States for three months in any six-month period , under the same conditions as the holder of a residence permit .
This was a measure which many students and researchers , such as those participating in European exchange programmes ( Erasmus Mundus ) , have been waiting for .
It is a step forward in terms of making the Union a more attractive destination for students , academics and researchers from third countries .
Moreover , it can be seen as a reminder of the European Parliament 's request for the Member States to take steps towards the future introduction of a visa intended specifically for students participating in exchange programmes .
I do have one regret , however : the United Kingdom , Ireland and Denmark have not adopted this regulation and will not be subject to its application , even though these countries attract a large number of foreign students and researchers present in the Schengen area .
The creation through the Schengen Agreement of a European area without border controls was an important step in constructing an open internal market with free movement of people and goods .
For this same reason , the crucial aim upon which the agreement is based is to allow the free movement of individuals within an area where there are no internal borders .
As a result , it seems to us absurd that citizens who are from outside the EU but who possess long-stay visas provided by one of the States which are party to the Schengen Agreement may not move freely within this area .
The examples given by the rapporteur seem to us to be evidence of the absurdity which this system represents in practice .
For this reason , I agree with the Commission 's proposal , in the wording suggested by Parliament , to treat long-stay visas as residence permits , thus ensuring freedom of movement for their holders .
Firstly , I welcome the excellent quality of this report .
In accordance with the Community legislation in place , nationals of third countries who hold a long-stay visa ( a visa for a stay in excess of three months ) are not authorised to travel to other Member States during their stay or to travel through other Member States when they return to their country of origin , since there is no provision for this in the Schengen Convention .
The new rules proposed mean that a long-stay visa will have the same effect as a residence permit in terms of free movement within the Schengen area , without internal borders , or that a person who holds a long-stay visa issued by a Member State will be authorised to travel to other Member States for three months within a period of six months , and under the same conditions as the holder of a residence permit .
For this system to work , there should be controls that are equivalent to those that are currently in place in other areas , so as to ensure good communication between Member States and coherence between the issuing of long-stay visas , residence permits and Schengen Information System alerts .
It is a good thing that a foreigner who holds a long-stay visa granted by a Member State is able to travel to other Member States for at least three months within a period of six months , and on the basis of the same conditions as the holder of a residence permit .
As this is the main matter covered by the regulation to which this report relates , we voted in favour .
As we know , at present and in accordance with Community legislation which is in force , nationals of third countries who hold long-stay visas who might be , for example , students who wish to make a study trip to another Member State , scientists , academics , relatives of nationals of third countries and EU citizens , are not allowed to travel to other Member States during their stay or to pass through other Member States when returning to their country of origin , a situation which is not envisaged in the Schengen Agreement .
The new rules which have now been approved will mean that a person who holds a long-stay visa ( a visa for a stay of more than three months , or a type D visa ) will have the same rights as the holder of a residence permit in terms of freedom of movement within the Schengen area .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we voted against Mr Coelho 's report .
Indeed , to allow holders of a long-stay visa , that is to say , one lasting more than six months , to benefit automatically from freedom of movement throughout all the States of the Schengen area , as though they were holders of a residence permit , is irresponsible .
Your examples are misleading .
It does not matter whether we are talking about students wishing to visit the capitals of Europe ( with the exception of London , Dublin and Copenhagen , which are outside the Schengen area ) , researchers whose research is due to last less than a year , or expatriates without the appropriate residence and work permits - it is all of marginal importance and merely a pretext .
In point of fact , this measure is yet another negation of the sovereign right of States to decide who may or may not , under which conditions and for how long , enter their territory .
By standardising rights , it ultimately makes long-stay visas completely meaningless , for the sake of promoting a sort of automatic resident 's status , one that is granted from the moment a person wishes to come to Europe for more than three months and for a purpose other than that of tourism .
This is unacceptable .
I supported the Coelho report on the freedom of movement of persons with a long-stay visa because , behind issues relating to administrative formalities , I believe it is important , for example , for young foreigners who come to study in our countries not to be confined to living in one country , but to be able to have the freedom to travel from one country to another , whether to study or to discover the diversity and wealth of European culture .
Unlike those who are raising the spectre of security and the fight against illegal immigration , we must defend here the need to develop a knowledge-based society in Europe , as elsewhere .
in writing . - I abstained on the Coelho report as it deals with aspects of Schengen which are not applicable in Scotland .
Firstly , I should like to thank Mr Coelho for the quality of his report and for the true expertise that he brings to all his work on visa policy .
Adoption of this regulation is a necessity and a matter of urgency .
It is a necessity because , due to an extremely contentious practice carried out by Member States , which no longer convert long-stay visas into residence permits , we have ended up with absurd situations in which any third-country national who is legally resident on EU territory by virtue of a D visa is prevented from travelling within the other Member States of the Schengen area .
This practice creates unnecessary obstacles to movement within the Schengen area and runs counter to the very philosophy of the Schengen acquis .
Adoption of this text is also urgent in view of the forthcoming entry into force of the Community Code on Visas , which abolishes D + C visas .
As well as maintaining a high level of security within the Schengen area , thanks to the obligation to consult the Schengen Information System when processing D visa applications , this report provides a fair and balanced solution to situations that must no longer arise in the future .
The previous legislation , which did not allow a citizen of a third country with a long-stay visa granted by a Member State to travel to other Member States , did not meet the mobility needs of the majority of those citizens .
We are talking about students , scientists , academics and others who , as part of their professional and / or academic work , need to travel between several Member States , and would not be able to do so under the existing legislation .
In this way , these changes are rectifying this anomalous situation while still continuing to safeguard all security rules on the movement of citizens of third countries within the EU .
I voted for this regulation because I consider that it is a welcome improvement to a previous measure which restricted the rights of long-stay visa holders in a Member State .
Just as society is in a state of flux , European legislation must not remain standing still either because we are facing new problems and challenges .
At the same time , we are being given new instruments for managing issues related , for instance , to free movement .
This report aims to make it considerably easier for third-country nationals with a long-stay ' D ' visa to move freely throughout the Community .
In doing so , it completely disregards the fact that it ought to be within the competence of the Member States to decide whether and which third-country nationals are permitted to enter the country and who should be refused entry .
It is for that reason that I voted against the report .
in writing . - I voted , together with my group , in favour of this report because it points out that the proposals made in this framework seek to make it easier for third-country nationals legally residing in a Member State to move in the Schengen area on the basis of a D long-stay visa issued by that Member State .
They are intended to provide a response to situations where Member States are unable , for various reasons , to issue residence permits in time to third-country nationals residing in their territory , by extending the existing principle of equivalence between a residence permit and short-stay C visas to long-stay D visas .
A long-stay visa will thus have the same effect as a residence permit as regards circulation in the Schengen area .
This will make it possible for anyone in possession of a document showing that he is legally resident in a Member State to move freely in the Schengen area for short periods of no more than three months in any half year .
The free movement of individuals is one of the fundamental principles of the European Union , and the Schengen area was created in order to put this objective into practice effectively .
The Group of the European People 's Party , to which I belong , has always defended the principle of the freedom of movement of individuals , following the principle that rules and common procedures regarding visas , residence permits and the control of borders must form part of the full Schengen concept .
In this context , I support the new measures which have been adopted , taking into account the fact that the free movement of nationals of third countries , that is , residents of a Member State on the basis of a type D long-stay visa travelling to other Member States within the Schengen area , is sometimes rendered difficult as a result of a delay in the conversion of their visa into a residence permit .
In accordance with the document , the principle of equivalence between residence permits and short-stay visas will now be applied to long-stay visas .
For these reasons , and given that the adopted measures not only leave matters relating to the granting of visas unaffected , including those relating to security issues , but also constitute a natural and necessary development of the Schengen concept , I voted in favour of the document .
The Fianna Fáil members of the European Parliament , Pat the Cope Gallagher and Liam Aylward , strongly oppose what is proposed in this report regarding the introduction of a Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base ( CCCTB in English ) .
The European Centre for Economic Studies carried out a study recently on how practical it would be to introduce the Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base in Europe , and it was clear from that study 's conclusions that such a tax system would not be workable , practical or desirable from the political point of view .
A Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base in Europe would not improve the competitiveness of the European Union or the operation of the single market , and on top of that , the CCCTB could interfere with small open economies like that of Ireland .
The question of taxation is within the competence of the individual Member States and the Irish Government has the right to use its power of veto in relation to any tax measures , including CCCTB .
This right is enshrined in the treaties , including the Treaty of Lisbon .
Effective competition in the supply of goods and services reduces prices , improves quality and allows greater choice for consumers .
It also allows technological innovation to progress .
Research in the energy sector is crucial , along with investment in infrastructure , particularly in the interconnection of gas and electricity networks , in order to promote competition .
The security of supply and real competition in the energy market depend on the interconnection and the smooth operation of energy infrastructures .
Strong competitiveness is also important within the telecommunications sector with measures to promote competitiveness through preferential tariffs .
In order to achieve this , it is important to analyse the relevant market .
I would even stress the importance of monitoring the competitive behaviour of fuel markets within the European Union .
I would emphasise that support mechanisms like State aid must not be used to protect national industries at the expense of the internal market and European consumers , and that these mechanisms should be used with the aim of re-establishing a sustainable knowledge economy .
The report on competition policy shows how to enhance the functioning of the markets to the benefit of European consumers and businesses .
Particular attention is paid to issues concerning cartels and consumers .
Fighting cartels is vital to ensure that the benefits of a competitive system reach the end consumer .
Indeed , they represent one of the most serious violations of competition law : operators are allowed to increase prices , limit production and divide the market up between themselves .
The Commission has a sanctionative role , thus preventing anti-competitive behaviour , and imposes fines on cartel members , discouraging any business from indulging in or continuing anti-competitive behaviour .
During an economic crisis there is a risk of increasing the level of protectionism .
It is therefore necessary to avoid public intervention that would change the conditions of competition on the internal market but , at the same time , to acknowledge that State aid is sometimes essential in order to tackle the crisis .
I voted in favour , since anti-competitive conditions encourage abuses of dominant positions to the detriment of SMEs and it is therefore vital that Europe does its best to provide greater guarantees and protection for goods .
on behalf of the ECR Group , in writing . - The ECR Group is a firm supporter of strong and effective competition policy as a tool both for protecting the consumer and encouraging fair access to markets .
We are happy to support the actions taken by the Commission in recent years in pursuit of these aims , and , in particular , their actions against unfair State aid .
Thus , it is to our dismay that the report , which was initially well drafted , has been made less effective by the irrelevant and unwelcome additions of paragraphs pre-empting the outcome of the negotiations on the financial supervisory architecture , calling for a common consolidated corporate tax base and attacking the right of enterprises to employ contract staff .
Members of our group have , in the past , voted in favour of reports on the Commission 's competition policy and our hope is that such reports will , in future , emerge from the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee in better shape .
Our abstention reflects this concern , and we reiterate in this explanation of vote our support for the continued good work of the Commission in the field of competition .
Greater competition means more choice for the European public and a more competitive environment for firms .
As such , there should be no separation between EU policies on competition and those relating to consumers .
Thus , action from the Committee to guarantee an effective competitive environment at the heart of the internal market are vital if we are to ensure the achievement of those objectives , although it may call into question the absolute powers conferred upon that institution .
During the crisis of the past few months , the authorisation of the State aid justified by recent events has been fundamental for the recovery of the economy .
Furthermore , the fight against cartels and the abuse of a dominant position by firms is fundamental if we are to guarantee that a climate of fair competition will survive within the internal market , allowing the various economic agents to benefit from conditions which are conducive to the pursuit of their activities .
The economic crisis , the effects of which we are still experiencing , requires exceptional measures , such as State aid .
However , it needs to be ensured that this does not unduly distort competition or increase the budgetary deficit and public debt .
In view of this , its application should be a matter of sober consideration .
The level of public debt , which is rapidly on the rise , will be a burden for future generations and an obstacle to economic recovery and growth .
Excessive debt and budgetary deficits not only compromise the stability of the euro , but also place severe restrictions on public spending in priority sectors such as education , health , innovation and the environment .
Within this context , it is necessary to proceed to a rigorous assessment of the rescue and recovery package and the effectiveness of State aid .
Protectionism and fragmentation of the single market must be avoided , as they weaken Europe 's position within the global economy .
A single market that functions properly is the key to a healthy economy and , in all certainty , economic recovery .
Ultimately , economic policies must gain more legitimacy through greater intervention by Parliament under the codecision process .
Policies and effective rules relating to competition have always been crucial for the healthy coexistence of all economic operators in the euro area .
Although the EU has been greatly affected by the recent global economic crisis , the truth is that a strong currency , a consistent single market , sound public finances and a good system of social protection have contributed greatly to helping us survive the effects of the crisis .
However , the State aid distributed by various Member States without any concern for the good of the European Union as a whole could lead to significant distortions in competition .
It is therefore crucial that there is an assessment of all the measures taken by each Member State to combat the crisis , so that in the future , the EU will have the capacity to react jointly and harmoniously in order to avoid protectionism and fragmentation of the single market .
Such situations do nothing but harm Europe , which wants to be strong within the global economy .
Policy on competition is one of the most important policies of the Community and was one of the first to be agreed .
The legitimacy and necessity of its introduction relate directly to one of the main objectives of the European Communities , which was the establishment of a common market in the Member States .
Competition policy is intended to give a guarantee that barriers to internal trade , which have been lifted as part of the common market , will not be replaced by other measures on the part of businesses or governments , because this would lead to the distortion of competition .
Competition policy is principally concerned with the interests of consumers , and tries to ensure them easy access to goods and services offered on the single market at prices which are as close as possible throughout the Union .
I would like just to draw your attention to the serious crisis which has hit Europe , and to say that an internal market which functions well is the key to a healthy economy , and is now certainly the key to the work of rebuilding which awaits us in the near future .
This report contains some sensible proposals , such as the different treatment , within competition law , of multinational concerns , on the one hand , and small and medium-sized enterprises on the other .
However , I do not believe that it is right to deregulate , or not to regulate , retail prices in the telecoms sector .
In general , I consider the tenor of the report , which assumes the absolute efficiency of the free market , to be misguided .
It is for that reason that I have voted against this report .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs in ' t Veld , which welcomes the Commission 's 2008 report on competition policy .
Indeed , I share this positive view : this change in the Commission 's approach should be noted .
In fact , in this report , the Commission explains that it is putting the concerns of consumers at the centre of its activities in relation to competition , and that it considers that the main objective of competition policy is the optimisation of the wellbeing of consumers .
I welcome this .
Can it be that the Commission is finally acting fully in accordance with Article 12 of the Treaty of Lisbon , which stipulates that consumer protection must be taken into consideration in the definition and implementation of the other policies of the Union ?
I also encourage the Commission to continue to engage in the regular dialogue which it has decided to create between its services , consumers and the associations which represent them .
In this respect , it is a good thing that , in 2008 , a unit was created to deal with consumer relations within the DirectorateGeneral for Competition .
We are now requesting a full report on the activities of this unit so that we may have a better idea of how useful it is .
in writing . - I , together with my group , the Greens / EFA , voted in favour of the in ' t Veld report on the annual Report on Competition Policy ( 2008 ) because it provides an opportunity for Parliament to set out its priorities and its assessment of the way the Commission conducts its competition policy .
I am glad that , in line with the vote in the ECON Committee , the in ' t Veld report was adopted ( as expected ) by a large majority ( Greens in favour , as in the case of major political groups ) .
Europe , hit by the economic crisis , was able to react quickly and mitigate the effects of the crisis thanks to its common currency , strong internal market and stable system of social protection .
This does not mean there are now no perceptible repercussions , but signs of an improvement in the situation are visible .
Unfortunately , consumers are still struggling with problems relating to making use of the benefits of competition .
Their rights must be protected , but they need to be more aware and have greater knowledge .
The proper functioning and competitiveness of the European market means the consumer is able to make use of the system of competition by choosing products , services and lower prices .
Insufficient competition is , however , something which is currently being seen , especially in the pharmaceutical and telecommunications sectors .
Absence of competition is directly detrimental to consumers , as it also is to the economy .
There is also a need for monitoring of competitive behaviours in EU fuel markets .
Penalties should be applied for breaking the law on the protection of competition which are commensurate to the violation , and stronger deterrents should be made use of in the case of repeated violations of the law .
Above all , however , the crisis has shown up the weakness of the European economy and has indicated those areas which should be strengthened .
All strategies of economic policy must still be subject to democratic control , and must be realised with care for the common good and with respect for the rights of the citizens of Europe .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
An effectively working internal market is essential for the creation of a stable and innovative economic environment .
However , the internal market cannot function effectively without correctly transposed , applied and enforced Community rules .
Unfortunately , the number of infringement proceedings remains too high in the Member States .
Such a situation distorts the internal market and leaves customers without adequate protection .
The European Parliament in 2008 called on the Commission to provide more detailed information on the directives which have not been implemented in the Member States , and I very much hope that the Commission will be able to present such information in the nearest future .
In 1997 , the Commission published the work of the first Internal Market Scoreboard. which focused on the implementation of the rules of the internal market by the Member States , given that substantial delays were preventing members of the public and businesses from making the most of the internal market .
Through the assessment and publication of developments regarding implementation , the Evaluation Panel has contributed to a reduction in the level of non-implementation of directives by the Member States .
I voted in favour of the present report as I consider it imperative that the Member States incorporate internal market legislation into their national legislation in a timely way , because the internal market can only operate properly if EU regulations relating to its operation are correctly implemented and applied , and if checks on compliance are made .
Notwithstanding the fact that the Member States have achieved the highest standards in terms of time taken to incorporate internal market regulations into national legislation , I do not believe the data provided by the most recent Internal Market Scoreboard to be satisfactory .
The creation of a stable and innovative internal market which caters for the needs of consumers and in which firms can maximise the creation of new jobs cannot coexist with systematic delays in the implementation of Community legislation and failure to apply directives .
It is individuals and business that suffer most from the delay in implementation of policies relating to the internal market through the costs that result from reduced choice , less competition and less open markets .
With this in mind , I believe it is important for Parliament to apply pressure regarding the application of internal market regulations .
It was the Member States who set the implementation periods for these directives .
They must at least be required to respect the objectives which they themselves set .
This is a fundamental goal for an internal market in a period of economic crisis .
Having improved the directive transposition deficit , which stands at 1 % , it remains vital to focus on improving the actual implementation of internal market legislation in national legal systems .
The Commission , Parliament and the Member States must make greater efforts in this regard and collaborate with one another .
For its part , the Commission should do more to support the Member States throughout the transposition period , by means of dialogue and the exchange of information to resolve problems before the end of the deadline for transposition .
It should also organise an annual internal market forum and look into new ways to eliminate the barriers remaining to completing the internal market , including the simplification of legislation .
We Members of the European Parliament , as representatives of citizens , must exploit any possible opportunity to inform them of European legislation , by promoting studies , workshops , conventions and hearings .
National parliaments , on the other hand , must be closely involved in European legislative processes to be aware of proposed measures in time , and improve cooperation between national , regional and local authorities .
In this respect , the Treaty of Lisbon gives elected assemblies a more incisive role that they must make the most of .
For all the above reasons , which are clearly explained in the report , I voted in favour .
After the most recent publication ( March 2010 ) of results by the Internal Market Scoreboard , it has been shown that the percentage of directives on the internal market which have not been incorporated into national legislation is 0.7 % , a lower result than that presented in July 2009 which was , as noted by the rapporteur , 1.0 % .
The timely and appropriate implementation of Community legislation is vital to a greater integration of the internal market in view of its direct impact on legal certainty and the confidence of the European public .
For this reason , Member States must adopt a responsible attitude in the application of this legislation so that in future , there will not be a lack of implementation , but rather greater legal certainty and the opportunity for the public to benefit from equitable conditions within the internal market .
The internal market cannot function properly if the Community rules relating to its operation are not properly transposed and implemented and compliance with them is not verified .
It is therefore imperative that Member States transpose internal market legislation into national law in a timely manner .
There are 22 directives whose deadline for transposition expired more than two years ago .
Furthermore , 6 % of the directives were not transposed by all Member States , meaning that 100 directives on the internal market were not as effective as they could have been within the EU .
The Member States and the Commission must act decisively in response to this situation .
I endorse the view that the Commission should publish the directives that were not implemented in each Member State on its website , so that this situation becomes public knowledge .
It appears that the number of cases of infringement is still too high ; some Member States have a number of cases well above the EU average of 47 .
The Member States are also called on to ensure the operation of cross-border networks of electronic information systems created by the Commission .
Contrary to what the report claims , it is clear today that the process of liberalising markets and privatising public services , which is still ongoing , has not brought any appreciable gains in terms of prices , quality of service or reduction in public spending .
On the contrary , consumer protection organisations and users of public services report increases in prices , reductions in service quality and increases in the cost of service provision .
Liberalisation has , in fact , contributed to the loss of jobs and to the creation of private monopolies , jeopardising the rights of workers , users of public services and consumers , as has clearly happened in telecommunications , transport , electricity and with post offices .
This situation has , for its part , served to worsen the economic and social crisis .
For these reasons , persisting with such a policy is arguing for a continued worsening of the socio-economic situation for millions of people .
It means arguing for squandering public services , which are a public resource , as well as transferring them to private groups .
It means arguing for insecurity , unemployment and poverty .
It means arguing for widening the gap between the richest and poorest .
It means arguing for a more unjust society .
That is why we have not voted in favour .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we voted against Mrs Thun Und Hohenstein 's report .
This Parliament is fixated on the number of transposed directives , the famous Internal Market Scoreboard .
Nobody ever questions the intrinsic quality of this legislation , or even the real need for or relevance of the 90 000 pages of text which represent what you call the ' acquis communautaire ' , or of the approximately 1 700 directives concerning the internal market .
No more so , by the way , than they are concerned about finding out whether the objectives headlined when these texts were adopted have been achieved , whether the impact analyses have proved accurate , and whether the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality have been respected .
All the shortcomings are said to be the responsibility of the Member States , which nonetheless have less and less room for manoeuvre in adapting these documents to national circumstances , given that the most minute detail is fixed , while the treaties indicate an obligation to produce results but not resources .
A little selfanalysis and selfcriticism would do the European institutions a power of good .
The Internal Market Scoreboard is a very important tool which gives information on the state of transposition of European legislation by the Member States .
Despite their obligations , Member States are delaying transposition and are also carrying out transposition incorrectly .
The scoreboard shows that Member States are managing increasingly well with the implementation of legislation , although a considerable number of them are still outside the target set .
We need a clear obligation for Member States to improve these indicators .
Recently , we have said a lot in the European Parliament about the necessity of strengthening the internal market .
The internal market will not , however , function properly if the legislation which is the foundation of a correctly functioning internal market is not transposed properly and on time .
The internal market must also gain the support of our citizens .
Therefore , I endorse the rapporteur 's suggestion to hold an annual internal market forum , as well as the suggestion of an ' internal market test ' , which is a suggestion to check legislation from the point of view of the four freedoms of the internal market : free flow of capital , goods , services and people .
in writing . - The Internal Market Scoreboard provides a useful overview of the application of Community rules in areas of vital importance to European consumers and businesses .
Unfortunately , Scotland does not as yet feature as an independent country on the scoreboard .
I consider it essential that the Scottish parliament gains full powers in those areas currently reserved to London ; when that happens , I am confident that Scotland will feature amongst the Member States implementing measures for the benefit of consumers and businesses .
in writing . - I fully support the concept of the Internal Market Scoreboard as a tool for measuring the success of the single market .
This is an essential tool for communicating how Member States treat European law .
It also shows that the burden of over-regulation , which often tarnishes the image of the EU , is often not the fault of any EU institution but of the Member State itself .
There is a lesson to be learned here and greater transparency is needed in future .
Mr President , an effectively working internal market is reliant on satisfied consumers who have confidence in it .
European consumers are vitally important as we move from recession into growth .
The reports we have adopted raise important issues regarding how to improve consumer protection and the functioning of the internal market , which I supported during the Committee 's deliberations and in today 's vote .
I will mention three of these .
Firstly , the Internal Market Scoreboard is a welcome tool .
Its five main indicators are surely crucial in evaluating how the internal market is functioning generally and from the point of view of consumers .
I think we should support the idea that in future , the scoreboard should incorporate information on the implementation of internal market legislation in Member States that are still found wanting .
We need to dispense with the ' cherry picking ' mentality .
Secondly , I am surprised at the very negative attitude of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament to the proposed internal market test .
This is probably due to a mistaken conclusion , for the test could also act to promote specifically social and environmental objectives .
That is surely what the entire integration process is about : the economy and a viable internal market are made to serve more general goals .
History has shown the wisdom of the Schuman Declaration .
Thirdly , I would like to express my support for the development of remedies to ensure the legal protection of consumers .
In Finland , our system for the outofcourt settlement of consumer disputes and the consumer ombudsman institution work very well .
The Commission needs to conduct an intensive dialogue with the Member State authorities to ensure the spread of good practices .
Nevertheless , we need to remember that if consumer protection and the internal market are to be strengthened , aware and active consumers are more important than official monitoring and legal protection .
A healthy internal market is crucial if there is to be sound competition and the economic development that comes with it .
However , if this is to become a reality , Community directives need to be adopted by all Member States in the same way , without exceptions .
The Internal Market Scoreboard and the Consumer Panel have a crucial role in improving the functioning of the internal market .
Although we are on the right track , we are still a long way from achieving all the objectives outlined for a more efficient internal market .
Everyone therefore needs to make an effort , including national parliaments , which have a very important and decisive role .
in writing . - I finally decided to vote against the report because we failed in eliminating Article 10 from the text .
The maintenance of this article is crucial because it calls for establishing systematic ' internal market tests ' in order to verify ex ante whether EU legislative proposals comply with all internal market rules .
As a result of a problem with the voting machine , my intended vote was not recorded .
I therefore declare that I voted in favour of all the points on which voting took place in the present session .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Question Hour with the President of the Commission
The next item is the Question Hour with the President of the Commission .
Mr President , President Barroso , if my group and most of those present here have worked relentlessly for years in the interests of the Treaty of Lisbon , and if it has come into force - and been in force for more than three months now - it was all done so that Europe could have a policy worthy of the name on the international stage .
Are we on the right track in this respect ?
I put this question to you , Mr President .
How can we ensure that the voices of 500 million Europeans are heard loud and clear ?
They have been asking for this for years and it is high time for Europe to assert its ideals and its values at the highest level .
Finally , the External Action Service provided for by the Treaty of Lisbon should come into being in the coming weeks and months , and this Parliament intends to be closely involved in its creation .
As the budgetary authority with the same rights as the Council , the European Parliament will , in any case , have joint decision-making power concerning both the modification of the Staff Regulations of the officials concerned and the financial regulation .
Mr President , my group attaches particular importance to the requirement that this European External Action Service should have full political and budgetary responsibility .
I would welcome your opinion on this matter .

Mr Daul , as you know , the creation of the European External Action Service is a very important innovation in the Treaty of Lisbon .
This service will play an essential role in supporting the High Representative in her task of ensuring the consistency of our Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) .
The aim is to strengthen the Union by allowing the Member States to have a greater involvement and increasingly to pool their currently separate efforts in relation to the CFSP .
It is therefore not a question of placing European powers in an intergovernmental framework , quite the contrary .
As you know , the Commission must consent to the Council 's decision on the creation of the service .
We are holding a special meeting of the College on this issue on Thursday .
For my part , I am in favour of a strong service , of a real European service that will represent an instrument of strategic coordination and a valuable interface between the Member States and the European institutions in the field of external policy .
To fulfil its mission , the service has to find its rightful place in the architecture of the European Union , under the leadership of the High Representative who , as VicePresident of the Commission , is fully accountable to this Parliament and who is responsible for coordinating the other aspects of the Union 's external action within the Commission .

Mr President , Mr Barroso , the euro crisis was triggered by incorrect figures provided by Greece .
I would like to ask you whether you can confirm that neither you nor the Commission departments were at any time already aware of the actual figures before the Greek Government submitted the most recent figures concerning its budgetary deficit .
Secondly , can you confirm that the Director General of Eurostat , Mr Rademacher , expressed serious doubts about the data coming from Athens as long ago as 2004 and 2005 ?
What have you done to help Eurostat collect the data ?
Thirdly , is it true that the Eurostat auditors informed you that they had serious doubts about the data provided by Athens ?
President of the Commission . - Mr Schulz , it is precisely because we had doubts regarding the Greek figures - Commissioner Almunia handled this file over the last five years with great competence , great impartiality and great objectivity - that we not only raised the point several times with the Greek authorities , but we did in fact put forward a regulation in the Council to propose that Eurostat be given audit powers .
Unfortunately , this was rejected by the Member States .
They did not want to give Eurostat and the European Commission more powers to examine in depth the Greek national accounts .
I am very pleased to tell you that the first decision of the new Commission was to put that regulation forward again , and my information is that at least some of the countries that voted against that regulation have already told me that they will vote this time for more transparency .
I understand .
Mr Almunia was the competent Commissioner .
However , I was asking about interventions on your part , so could you just tell us once again what you did yourself ?
Have I understood you correctly , Mr Barroso , that the blame for the Greek crisis lies with the Member States , because they refused to follow your proposals ?
Could you please tell us which Heads of Government of which Member States we are talking about ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , if you ask me about blame - I do not use that word - it lies first of all with the Greek authorities who did not respect the Stability and Growth Pact .
It is because of this that we have a huge problem .
Regarding the Commission , Commissioner Almunia , with my full support and the support of the College , performed his job in an exceptionally competent way .
This issue of the Greek accounts was addressed several times in euro area meetings .
Regarding the list of Member States that voted against this matter , I cannot tell you off the top of my head exactly which , but I know , for instance , that Germany voted against and it was also Germany that told me they are going to vote in favour this time .
Mr President , there exists today a broad consensus on the need for strong economic governance within the European Union .
That in itself is an enormous change from recent years .
Last Sunday , Mr Schäuble said that , in this context , he was in favour of a European Monetary Fund and also of other proposals and options , such as the creation of a European debt agency , Eurobonds and even a European rating agency .
According to a Commission spokesperson , Mr Barroso , things are currently moving quickly .
I have three very specific questions . First , is it true that the Commission is currently working on a proposal to create this European Monetary Fund ?
Secondly , is it true , as Mrs Merkel says - and I have my doubts about this - that this requires modification to the treaty ?
Thirdly , would you also agree that this fund could be nothing other than a first step towards a real European treasury , which we need with economic and monetary union ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , regarding the proposal to have an EMF , this idea was put forward by the German Finance Minister without giving any details of such an institution .
It seems , however , an interesting contribution to the current debate about the euro area .
The EMF is , however , a longer term proposal which may well require a change in the treaty .
What we are working on is preparing some initiatives on reinforcing economic policy coordination and country surveillance .
We cannot at this stage tell you what exactly will be the format of this .
Of course , generally speaking , as you said , we support everything that moves towards increased economic governance , but we have to see the exact details and make the proposal at the right time .
That said , the question of the EMF could not solve the urgent issue of Greece .
It is a separate issue that requires more analysis , and that is for a longer term .
I would first like to thank the President of the Commission for his answer .
I agree with him when he says that the fund as such cannot solve all of the problems straight away .
This is why I am asking that the various options be put on the table during the Commission 's deliberations .
There is the European Monetary Fund , which is a longerterm project ; there are the Eurobonds , another idea which may of course help with the Greek problem ; there is the rating agency from the President of the Eurogroup , which is absolutely essential if we are not to be forever dependent on foreign rating agencies ; and then there is the idea of a European debt agency .
My request then is that we pool all of these ideas in order to arrive at one coherent idea that comes from the Commission rather than from one or other of the Member States .
The reason we do not wish to rush is precisely to avoid what is currently happening - where everyone is proposing a different idea , where sometimes there are two different ideas within the same government .
We want to prepare ourselves and , as Commissioner Rehn has already stated publicly , we are in the process of preparing a communication on strengthened economic policy coordination and monitoring by country at the euro area level and possibly even at a general European Union level .
This is what we are in the process of preparing and we are unable to present a new proposal every day .
We are working objectively and responsibly on this issue and in this way , the best results can be achieved .
In view of the fact that there is currently no real market in the European Union and no need for the cultivation of genetically modified starch potatoes - there are alternatives available for this - I would like to ask you why you have exerted so much pressure to get the genetically modified potato Amflora approved in a very brief and rapid procedure .
As there is no need for this , I would like an explanation as to why you encouraged the new Commissioner for Health to simply ignore the concerns of the World Health Organisation with regard to the feeding trials and why you did not wait until the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) had submitted the new guidelines that it has produced precisely for the purpose of assessing the overall risks to biodiversity and the biosphere posed by GMOs , and why , en passant , you also increased the contamination limit for feed and food potatoes to 0.9 % .
I consider this to be a risky strategy that our citizens will not find at all acceptable .
I , too , would like to thank our fellow Members .
We have seen your protest .
Thank you very much .
President of the Commission . - The Commission decided unanimously to move ahead with the authorisation of this GMO in accordance with the provisions of European law .
We have an institutional setting that we have to respect and we had to take a position : ' yes ' or ' no ' .
A considerable period of time has elapsed since their application was lodged and this is because this authorisation was subject to intense scrutiny by the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) , our independent agency in terms of food security .
We wanted all concerns regarding the possible presence of an antibiotic resistance marker gene to be thoroughly assessed .
After an extensive and complete review of these pending files , it was clear that there were no new scientific issues that merited further assessments , based on the opinion of our competent agency - that is independent from the Commission .
Therefore , we believe that all scientific issues have been fully addressed .
In fact , I was expecting a word of congratulations from you ...
( Protests )
... because I have announced that the Commission has the intention to propose to give Member States the choice as to whether or not they want to cultivate GMOs .
This is , I think , a reasonable position considering that there are deep differences among our Member States - some very much in favour , and some very much against .

Firstly , Mr Barroso , I have still not received an answer to the question about the need for these genetically-modified potatoes , which are simply intended to provide industrial starch .
There are alternatives available , so why take the risk ?
Secondly , there is the contamination limit .
Why suddenly change it to 0.9 % ?
Up to now , we have talked about the detection limit in this regard , and for feed and food in particular , and in the case of an antibiotic-resistant potato , I consider that to be a high-risk approach .
You have not said anything about this .
I would also like to know whether , in the foreseeable future , you plan to issue further approvals without the availability of the guidelines and recommendations of the EFSA - for imported rice or maize , for example .
( Applause )
President of the Commission . - Seeing the enthusiasm of your group - and I want to congratulate you on that manifestation - you have a strong position against any GMO .
That is clear .
You have that right .
I do not have any position in favour or against .
It depends on the opinion that is given to me by experts of the EFSA .
I do not have any prejudice in favour or against GMOs .
The Commission has a position that is to follow in those matters .
I do not see the Commission having ideological discussions about each GMO and what it should do regarding each one .
The Commission takes a position based on the independent assessment given to us , not because a GMO is necessary , but if there is no evidence that it poses a risk to public health or the environment , we feel obliged to accept it , also in accordance with the obligations we have under the WTO , if there is nothing that prevents us - scientifically - from doing so .
( Protests )
That said , we respect very much the subsidiarity principle in the European Union .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I would like to assure you that I will be introducing a simpler topic than genetically modified organisms .
In my opinion , it is right and proper for the current economic crisis to be discussed in the European Parliament , and I am quite sure that citizens of the European Union and the Member States are definitely far more interested in employment and work than in genetically modified potatoes .
On the one hand , speakers standing up in this Chamber defend the existence of a large , central , strong government , and on the other hand - and I speak here as a European conservative - we believe that strong governments do not create job opportunities .
It is companies that create job opportunities .
I would like to ask you three specific questions : firstly , what level of independence does the European Commission leave to the individual Member States for solving economic problems ?
Secondly , can you promise a significant reduction in European legislation , which is slowing down economic growth considerably ?
Thirdly , do you agree with us that less regulation , less centralised control and less harmonisation is currently the best approach to solving the economic problems of the European Union ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , we fully respect the diversity of our Member States .
That is why we make that point very clearly in the EU 2020 strategy and why we address this issue of diversity very precisely with instruments like the social and economic cohesion policies .
The fact is that our Member States are not all the same .
At the same time , we need - as was said earlier - stronger economic governance , because failing to coordinate in the euro area and in the European Union as a whole makes no sense .
If the Member States tackle these policies on their own , they will certainly not have the leverage for discussions on an equal footing on , for instance , the great challenges we now have globally with the United States or with China .
So we need to have a common approach but then , at the same time , to design specific measures for different Member States .
Regarding the issue of reducing the administrative burden , that has been a very important point in my programme .
We believe we should continue considering pragmatically where some European legislation is needed and avoid legislation when it is simply not needed .
Mr Barroso , last week you presented your proposal for an economic strategy .
It contains important objectives .
The Council has now imposed an austerity programme on Greece , which , in my opinion , makes the achievement of these goals impossible , with one State having 3 % of the gross domestic product of the EU .
However , you continue to persist with the failed Stability and Growth Pact .
At the same time , several Member States are calling for a European monetary fund or even economic governance .
My questions are as follows . Are you going to review your EU 2020 proposal again in order to integrate the idea of the monetary fund and economic governance so as to initiate a move away from tax and wage dumping and from the prevailing competitive ideology ?
Are you going to take measures immediately , together with the Member States , to prohibit speculation against the euro by the very banks that have just been bailed out using taxpayers ' money ?
President of the Commission . - Regarding the situation of Greece , we believe that Greece has taken the necessary steps to reduce the government deficit this year .
These measures show the determination of the Greek Government to tackle their structural problems .
At the same time , we are doing what is required to secure the financial stability of the euro area as a whole .
The Commission has been actively working with euro area Member States to design a mechanism which Greece could use in case of need .
Such a mechanism would conform with the current Lisbon Treaty , in particular , with the ' no bail-out ' clause .
It would include stringent conditionality .
The Commission is ready to propose a European framework for coordinated assistance which would require the support of euro area Member States .
This is what I can tell you about Greece and about our response for euro area stability .
Regarding the EU 2020 proposals , we do not see any need to change them .
We have put those proposals forward .
They are now going to be discussed by the European Council and Parliament , and we hope this will be a very fruitful discussion .
I am not entirely satisfied .
The issue is that taxpayers ' money is being used to speculate against the Greek State .
Some of this taxpayers ' money comes from German banks and it has also been lent out by German banks .
Yet , while we are repeatedly told that some sort of measures will be taken , nothing actually happens .
I am therefore rather disappointed that so little has been done to simply prohibit certain things in the EU so as to put a stop to such speculation once and for all and allow us to genuinely concentrate on growth and employment .
President of the Commission . - As regards speculation , let us be clear that the current problems in Greece were not caused by speculation .
They were mainly caused by overspending and not respecting the European framework in terms of the Stability and Growth Pact , namely the excessive debt , but it may happen afterwards that speculators act against the sovereign debt of that country .
This also shows the importance of a fundamental reform in the derivatives market and the relevance of the action already undertaken by the Commission .
On 20 October 2009 , the Commission began a programme of action in favour of efficient , solid derivative markets .
The legislative proposals that Commissioner Barnier will present before the summer , and also those concerning the market abuse directive that Commissioner Barnier will present before the end of the year , will increase market transparency and limit risks .
Beyond this systemic response , a new ad hoc reflection is needed on credit default swaps regarding sovereign debt , and the problem of ' naked ' practices needs particular attention in this context .
It is not justified to buy insurance and buy unseen interventions on a risk on a purely speculative basis .
In the short term , we must achieve the necessary coordination to ensure that Member States act in a coordinated fashion , but most particularly for naked practices .
In this context , the Commission will examine closely the relevance of banning purely speculative naked sales of credit default swaps for sovereign debt .
At the same time , we will push for international coordination .
Because these markets are opaque , we are going to bring this issue to the G20 and we also have to raise some of these issues in our bilateral contacts , particularly with the United States .
Mr President , how fortunate that you anticipated my question .
First of all , allow me , as a Greek MEP , to tell you that Greece will make it .
The testing times we are experiencing at present , and for which we are accountable , is a very good test of resistance and discipline for Greece .
I was delighted that you referred to the G20 as a group with which you will raise the question of swaps .
Apart from its own errors , Greece was hard hit by market speculation .
Do you intend , and I should like you to raise this at the G20 , to introduce initiatives to adopt clear rules governing open , naked sales and credit default swaps ?
President of the Commission . - As I said earlier , the basic problem regarding Greece - and it is important to say this - comes from excessive debt .
It is true that probably there were also speculative attacks , but that is because they saw an opportunity there .
Now we have to support Greece , and Greece has now announced very important measures .
We fully support those measures .
At the same time , we have to look to the broader issue .
I already said that we will examine closely the relevance of banning purely speculative ' naked ' sales on credit default swaps on sovereign debt .
The question of transparency between regulators - particularly on access to information on these practices - should also be raised in the G20 and in other fora and bilaterally .
Last Friday , Commissioner Barnier organised a meeting in Brussels with the national regulators precisely to find out what we know about the action of some of these speculators against sovereign debt .
We need to proceed with an in-depth analysis of credit default swaps markets so as to determine better how these markets function and if they are the subject of questionable practices .
If needed , the Commission will also use its competition powers in that matter .
Mr President , is there a timetable for all this , for the mechanism to combat speculation ?
Tell us if there is some sort of timetable so that I know , when we go out to borrow on the international market , if we will have some support from this mechanism .
President of the Commission . - I already said this , but I can repeat it .
Commissioner Barnier will present some legislative proposals regarding the directive on derivatives before the summer and will also present a legislative proposal before the end of the year concerning the market abuse directive .
We believe these proposals will increase market transparency and limit the risks .
We intend to put the issue of credit default swaps to the G20 in June .
( NL ) Mr President , Commission President Barroso , openness and transparency are fundamental values in any self-respecting democracy .
If citizens have no means of monitoring expenditure by administrators , an atmosphere of greed and self-enrichment can result .
We saw an example of this last year in the United Kingdom .
According to reports in the Dutch press , President Barroso declared a sum of EUR 730 000 for 2009 .
This is not only a ridiculously large amount but also another remarkable feat : managing to declare EUR 2 000 every day .
Hats off to President Barroso .
On a more serious note , democratic scrutiny of these declarations is , of course , pitiful .
One internal audit and a few pre-approved people can give their seal of approval .
I insist that this Commission , and President Barroso in particular , abandon this conspiracy of silence and publish their declarations openly and transparently on the Internet for all European citizens to see .
I should appreciate your response to this .
President of the Commission . - I am somewhat surprised by this kind of comment .
In fact , the so-called representation expenses are expenses incurred in the service of the European Union , namely travel by myself and the other members of the Commission .
In fact , if you compare these amounts with what is spent by governments or Heads of State or Government , you will find that these amounts are very small in comparison .
The budget for the College is fixed annually by the budgetary authority .
You are part of that , and this budget has remained the same for five years , only adapted for inflation .
Regarding this expenditure , we believe that it is reasonable and proportionate to the public good it tries to serve .
We are , of course , using full transparency .
We give the budgetary authority and the Court of Auditors all the information they request from us .
( NL ) President Barroso claims that Parliament has access to the declarations , but of course that is nonsense .
Everything takes place behind closed doors here ; everything is swept under the carpet .
If President Barroso genuinely wants to be accountable , he will simply publish these receipts ; and if he does not want to , he should just be honest and say so .
President Barroso , if you have simply followed all the rules , I am at a loss to understand your failure to publish your receipts on the Internet , unless you are afraid of how the public will react .
Just make them public .
President of the Commission . - In a system of law , we respect the rule of law , and to analyse the intentions of people is , at the least , unfair .
You cannot attribute to me or to the Commission any intention behind respecting the rule of law .
Once again , I think we have to make a distinction between the obligations of the European Commission - or any public body - regarding the rule of law , and giving in to demagogic attacks on the European institutions .
The European Commission , the European Parliament and the European institutions in general have the highest standards in terms of transparency .
So I do not accept this kind of easy criticism that is populist and demagogical .
We have completed the first round of questions , which were free questions on a variety of subjects .
Now we will concentrate on the subject of implementation of the new treaty and fundamental rights .
( SV ) Mr President , I hope that I am not departing from the questions to be put now .
I am absolutely convinced that Mr Barroso and I agree that respect for civil liberties and human rights is the most important thing within the EU and in contacts between the EU and other countries .
The fact is that the EU provides aid to Eritrea , and a total of EUR 122 million has been budgeted for Eritrea for the period 2009-2013 .
I am not asking the President of the Commission to know what these funds were used for , but it would be worthwhile hearing Mr Barroso 's attitude to the state of Eritrea .
Very often , when there is talk of countries under totalitarian rule , there is no mention of Eritrea ; instead , a number of other countries are mentioned .
It might therefore be useful to hear Mr Barroso 's view on the state of Eritrea in particular .
President of the Commission . - Thank you for recognising that the Commission defends fundamental rights .
Of course we defend them , not only in the European Union , but also in our external relations .
This does not mean that we can only have relations with countries that respect fundamental rights .
Unfortunately , there are many countries in the world that do not respect fundamental rights and we have to keep relations with those countries .
The case of Eritrea raises concerns in terms of respect for fundamental rights in that country and also because of the extremely difficult situation in which that state exists .
According to some commentators , it can be considered a failed state - a state where there is no rule of law , because of civilian conflict and widespread violence .
There are many areas of that country where even the authorities cannot exercise legitimate democratic power .
We are , in fact , following the situation very closely in all countries that can pose a problem for the respect of fundamental rights .
( PL ) In the context of today 's debate , I would like to draw attention to the question of scanners at European airports .
One of the most obvious roles of European policy is to protect the life , health and fundamental freedoms of European Union citizens .
Therefore , it must not be the case that , in exchange for an illusory sense of security , we so easily relinquish respect for dignity , the right to privacy and protection of the personal data of the Community 's residents .
I have the impression that the situation with scanners is very similar to the situation we had during the swine flu epidemic .
Acting under pressure , we invested huge sums in vaccines , which , as we now know , was irrational and unjustified .
In my opinion , scanners are a rather ineffective medicine , for which attempts are being made to find a suitable disease .
Mr Barroso , I would like to hear clearly what your opinion is on this question .
Are you for or against the scanners ?
President of the Commission . - I will be in favour of it if Member States agree , because I think it should be possible to harmonise the security and safety rules at our airports .
What happens now is that some of our Member States are introducing body scanners at their airports .
Others are not .
As you know , the Commission presented a proposal for body scanners some time ago that was refused .
This does , of course , raise some concerns but we should try to find , if possible , a harmonised position regarding the utilisation of any security device at European airports .
If not , we will have a kind of discrimination in the evaluation of security at our airports .
The treaty respects the rights of local authorities and regions across Europe , and this will be an important factor when you start discussions on the future of cohesion policy , for example .
I wonder if you could assure us that when you start those discussions - for example , on the fifth Cohesion Report - that you will have those discussions with local authorities and regions on the future of cohesion policy - and , of course , with this Parliament .
President of the Commission . - This is not a question of fundamental rights , but of course we will discuss these issues with local and regional authorities .
You know how important social and economic and territorial cohesion is for us .
This is now recognised also by the Lisbon Treaty as one of the goals of the European Union .
In the new 2020 strategy that I presented some time ago , we made it clear that cohesion will remain a central feature of our proposals , and we want cohesion to be considered all the time in future policies .
This is part of our dialogue with the regional and policy authorities .
I also mentioned the need to consult the Committee of the Regions , for instance , in the document I have just referred to .
I would like to raise a case about fundamental rights .
I recently visited Cairneyhill Primary School near Dunfermline in Scotland and I was approached by a boy called Douglas , who wanted to raise the case of an Eritrean girl called Rima Andmariam .
This relates to what the first speaker was saying about Eritrea .
Rima 's family was persecuted and murdered in Eritrea for being Christian .
The persecution of Christians in Eritrea is a subject I know you are familiar with .
Rima managed to escape to Italy and then to Glasgow in Scotland where Alison and Robert Swinfin took her in and cared for her and looked after her as their own daughter .
Rima is now 17 .
She is facing deportation back to Italy where she first sought asylum and we are doing all that we can to raise Rima 's case to appeal to all those that can help her .
She needs to remain in the loving care of Alison and Robert .
Her case is being raised by civil society , human rights organisations and churches across Scotland .
It was even mentioned on ' Thought for the Day ' on Radio Scotland yesterday .
What can the Commission do to protect Rima 's fundamental rights ?
President of the Commission . - I am sorry , but I do not know about this specific case in Scotland .
I would like to make a general point .
In these political debates , you cannot expect the President of the Commission , even if he is a relatively hardworking person , to know about all the cases - which are extremely sensitive and extremely serious - that happen in Europe .
Of course , I can assure you of our concern and express our solidarity to any person who sees his or her human rights violated but , as regards that specific case , I do not have enough information here .
However , I will be more than happy to react in writing to the question that you have just put .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , my political group .
On 5 March , the President of the Italian Republic , Giorgio Napolitano , signed an interpretative decree-law , also known as the ' save list ' decree-law .
In fact , this decree allows the rules of the game to be changed after the electoral campaign has started .
On the website of the Quirinal Palace , Giorgio Napolitano himself states that , unlike the draft decree proposed to him by the government in a tense meeting on Thursday evening , in his view , the text subsequently drafted by the Ministry of the Interior and the Prime Minister did not present obvious defects of an unconstitutional nature .
Article 87 ( 5 ) of the Italian Constitution lays down that the President of the Italian Republic shall promulgate laws and issue decrees with the force of law , and regulations .
The President of the Republic absolutely cannot participate in the drafting of procedures and of decree-laws .
The President of the Republic 's predecessor , Carlo Azeglio Ciampi , considers it to be an aberrant distortion of our democratic system .
It is clear that the government is doing what the constitution prohibits .
That decree , Mr President , has changed the rules of the game for an electoral competition that has already begun and allows those who have broken the law to stand , having been readmitted to the electoral competition .
I wonder why Parliament is always ready to take a stand against countries that violate laws but does not acknowledge that there is a country among the 27 Member States that is violating laws .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mrs Alfano , once again , please do not ask me to discuss domestic policy issues .
The Commission has responsibilities for fundamental rights when European law is being implemented , either by the European institutions or by the Member States .
It would appear that in the case that you have mentioned , it is not the application of European Union law that is in question .
From what I have understood from your speech , this is a typical problem concerning internal political debate , with perhaps a dimension relating to the law or the rule of law , but the European Commission has no business interfering in the conflicts between the various political forces or political personalities in each of our Member States .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , the Charter of Fundamental Rights is , as yet , the only international document that prohibits discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation .
There is even a lot of pride in other parts of the world about the fact that Europe has achieved this and they would like the same thing for themselves .
Within the EU , we have the problem that three states , namely the United Kingdom , Poland and the Czech Republic , do not view the Charter of Fundamental Rights as part of their European legislative system .
I would be very interested to know what the Commission is doing - what you intend to do - to enforce the fundamental rights of lesbians , gay men , bisexuals and transgender people in all parts of the EU so as to make it clear that homophobia and discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation are no longer acceptable , not only in the area of employment , where , of course , we already have a directive , but in all areas , and so that people can live and choose their sexual relationships without fear .
President of the Commission . - There are two questions there .
I do not know if I can respond to them in one minute .
First of all , regarding discrimination on sexual orientation , you know that the previous Commission has proposed a directive against any form of discrimination , including that based on sexual orientation in areas outside of employment .
We are committed to ensuring that European legislation , and Member States ' implementation measures , fully respect the prohibition of discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation .
These principles of non-discrimination , as you know and said , are enshrined in the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Regarding Poland and the United Kingdom , the protocol clarifies the application of the charter in relation to the laws and initiative action of Poland and of the United Kingdom and its judiciability within these Member States .
It states , in particular , that the charter does not extend the competence of the EU Court of Justice or any court or tribunal of Poland or of the United Kingdom to find that the laws and regulations or initiative provisions , practices or actions by these Member States are inconsistent with the fundamental rights , freedoms and principles that it reaffirms .
So we still have to see how the European Court of Justice will interpret the protocol of those two Member States .

President Barroso , many countries around the world have finely worded bills of rights in their constitutions .
Rather fewer afford genuine protection to their citizens .
Do you agree that what matters is not the structure of protection of rights but rather how that protection is practised ?
In the United Kingdom , we face a general election within three months .
If elected , the Conservative Party will repeal the Human Rights Act and replace it with our own bill of rights .
This would mean that the European Convention on Human Rights would no longer be directly applicable in UK domestic law .
( Interjection from the floor : ' You can 't do that ! ' )
President Barroso , will you explain to what extent plans for the EU to sign the European Convention on Human Rights will take into account the differing positions of the Member States ?
My party will also seek a treaty change to guarantee that the Charter of Fundamental Rights does not affect the UK .
How will you ensure that the EU does not interfere with the UK 's right to opt out of those structures we do not wish to participate in ?
President of the Commission . - I partly already answered the question while answering the previous question .
The United Kingdom and other countries have a protocol regarding the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It has that right .
It was negotiated and we have an intergovernmental treaty that recognises this .
Having said this , I would , of course , prefer all Member States to accept the Charter of Fundamental Rights because I believe this Charter is a basic compass for all European Union policies .
We are also now ready to accede to the European Convention on Human Rights .
This will complete the European Union system of protection of fundamental rights .
Certainly , I very much respect the United Kingdom as a democracy and a country of the rule of law .
In fact , it is one of the countries that has , over the centuries , made a most important contribution to democracy .
That is why I really regret that the United Kingdom does not want to be with all its partners in the front line to have human rights not only at national level but also as a European project .
( PT ) Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , the rights of women and the right to live in dignity are fundamental human rights which must be promoted by the European Union .
For this reason , in view of the glaring inequalities which are persisting and even worsening , including the pay gap between men and women , poverty and insecure employment - all problems which predominantly affect women - it is not enough to publish a Charter of Women 's Rights which is essentially vague and imprecise , and which was not preceded by any discussion with women 's organisations or with Parliament itself .
Therefore , I ask whether the European Commission is prepared to prioritise such questions about the protection of women 's rights by means of concrete measures , particularly through the development of the new equality strategy which Parliament itself is preparing ; a report that I hope will be taken into account .
Last Friday , I presented with Commissioner Reding a Charter of Women 's Rights which reaffirms the commitment of the Commission to gender equality and also reaffirms our willingness to work on and make progress in this area .
In September , the Charter which we have now announced will be followed by a new strategy for gender equality .
This will provide us with a general and fairly comprehensive framework for action by the Commission regarding progress on equality between men and women in the areas which my fellow Member has just mentioned , from employment through to the other ways in which it is important to ensure and guarantee such equality .
The Charter has not appeared from nowhere .
The Charter has also appeared in commemoration of the 15 years since the Beijing Platform for Action , and it has come about after many consultations which I have had , especially with the group of Members of this House that is dedicated to the cause of women .
As a matter of fact , I am going to have another such meeting tomorrow morning .
Every year , I have had at least one meeting with the Members who have made this one of their most important priorities .
President Barroso , the question I would like to raise today concerns the financial situation in Greece .
Article 121 of the Lisbon Treaty is , for the first time , being used to push through structural reforms in that country .
The good people of Greece now find themselves stuck between a rock and a hard place as it becomes very clear that you are running the show in that country and not their elected government .
Does this mean , as you have sent in your officials to sort out the Greek financial situation , that you can now be addressed not only as President of the Commission but also as the Governor of Greece ?
If the measures your officials put in Greece do not work , do you have a plan B ?
If so , is it for Greece to leave the eurozone ?
Finally , do you intend to send your officials into other countries suffering financial hardship , for example , Portugal , Spain and Italy ?
Mr Bufton , our topic is implementation of the new treaty and respect of fundamental rights , so please keep to this topic .
President Barroso , are you prepared to give an answer ?
President of the Commission . - Mr President , I try always to be ready for the requests of Members of this Parliament .
Your question , distinguished Member of Parliament , comes from an assumption that is not correct , namely that it is because Greece is in the euro area that it is having some problems .
In fact , we have countries outside the euro area that have similar problems - in some cases , even more serious ones - both in the European Union and outside the European Union .
May I remind you , for instance , of the grave situation of Iceland , which is now asking to join the European Union precisely because Iceland hopes one day to join the euro as well .
So in fact , it is a complete mistake to think that the problems in Greece are a result of Greece being in the euro .
It is precisely because Greece has not respected the rules of the stability and growth pact that it is now facing difficulties .
It will , of course , have to pay some costs for the difficult adjustment it has to make .

( DE ) Mr Barroso , I would like to ask a question relating to the problem of data storage , as the German Federal Constitutional Court declared null and void the general storage of all telecommunications data at the beginning of this month .
The extent to which the unrestricted and uncontrolled storage of data or such access to data is compatible with the fundamental rights remains controversial .
Here in Parliament , we said a clear ' no ' to the SWIFT Agreement .
In my opinion , the EU 's Data Retention Directive probably also needs to be assessed in the light of the list of fundamental rights contained in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Do you , or does the Commission , intend to carry out any sort of review in this regard to see how the list of fundamental rights relates to data storage ?
President of the Commission . - The protection of personal data is a fundamental right explicitly recognised by Article 8 of the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Thanks to the Lisbon Treaty , we can now establish a comprehensive and coherent framework for the protection of personal data .
This is essential to protect the privacy of our citizens , to ensure a common approach to all data-processing activities within the European Union , and Parliament will , of course , be fully involved in the reform of the current legal framework since the codecision procedure also applies to the former third-pillar areas .
We must also ensure that the fundamental rights of European citizens continue to be protected when personal data leave the Union .
In this context , a European Union-United States agreement on personal data protection for persons could be important and we are working towards this .
Currently we are taking consultations to ensure transparency and collect the views of stakeholders and citizens .
The Commission plans to table a draft recommendation to authorise negotiations with the United States .
During the last decade , international cooperation on counterterrorism has been made more difficult because of human rights concerns , including in the practices of the US Administration .
We had hoped to put that behind us with the Obama Administration .
Sadly , we learn that unfair military commissions and indefinite detention without trial will carry on , even if Guantánamo is closed .
These departures from international and domestic legal norms make transatlantic data sharing projects even more problematic than they would otherwise be .
What representations is the Commission making to the US Administration in order to uphold fair trials , and warning that their absence will prejudice cooperation ?
I hope that nowadays , unlike in the past , there is no danger of the EU or its Member States colluding with gross breaches of fundamental rights in counterterrorism .
President of the Commission . - I am proud of the European Union for being the first , as far as I remember , to raise the issue with a United States President - a former President - of the need to respect fundamental rights and the rule of law , also when dealing with terrorism , namely regarding the issue of Guantánamo .
It was myself and the then President of the European Council , Mr Schüssel - then Prime Minister of Austria - who raised the issue .
That matter has always been an issue of dialogue with our American partners .
You may be sure that this is going to be very high on the agenda .
Regarding data protection , we believe that we should also work with the United States on attaining a framework .
I mentioned that in a previous response .
At the same time , we need to have a framework to combat terrorism together .
So the issue is to find the right way of responding to two important needs : the need for freedom and respect of data protection , but also the need for security , because without security , there is no possibility of freedom .
Mr President , one of the key issues in the new Lisbon Treaty is the increased role of the European Union in the world .
With this new strengthened foreign policy , we as a Union must be more active in the promotion and defence of human rights and fundamental rights in third countries .
What are you and Mrs Ashton planning to do to strengthen the EU 's policy on the promotion of democracy ?
Secondly , will you be supporting greater funding for the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights in the next budget ?
Human rights always seem to take second and third place in our dialogues .
I think we need to spend more time and money on the promotion of democracy and build a true European endowment for democracy .
I would like to hear your opinion on these issues .
President of the Commission . - The provisions of the treaty work to promote human rights throughout the world .
The European Union has adopted guidelines in human rights on issues ranging from the death penalty to the prevention of torture and support for human rights defenders .
Under these guidelines , the European Union implements a wide range of actions , ranging from public declarations or diplomatic démarches to trial observations .
I myself have been raising the issue of human rights in summits with Heads of State or Government from third countries .
Just recently , in the summit we had last week with Morocco , we made the point on fundamental rights .
The European Union has established some 40 human rights dialogues with partner countries around the world which serve as dedicated fora for detailed discussions on that issue .
Under the European instrument for democracy and human rights , the Commission programmes around EUR 150 million each year to support human rights NGOs across the globe .
We try to insert a human rights clause in every framework agreement which we conclude with a third country .
( MT ) One of the fundamental principles is freedom of movement .
In view of the ongoing issue between Libya and Switzerland , Mr President , hundreds of European Union citizens and workers are being prevented from entering Libya to work .
My question is : what is the European Commission doing to find a solution for this issue as a matter of urgency ?
And does the President of the European Commission deem it acceptable that one country , namely Switzerland , takes a unilateral decision which affects all Schengen zone citizens , in particular , workers who need to enter Libya in order to earn their daily living ?
President of the Commission . - We are very concerned with this case .
Commissioner Malmström has already said that the suspension by Libya of visas for citizens from the Schengen area is a disproportionate measure .
In addition , this situation is not coherent with the positive trend of relations between Libya and the European Union .
Intense diplomatic efforts are ongoing to find a solution to the crisis .
Already , one of the two Swiss citizens has left Libya .
This is a positive step .
The European Union 's Foreign and Justice Ministers discussed the issue on 22 February and 25 February respectively and supported the continuation of diplomatic efforts .
I believe that it is essential to keep dialogue open and make the effort of understanding each party 's positions with a view to finding a solution as soon as possible .
( SV ) Mr President , the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon has strengthened respect for basic human rights and trade union rights .
Rulings by the European Court of Justice in recent years , however , show that there is a need to strengthen the protection of fundamental trade union rights further .
In the Laval , Rüffert , Viking and Luxembourg cases , the Court of Justice has consistently downgraded the value of trade union rights .
These rulings have made it impossible to ensure the equal treatment of workers regardless of nationality .
It is no longer possible for trade unions to guarantee equal pay and equal working conditions for posted workers as for domestic workers .
I , too , therefore welcome the promise made by Mr Barroso in this Chamber before his re-election as President of the Commission .
My question now to Mr Barroso is as follows : when can we expect the Commission to table a legislative proposal to deal with the problems that have arisen subsequent to the rulings by the European Court of Justice ?
Can the President of the Commission provide us with this information already today ?
President of the Commission . - When these rulings were made public , we expressed our position very clearly .
I myself , and Commissioner Špidla , who was responsible for employment and social affairs , made it clear that , in our understanding , those rulings could not call into question fundamental rights such as the right to strike , the right to trade unions and the specificities of some labour relations mechanisms in our countries .
We are working on some proposals to address this issue .
I am afraid that I cannot give you a concrete date now as I was not expecting this question .
However , I can tell you that , as I have said before , with the election of this Commission - and the Commissioner responsible has also said this - this is an issue that we will address shortly .

( PL ) Mr Barroso , I would like to ask about fundamental rights and the new treaty , including external action .
According to research conducted by the Committee on Budgetary Control , 43 % of financial transactions were incorrect .
Will the new treaty and the new solutions in the context of our work to achieve respect for fundamental rights around the world help to bring about a radical reduction in the level of errors in preparation , execution and reporting of the budget ?
I should underline the fact that 43 % is the estimated level of financial errors .
President of the Commission . - As you know , we have been working over the years to reduce financial errors in the accounts of the European Union .
Many of those errors , as you know , are the responsibility of the Member States in the implementation of many European programmes .
I am encouraged by the recent opinion given by the European Court of Auditors recognising the progress made so far , but I believe that we should not be complacent in this area .
We are ready to work to reduce all kinds of errors in the implementation of the European Union budget .
( MT ) The treaty lays down principles for the protection of fundamental human rights , and those countries wishing to become European Union members must ensure compliance with the European Union 's requirements , as Malta did , and as did all the other countries who became members at the same time .
Concerning Turkey , does not the President think that there is much that Turkey still needs to do in the field of human rights ?
Moreover , what is the Commission doing to ensure that prior to having the economy in place in Turkey , and before making any other demands , that first and foremost , attention is paid to fundamental human rights ?
I believe these to be a priority yet , I am sorry to say , they are non-existent in Turkey .
President of the Commission . - I would not say ' in existence ' , frankly speaking .
Turkey has made progress in terms of rule of law .
However , we do not believe that it is yet compatible - in its standard of respect of fundamental rights and the rule of law - with European standards .
This is precisely part of the work we have been developing with Turkey over the years .
Each year , because Turkey is a candidate country to the European Union , the Commission assesses in very objective terms the reforms made by Turkey in the rule of law and all matters related to fundamental rights .
There has been progress in some areas , to be fair .
There are other areas where we are requesting more efforts from the Turkish authorities .
I believe that keeping up this dialogue - and , in fact , these negotiations - for Turkey 's accession is indeed the right way to make progress in the matter of respect of fundamental rights and , generally speaking , the rule of law and democratic reforms in Turkey .
President Barroso , thank you very much for a very interesting debate .
This has been the fourth Question Hour in plenary .
The next will be in one month 's time at the next part-session in Strasbourg .
That concludes the item .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a moment ago , a disgraceful speech was speciously made in this House against the President of the Italian Republic .
I believe that the Bureau of this House should not allow people to bring national political issues into it , particularly when dealing with institutional and political matters of great importance .
I would remind you - and remind all fellow Members - that the Italian Republic is not for sale , and that the President of the Republic , Giorgio Napolitano , is the guardian of the Italian Constitution .
On behalf of the Italian delegation of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , I call on the Bureau of this House to be more vigilant with regard to the topics debated and the speeches that are made .
I am sorry that President Buzek did not intervene to stop a speech that attacked the President of the Republic , who , just one week ago , visited the European Parliament .
( Applause )
Both the comment to which you referred and your statements will be recorded in the Minutes and I will try to take account of your requests during the agenda item over which I am now presiding .
I hope I succeed .
International Climate Policy post-Copenhagen : Reinvigorating the international negotiations through immediate action
The next item is the statement by the Commission on International Climate Policy post-Copenhagen : Reinvigorating the international negotiations through immediate action .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , this is the first time I have spoken before this House .
I am glad that , less than four weeks after I took office , I can today present to you a communication on international climate change policy post Copenhagen - a communication that the Commission adopted in its meeting today .
The communication is entitled ' Acting now to reinvigorate global action and climate change ' , and that is exactly what we aim to do .
Naturally , in drafting the communication , we have taken full account of Parliament 's resolution of 10 February on the outcome of COP 15 .
Copenhagen was a much smaller step forward than the European Union had wanted but , nonetheless , it was a step forward .
One hundred and nine countries - industrialised and developing nations alike which are collectively responsible for more than 80 % of the world 's greenhouse gas emissions - have now officially included their emission reduction targets and actions in the Accord .
In other words , the opportunity is there for us to build on this determination and help channel it into international action .
We need to seize this chance to help maintain momentum towards the robust and legally binding global climate agreement for the post-2012 period which , of course , remains our objective .
The Commission 's starting point is that the EU must continue to show leadership .
We believe that the most convincing way Europe can do so is by taking tangible and determined action domestically to become the most climate-friendly region in the world .
We must do this as part of the EU 2020 strategy put forward last week .
And let me say this loud and clear : it is in Europe 's own interest .
How is that ?
Well , because it will - if we do it intelligently - enhance our competitiveness , strengthen our energy security and stimulate greener economic growth and innovation , thus creating new jobs .
The Commission will therefore now undertake work to outline a pathway up to 2050 for the European Union 's transition to becoming a low-carbon economy .
This will involve reducing our emissions by 80 % to 95 % in 2050 , as already agreed , and - as this House is well aware - the EU is committed to reducing its emissions to at least 20 % below 1990 levels by 2020 and to scaling up this reduction to 30 % if the conditions are right .
I fully share the wish expressed by this Parliament that the EU should move beyond the 20 % target .
We need to bring our reduction more closely into line with what the science tells us is necessary in order to meet the Copenhagen Accord 's objective of keeping global warming below two degrees .
As you also stated in your resolution , the crisis has made it easier to achieve the targets .
If today we want to be as ambitious as we were prepared to be when we adopted the Climate and Energy Package back in 2007 and 2008 , we would then have to go beyond the 20 % .
I am therefore also pleased to announce that the Commission will prepare , before the European Council in June , an analysis of which practical policies would be required to implement a 30 % emission reduction by 2020 .
The Commission will also engage in developing an analysis of milestones on our pathway to 2050 , including the necessary scenarios of the ambition level for 2030 .
This will require a need to set out appropriate strategies for the key emitting sectors , consistent with the EU 2020 strategy .
In line with the deadline agreed in the ETS Directive , the Commission will also set out its analysis of the situation regarding energy intensive industries in the event of carbon leakage .
In parallel with this work , the EU must start implementing the Copenhagen Accord .
This means building a robust and transparent international accounting framework for countries ' emissions and performance .
It also means swiftly mobilising the EUR 7.2 billion in fast-start finance for developing countries that Europe has committed to for the period 2010 to 2012 .
This is particularly important for our credibility , as well as contributing to securing long-term finance .
The Commission is ready to help ensure the EU 's assistance is well coordinated .
Finally , this communication proposes a road map for the next steps in the UN process , to be agreed in Bonn this spring when the negotiations restart .
The technical meetings in Bonn need to begin the process of integrating the political guidance provided by the Copenhagen Accord into the UN negotiating text and addressing the outstanding gaps .
Most importantly , I think it is very important to see what can be specific deliverables for Cancún .
Bringing the developed country targets and developing country actions submitted under the Accord , as well as the political guidance on MRV , into the formal UN negotiation process will be crucial , but also decisions on issues which were neglected in the Accord , such as the evolution of the international carbon market , reducing emissions from international aviation and maritime through ICAO and EIMO , agriculture and other things .
In the formal negotiations , there was actually substantial progress made in Copenhagen on the adaptation framework , technology framework , forestry , that could also be among the specific deliverables for Mexico .
Nobody would be happier than me if Cancún also delivered a legally binding global deal and if the legal question was also solved there - and do not be mistaken , the European Union is ready .
However , we need to recognise that remaining differences between parties may delay agreement on this until next year .
Therefore , we have to manage expectations carefully .
I think all of you know that high expectations for Mexico without specific deliverables implies a very high risk of killing this process in the end .
So for all of us to whom it is very important to get an international deal , I also think it is very important to pursue this stepwise approach and to try to do whatever we can to ensure that the world gets a legally binding deal before 2012 .
Finally , a few words on environmental integrity .
Environmental integrity must be our watchwords in the negotiations and I know this is a concern Parliament shares .
Therefore , the shortcomings of the Kyoto Protocol have to be addressed .
By this I mean the limited number of countries it covers - corresponding to only 30 % of today 's emissions - and the serious weaknesses it contains such as the accounting rules for forestry emissions and the handling of surplus national emission rights from the period 2008 to 2012 , which were also highlighted in your February resolution .
Lastly , Europe needs to undertake outreach in order to promote support for the UN process and rebuild confidence that a global deal is possible .
We need both to get a better understanding of where our partners stand on key issues and to explain what the EU requires from a global deal .
The Commission will undertake outreach in close contact with the Council and the Council Presidency .
I will be holding talks in Washington and Mexico this month and plan to visit , among others , India , the Maldives , China and Japan in April .
We would also like to encourage you , the European Parliament , to contribute by engaging with your fellow parliamentarians around the world .
I have already met some representatives of your parliamentary delegations with major third countries and will meet others soon in order to discuss how we could join our efforts and reach out together and how the Commission can assist you in this important task .
The Commission 's communication sets out a strategy to help maintain the momentum of global efforts to tackle climate change expressed by the growing support for the Copenhagen Accord .
EU leadership in this process will be absolutely vital for success .
I hope we can count on Parliament 's support .
( DE ) I would like to congratulate the new Commissioner on her first speech .
The communication that you have presented to us is also very interesting .
However , I would now like to mention a couple of shortcomings .
It would have been appropriate for you to analyse the UN process yourself a little more in this initial communication and also to criticise the areas where it has real weaknesses .
As we know , panel 2 , in particular , did not exactly employ scientific meticulousness .
Secondly , the two-degree target that we have set ought to have more scientific evidence to back it up and you should now increase your efforts so that we intensify our research into whether this is still possible or whether - as various people are already saying - we should noticeably distance ourselves from this .
Thirdly - and probably most importantly - we now need , in particular , to tackle the crisis in confidence that we are seeing throughout the world and particularly here in Europe .
As you know , there are surveys which indicate that only 30 % of European citizens believe that CO2 affects the climate .
Every project that does not take this into account is doomed to failure .

( SV ) Madam President , Commissioner Hedegaard made a number of positive statements , but she also said two very worrying things : she prefers talking about 2050 than about 2010 , which I find worrying , and she talks more about how we must lower our expectations than about continuing to drive things forward so that our aims and expectations are as high as possible at the meetings that are already scheduled .
I would like to ask whether the Commission will be working towards an ambitious and legally binding agreement on climate change actually being signed in Cancún in December , or will it continue to advocate a process in which Cancún is regarded merely as a step along the way to an agreement that will be signed in South Africa , or perhaps in some other country far off in the future : in 2011 , 2012 , 2020 or , in the worst case , even further away than that ?
Madam President , in the wake of Copenhagen , some of us are feeling like the remnants of a defeated army , scattered and demoralised , so I am glad you have raised the standard here and launched a fightback .
But , although you sound upbeat and positive , in practice , a lot of this is based on a wish and a prayer .
We are very much dependent upon others to be able to make progress .
I notice that you have talked about revisiting the idea of raising our own target to a 30 % reduction .
Am I right in saying that you have suggested a new and more subjective formula for applying that ?
' If the conditions are right ' , the document says .
That is new , I think .
Why is there nothing in the document that analyses the reasons for failure at Copenhagen and suggests lessons ?
Why is there nothing here that points at the problem of climate-change denial , which is sapping political will ?
And , finally , why is there nothing here about the need to bring in more business ?
There are lots of businesses in Europe that want to work with us on this and , frankly , while I wish you well , and while we wish you well , you need all the friends that you can get .


Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first to Mr Seeber , about the IPCC and why did we not criticise that or whatever we were supposed to do in this paper : I must say that , although I think it is crucial for the IPCC to take the criticism seriously and try to correct where there are things that need correction , I have seen nothing to date that changes my profound understanding and feeling that , yes , we need to address climate change .
There are things , details , leaked mails and all these kinds of things .
I have seen nothing more profound that would change my profound attitude and I think that goes for very many , so that is very much deliberate .
I think that the IPCC itself must try to be careful now to restore confidence in whatever comes out of the IPCC .
I very much agree with the point that you almost did not have time to raise - the issue of trust - and that is also why we have a substantial outreach , a thing that is crucial for the European Union .
Mrs Ulvskog , you mentioned that I spoke more about 2050 than 2010 .
This is a strategy on the way forward for 2012 .
We already have our policy for right now , 2010 , in the European Union , so this is a strategy looking forward .
Where I think that one of the new things to pay attention to is that we start to say we must define the pathways between 2020 and 2050 , and that is why I will come up with something on what should be achieved by 2030 .
The year 2020 is only 10 years away .
In this Commission period , we must also lay the path for where we are going to be by 2030 , so that was very deliberate and that is one of the new things in this .
I definitely do not want to lower expectations but I would be very careful not to raise expectations so high so that those who do not want the international negotiations to succeed could kill the process after Mexico if we do not achieve anything .
That is why we must be practical .
I will defend before anyone that up to Copenhagen , it was right to keep expectations high , to keep the pressure there and to bring this to the top of the agenda of Heads of State .
It made them responsible ; it made emerging economies and the United States set domestic targets ; it was important .
But only once can you do a thing like this and then not achieve it fully .
My fear is we cannot do it twice .
Why not , then , make a specific roadmap in Bonn , guaranteeing momentum is being kept here ?
That is the thinking .
Finally , to Chris Davies , yes you are right .
We are depending on others to make progress , and that is also why we must do the average and try to analyse the information we get .
What is going on in Beijing ?
What is going on in Delhi ?
What is going on in Washington ?
What is going on in the US Congress ?
And then try to see that , by taking all of these things into consideration , we can , at the same time , ensure that we still have our objective met , namely a legally binding , truly international deal .
You mentioned this 30 % , if the conditions are right - yes , you are right , this is a new way of putting it .
There are footnotes also in the 2020 strategy referring to policies hitherto , that it is provided that other nations ... and so on and so forth , but I think if conditions are right , and maybe if we do this intelligently , it could also benefit Europe itself .
We also need to have that in our different strategies and papers .
I know that this is one area where there is not consensus in Europe at this stage .
I think it is important to consider this .
Say that , for instance , China will not accept an international agreement , would we then stand still for ever on 20 % ?
How would that benefit our economy , our innovation , our growth ?
Would we not risk losing the markets to China and other regions that are moving on this agenda as well , no matter whether and when we get an international deal ?
This is just an opening for discussion , saying , yes , these are bargaining chips in the international negotiations , but we should not forget there is also a domestic side to this .
Where will our growth come from in the future ?
There , we should be careful of not being ambitious enough .
( FI ) Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , it is excellent to see that you have read Parliament 's resolution and that you should refer to it .
That is a good sign , as you start your new job .
If the EU is actually to maintain its leading role in the matter of climate protection , we should raise our target to at least -30 % , one which you have already stated the case for .
I wish to add that the changes which the recession has actually brought to the situation mean that -20 % is , in reality , not a lot different from the ' business as usual ' scenario .
If we want to be ambitious , we need to make our targets more stringent and bring them up to at least -30 % , and preferably -40 % .
Secondly , as Parliament , in its last debate , unanimously ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for her statement and welcome her to our Chamber .
She talked in her statement about raising our target to 30 % if the conditions are right .
What evidence does she have that , if we do so , this will help persuade America , India , China , or other countries to sign up to a globally binding agreement ?
In the absence of a globally binding agreement , does she not agree that there is a great risk that we make our industry more uncompetitive , and saddle our consumers with ever higher electricity bills , at no net benefit to the environment at all , because those reductions in emissions are , of course , cancelled out by increases in India , China , the US , etc . ?
( GA ) Madam President , the EU must commit to reducing emissions by 40 % by 2020 according to the most recent scientific information available .
This type of commitment cannot be made by depending on the actions of others .
What measures will the Commission put in place to ensure that the commitment to reducing EU emissions will be increased to 40 % ?
As regards the necessary funding available to developing countries to enable them to combat climate change and its consequences , who exactly will provide this funding to the developing countries ?
How much will each developed country give ?
How and when will it be provided ?
The Commissioner also spoke of an ambitious , legally-binding agreement .
What steps will the Commission take to achieve an agreement that recognises the common , but different , responsibilities that industrialised countries and developing countries share , based on historical input of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere and on the resources available to deal with the challenges involved in reducing emissions and the consequences of climate change ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , if I understand the last point correctly , it is about how can we enforce whatever we agree upon .
That is , of course , a key issue .
The other question was how much should be given to developing countries , as I understood it .
The criteria have not been set up yet , but I think it is very important that we do not attach a lot of conditions to that .
This was the promise given in Copenhagen , that the fast-start financing , the here-and-now financing , will be given to the least developed countries and the most vulnerable , partly for adaptation , partly for mitigation .
I also think that it is only logical that we defend the fact that it must happen through existing channels .
We cannot afford , time-wise , to invent new governing systems or channels or whatever for this money to get out to work , because we should get it out there working as soon as possible .
I would say that the EU is already ready for Bonn to deliver the fast-start financing and I would say that , at the latest in Mexico , the world must be ready to deliver on its promises on fast-start financing from Copenhagen and to set up the different criteria and exactly how we are going to do it .
To Mrs Hassi , it was the point of view of the need to stick to 30 % and , in many respects , it relates also to what Mr Callanan says .
It is not very easy to decide exactly when we should go to 30 % and exactly what it would take to go to 30 % .
That is why , in this communication , we say that , before the June European Council , we will provide an analysis on exactly how we could intelligently go to 30 % .
What would it require ?
Of course , nobody should be naive .
Of course , we should take care of our own industry , obviously .
We should know what we are doing and we should not be naive .
My point is simply that I think that , if we do this in an intelligent and coherent manner , it would be possible to choose tools that could , at the same time , benefit climate change and emissions reductions , energy efficiency , energy security , and innovation and job creation .
That is what we will be looking for .
I am not saying it is going to be easy .
We should not think going to 30 % will be a piece of cake , although we must know what the potential would be , what the implications would be and that would be the analysis that I would provide before the European Council meeting this June .
Then , later this year , we would have the analysis on the pathways to 2050 , including this 2030 perspective that I think we have to start thinking about , the reason of course being that we have pledged to reduce by 80 % to 95 % by 2050 .
If we do not get started , it is going to be extremely tough in the last one or two decades as we approach 2050 .
Madam President , contrary to the belief of the Commission , the debate regarding man-made climate change is far from over .
In the past month alone , we have had the scandal of the University of East Anglia ; then we have had the debacle over the Himalayan glaciers and now , we have got questions over the effect climate change will have on wildlife in the Amazon .
Research has shown that at least 20 passages in the IPCC 's report cite non-peer-reviewed World Wildlife Fund or Greenpeace reports as authority .
This is not science .
We need solid , peer-reviewed scientific evidence , not the work of pressure groups using climate change to further their own agendas or politicians who use climate change to justify the existence of the European Union .
I would like to ask whether it is now time to pause , to take stock and consider the ramifications of bounding ahead with policies that could damage economies , result in job losses or potentially result in energy chaos .
You will be aware that the leaked emails from the University of East Anglia reveal that historical changes in temperature have been manipulated by supporters of the man-made climate change hypothesis by subjectively choosing base years .
That trick has been used to disguise recent falls in temperature and to contain the problem of the Medieval Warm Period .
The emails also reveal that scientists sceptical of the hypothesis have been squeezed out of peer review processes to avoid flaws in research being revealed to public scrutiny .
Can a hypothesis that depends on manipulation of data be a proper basis for justifying enormous expenditure and the closing-down of factories such as the Corus plant in Middlesbrough ?
The European Union pays enormous subsidies to environmental pressure groups that agree to advise the EU to follow a policy to which it is already committed .
Is it appropriate for the European Union to use public funds to subsidise pressure groups ?
This wastes public money , gives bogus support for European Union policies and compromises the independence of campaigning organisations .
( DE ) I wish you a very warm welcome to this House .
The loss of confidence in Copenhagen was , in my opinion , one of the major problems .
This could theoretically continue worldwide , but also within the European Union .
My question to you is as follows .
What is happening with the instruments that we adopted last year ?
The Emissions Trading Scheme ( ETS ) is of concern to me , because I am not entirely sure what the Commission is currently doing in light of the decision in Copenhagen , for example , with regard to benchmarks , but also to carbon leakage .
My second question is as follows .
The French Government has put forward a proposal to incorporate importers from developing countries into the ETS system in order to make the market bigger and to allow these countries to participate in this system .
Do you have an opinion on this ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first to the two gentlemen who raised the question of the IPCC .
First , I am not here to represent the IPCC .
I am sure they are perfectly capable of talking on their own .
When I hear this ' is it not time to pause ? ' , I must just say that the international climate negotiations in many ways have been put on hold for quite a long time .
We still need , I believe , substantial progress there .
I simply do not understand why , because of a few leaked things , one wants to aim the scepticism at a whole project .
That is not my approach .
I am the politician .
I cannot judge the work of the scientists but I can use my common sense and I can read their main conclusions and see what the facts on the table are like .
Then I can myself weigh up whether I want to run the risk of doing nothing , with the very big implications that might have - or , instead , will I try to respond to the challenge ?
What I simply fail to understand is that those who are sceptical of this climate issue cannot see that it will always be good for a planet whose population is approaching nine billion people , or even more by the middle of this century , to become much more energy efficient and much more resource efficient .
So that is where we should have common ground when it comes to the tools because that will anyhow benefit our environment , benefit our citizens and benefit our economies .
It will also benefit business to become very energy efficient , in a future where energy is becoming still more expensive .
That will pay off on the bottom line , in a world where there will be a struggle over resources .
So I simply do not understand why we cannot take on the same kind of agenda from that angle .
To Mr Florenz , what do we do with the instruments on the ETS ?
Well , as mentioned , there will be an analysis of the carbon leakage coming out before summer and , when it comes to the benchmark , we will continue the work with the benchmark .
There are still many things to be worked on with the ETS .
I also think that we should still work with those other parties around the world who are planning to get some kind of trading schemes .
I still think that that will be the most efficient way of trying to regulate this , but then , of course , it is very important that we have our own systems up and running , working as efficiently and as business-friendly as possible , so that they can see that it actually works and that , in the end , it also benefits their possibility of providing innovation .
( DE ) A very warm welcome to Parliament , Commissioner .
I wrote a letter to the President of Parliament to inform him that all of the delegations in this House have climate protection on the agenda in our discussions with our partners throughout the world .
We need to find another mechanism to enable this information and these results to be linked in with your travels around the world so that those of us here in Brussels and Strasbourg know exactly where we stand .
I am rather concerned that the climate negotiations could suffer the same fate as the Doha negotiations , which are constantly being postponed year after year .
My question is , therefore , what is your plan B in order , perhaps , to achieve results in parts of some sectors ?
I also have a question concerning the Kyoto Protocol .
One strategic error we made in Bangkok was to give the impression that we would abandon it .
What would happen if we do not adopt something until 2011 or 2012 ?
What is the future for the Kyoto Protocol ?
( FR ) Madam President , I would like to welcome Mrs Hedegaard to our Chamber .
Commissioner , I am delighted to welcome you to your first engagement and to repeat what I said to you at your hearing and to congratulate you on the enthusiasm that you breathe into our debates , you who embody climate diplomacy with , of course , the ongoing support of our Parliament .
I am convinced that Europe must adopt a more offensive position , that it must show its arms rather than its intentions .
My question , which will be easy for you to answer , is somewhat similar to the one from the Chair of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , since I , too , am convinced that Europe must henceforth ensure that it always includes this climate dimension in all of its trade agreements with third countries , with a European carbon tax if that is the only language that those who refuse to realise the magnitude of the challenge can understand .
I have another question that might be slightly more iconoclastic on my part , a proposal that , in any case , requires a response from you : could not the European Parliament , the Commission and the institutions also set an example by declaring themselves carbon neutral , in other words , by offsetting their CO2 emissions in order to meet at least - even though this is only one aspect - the environmental costs of our journeys to Strasbourg ?
Madam President , first , I think we are also very much looking forward to this impact assessment .
We are really more or less sure that 30 % will be good for the European economy and also in the race for green technologies .
I have two questions , Commissioner ; one is on the quick-start money .
How will you link with Mr Piebalgs to make really sure that this money goes to efficiency , to renewables and , in a decentralised way , to decentralised energy production combining this also with energy poverty ?
The second question is , how do you bring the large European cities and progressive regions into the game , internationally as well ?
I was really disappointed that , in last week 's EU 2020 paper , cities and regions basically do not exist .
How can we even dare to think that we will move Europe forward while ignoring citizens ' regions in Europe and the impact they could have internationally ?

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first to Mr Leinen , I think it is a very good idea that , whenever delegations do go out , you have the time and priority also to get climate on the agenda .
This is very important and it could be very useful to compare notes , so that when you get a piece of information in one country and I get information one month later , we get together sometimes and compare notes so that we can really build on the information that we each receive .
The risk of ending up in some Doha-like process was the very reason why we applied so much pressure for Copenhagen in order to do our utmost to try and avoid that situation .
You are also right that it is dangerous now : if we did not make it in Copenhagen , could it then drag on for ever ?
That is why I would like to see a specific roadmap with exact deliverables for each event , and an exact date on which we have to conclude it .
I think that is a very good point .
The last question was about the Kyoto Protocol and the continuation of the Kyoto Protocol .
We all know there are problems with the Kyoto Protocol .
We all know there are many countries that do not want to be part of it and all these challenges .
In the end , it is also a challenge for the European Union .
We cannot stand there alone in the Kyoto Protocol .
I think it is very important that Europe gets better at not taking the blame when we are not to be blamed .
We are not the problem vis-à-vis the Kyoto Protocol .
We delivered before anybody else .
We have delivered and lived up to our formal pledges in the first period from 2008 to 2012 .
We will deliver whatever we have pledged to deliver and we are also ready to continue the Kyoto Protocol .
The EU in this context is not the problem .
It is other parties that are the problem here and they will have to find out if they want an alternative , should there be one , or how they will cope with the continuation , the second commitment period .
That is why this is an open issue that we must discuss but , as Chris Davies has already said , we are dependent on what other parties do .
We should be careful .
Why should it be us that kills the Kyoto Protocol ?
We have lived up to our promises in the Kyoto Protocol , so sometimes we should be better in Europe at not taking the blame where others deserve the blame .
On the proposal on the institutions here , I can say that I have already raised that issue in my own cabinet .
I think it is a natural thing .
I would very much like to work with Parliament .
If you could work with Parliament , then I will work with the Commission .
I think it is a logical thing also vis-à-vis the citizens .
To Claude Turmes , regarding the quick start and how I can link with Commissioner Piebalgs , you may have noticed that this communication was produced together with Mr Piebalgs .
He has co-signed here , because we know that it is very important that we try to work together also on his portfolio and how that can be used in a very positive way .
We two Commissioners are already having this kind of discussion .
I understand your point on big cities .
I think that C40 and lots of other initiatives are very good , and you are also right that much of the emissions will be related to cities and lifestyle in the cities .
The challenge here is that much of the planning and other types of tools that can really address these issues often lie with Member States , but I agree with you and I have also worked with some of the major cities prior to Copenhagen .
That is an aspect that we should bear in mind and try to see how we can develop it further .
Also , for instance , when it comes to transportation and the decarbonisation of transport , it goes without saying that the major cities will be key to finding solutions there .
( PT ) Commissioner , the Copenhagen conference has shown that it is necessary to prepare for the next Conference of the Parties ( COP ) not just at an internal , global and technical level , but also at a political level .
Internally , Europe has the task of implementing the energy and climate package and investing in clean technologies , scientific research and energy efficiency .
Leading by example is a necessary requirement , but it is not enough on its own , as was demonstrated in Copenhagen .
It is therefore essential to develop and promote the diplomatic aspect and to make use of the options afforded by the Treaty of Lisbon to prepare the way towards the next COP with ambition , speaking with a single voice and creating strategic alliances with our potential allies on this subject such as , for example , the African , Caribbean and Pacific countries .
It is also important to bring the topic of climate change into all summits and high-level meetings .
I would like to ask the Commission and the Commissioner what progress has been made in these political negotiations .
( DA ) Madam President , welcome , Mrs Hedegaard .
You have said many good things , and there are many good things in the communication .
I am going to focus on the things that I disagree with .
I disagree greatly with a strategy that is based on accepting at this early stage that we will not get an agreement in Mexico .
My question to you is therefore whether that is something you have simply decided , or is it a mandate that you have been given - and if so , who gave you this mandate ?
Is it the Heads of State ?
Or is it the codecision procedure , or what ?
I hope that this strategy can be revised .
What good can it do to say ' What if a huge momentum is built up and there are high expectations , and then it all comes to nought - how could we then explain two fiascos ? ' .
Listen , that is not something you need be concerned about .
The US and China and others will probably ensure that there are no great expectations of Mexico .
The role of the EU should not be to talk down expectations - the EU 's role should be to talk up expectations .
If we say even before the summit has begun : ' Listen , we are willing to accept that there will not be a particularly great agreement ' and so on , then you banish any chance of success before you have even started .
It sets a whole new starting point and the agreement will only be the worse because of it .
( DE ) Commissioner , I have two specific questions for you .
Firstly , in your paper , I see no analysis of the European negotiating position at international level .
Have we really taken note of the fact that Europe 's influence in climate policy has diminished ?
Have we taken note of the fact that the political and economic weight in this world has shifted sharply in the direction of Asia ?
Is it possible that we completely overestimated our influence here ?
Secondly , your paper is remarkable .
In the twelve pages that you have completely filled , there is not a single reference to the IPCC Panel .
Is that a subtle attempt to distance yourself from this body ?
I would like to remind you that this panel formed the basis for all the political decisions relating to the directives that we have drawn up here in recent years .
Is it not time to call for a broad scientific approach that gives us real scientific statements , not political ones ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , it is definitely a clear ' no ' to the latter point on the IPCC .
If I should distance myself from everything that is not in this paper , then I would distance myself from a lot of things .
This is a way of trying to take for granted that we are facing a challenge , that we have to solve it , and that the EU has to take the lead in terms of how to solve it .
That is the thinking behind this paper .
I do not agree that the EU does not have an impact on international negotiations .
You are quite right that we do not have as much impact as we would like , to think that we could just dictate what is going on .
We are dependent upon others .
However , we saw something very new in Copenhagen : whereas , in the past , the EU often had only a few partners when going into international negotiations and trying to get things done , this time , leaders representing more than 80 % of global emissions in Copenhagen promised that , from now on , they would also be on track .
That changes the whole dynamic substantially .
May I remind you that to get the emerging economies on board and to get them to be co-responsible has been a European priority for years , and that was actually achieved in Copenhagen .
To Mrs Carvalho : yes , I agree very much that we should prepare both technically and politically , and that we should be better at doing so , not least so that , when we come to the negotiating table , we do not just say what we want and then , when the rest of the world disagrees with us , we do not really know what to do because we have expended all our energy trying to come together on a very firm and detailed formulated position .
We should be more flexible in the way we negotiate this .
( DA ) ... and then finally to Dan Jørgensen : of course I do not believe that we should not reach an agreement in Mexico .
What is under discussion is whether we believe that we can get all the details , including the form of the agreement , in place in Mexico .
That is my concern .
Viewed in these terms , I believe that we will increase the pressure on the US and China and others precisely by saying that we must have very specific deliverables and that very specific results must be achieved in Cancún .
We cannot just put it off .
I am trying to make it difficult for them not to deliver in Mexico .
I believe that if we are to achieve this , then we must make sure we do not focus too much on the legal form , because that could well obstruct agreement being reached on the actual content . There are a lot of factors to take into account - ' What do we think ?
What are we hearing ? What do we think it is possible to get the US to agree to just three weeks after they have had mid-term elections ? ' , for example .
There are many factors that come into play here , but I believe Mr Jørgensen knows me well enough to realise that it is not because I do not think we should be ambitious in Mexico .
We simply need to try to define what the maximum is that we can get out of Mexico .
That is the pivotal point of the strategy that I have tried to present here today .
Ladies and gentlemen , more Members have not been able to speak than have had the opportunity to do so .
There was not enough time .
I hope that you understand that .
Thank you all for this disciplined debate .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I hope that we will see each other more often here in plenary .
I am sure that will be the case .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The EU has every opportunity to lead the way in taking action to reduce CO2 emissions .
The Copenhagen Summit perhaps left many with a feeling of disappointment due to some of the participants refraining from committing to any definite climate change prevention targets .
India and China have recently sent messages to the UN indicating their determination to meet the targets committed to under the Copenhagen Accord , as vague as it was .
This is an important sign and the EU can grasp the initiative globally and bring all the states back to the same table , especially the Asian states whose industrial capacity is growing every month .
Climate change is a certainty , just as it is a certainty that pollution accelerates it .
This justifies the EU 's ambitions to set an example in its actions to reduce pollution .
Indeed , our aim to become the least polluted region in the world cannot but be to our advantage .
The benefits from this include more than just the immediate benefit of a cleaner environment .
Redirecting Europe towards a green economy and industry will create jobs , open up new avenues of research and , last but not least , reduce every state 's expenditure .
While preserving the earth 's atmosphere must be a responsibility shared by different countries , it is also clear that the influence that each of these countries has had on the atmosphere throughout history and the impact which they have today are two very different things , which means that their responsibilities must be differentiated , for reasons of basic justice .
Moreover , the definition of responsibility of each country in the global effort to reduce emissions must take into account their respective populations , for the same reasons of fairness .
China 's per capita emissions are currently four times less that those of the USA and about half the average of EU emissions .
India has about a tenth of the average EU emissions and twenty times less than those of the USA .
At present in India , there are about 500 million people ( roughly the population of the EU ) without access to electricity .
This is why attempts to blame these countries for the failure of Copenhagen are unreasonable and unfair , not to mention the ridiculous blaming of the countries of the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America by a resolution from this House .
This position is justified only by sheer political factionalism , which undermines and subverts what actually happened in Copenhagen .
The very persistent lobbying of the European Commission and its President on the matter of an ' ambitious ' climate and energy policy , which has been going on for years , is nothing other than an attempt to destroy the EU 's industry .
This policy is a result either of ignorance made worse by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , or of plain stupidity , or it is also the result of excessive cynicism leading to economic sabotage .
It is a pity that the Left-wing Members have not realised that this is nothing other than a trap for them , because the greatest number of supporters of emissions trading are being recruited from among those who have caused one crisis already .
This time , however , the ' finance bubble ' will be significantly bigger .
The damage which has already been caused by this suicidal policy is huge , especially in my country of Poland .
We do not need a war .
It is easier to ruin a country than to rebuild it .
I call on the Commission - come to your senses , because what you are doing is not only anti-European , it is anti-humanitarian .
What is needed is immediate revision of the climate and energy package .
Get to work on this , and stop persuading others to commit economic suicide .
A green economy - yes , but that , of course , means recycling of materials and energy , cogeneration , thermomodernisation , sustainable energy where there is no other source , reuse of sewage , nuclear energy , greater energy economy , higher energy efficiency and other things .
Do CO2 emissions , therefore , also have any connection with an economy which is ' green ' like this ?
Yes , they do , but paradoxically , when emissions rise ... so that is good .
Madam President , I am grateful to Commissioner Hedegaard for indicating that she understands the basic dilemma of climate policy : the EU cannot make reductions alone , because then not only will our own results be in vain , but we will create the risk that the environment will suffer .
If production cannot continue to take place in Europe because of the soaring cost of emissions trading , and if , as a consequence , steel or paper , say , are produced in places where the ensuing emissions are greater than in Europe , emissions will increase overall .
Unilateral ambition is not ambition : only when we act together according to the same rules will it be easy to tighten our belts substantially .
The basis for this must be a different sort of climate strategy : a consistent cut in specific emissions .
That constitutes a system of decarbonisation which is independent of the business cycle and which always rewards the party making the cuts , unlike our current system of emissions trading .
China , Japan and the United States of America , among others , are interested in such a scheme , and so the EU too should update its own strategy to reflect the present situation .
I would also like to ask if there is any sense in adhering to the emissions trading scheme beyond 2012 , as now it appears that there will be no such schemes emerging globally that could be linked to our own .
Unless the specification and allocation of emission allowances is proportional , it will be impossible to avoid distortion of competition .
When , just under 10 years ago , we began to draft the Emissions Trading Directive , the entire scheme was marketed to us as a means of preparing for emissions trading on a global scale .
We acquired the expertise and experience .
That experience has definitely cost us dear , and the benefit to the environment is by no means obvious .
Reductions in emissions could be made in a way that makes them less exposed to market failure and speculation .
Does the Commission think that there are good reasons for carrying on alone ?
Madam President , Mrs Hedegaard , the Copenhagen Summit , which we went to as climate change leaders , was a defeat , and showed that it is only Europe which is interested in limiting CO2 emissions .
Mrs Hedegaard has announced that , in spite of this fiasco , the fight against global warming is still going to be at the centre of European policy .
We are now building a new strategy before the Mexico Summit , so we have to answer the question as to where we went wrong and examine our views and expectations , because the world is not ready , today , to accept such large restrictions .
I have , therefore , three questions for Mrs Hedegaard .
Firstly , how are we going to negotiate , and what objectives will we set ourselves , so that the Mexico Summit does not end up like the Copenhagen Summit ?
Secondly , has the European Commission verified the information on global warming and melting icebergs in the context of the misleading and untrue information being given by some scientists ?
Thirdly , do you agree with my conclusion that without consent to significant reductions in emissions from the USA , China , Russia and India , the efforts of the European Union , and the costs we are incurring , will be wasted ?
The fundamental challenge for the European Union after the Copenhagen Summit is to draw up , as quickly as possible , something which is essential - a collective roadmap for the COP 16 summit in Mexico .
Copenhagen has made us realise that good intentions are not enough .
As a result of Copenhagen , we can come to the following four conclusions .
Firstly , the European Union will not be fully effective if it only sets frameworks to be followed .
Europe should give developing countries real support which favours the Community 's ambitious emissions objectives .
Secondly , the European Union must start discussions again with the United States , as part of a transatlantic leadership , and with other leading world powers .
Thirdly , the European Union should adopt a more rational approach to the CO2 emissions reduction strategy , with a view to reducing emissions while avoiding high adaptation costs .
Fourthly , the European Union should intensify its efforts at building an efficient low-emission economy .
Mrs Hedegaard , the question is simple - is there a climate for such change in Europe ?
I welcome the important place that has been given to climate change in the Communication from the Commission entitled ' Europe 2020 - A European strategy for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth ' .
There are two aspects of this worth highlighting .
Firstly , investing in greener , low carbon technologies is an important instrument .
These investments will protect the environment , while also creating new business opportunities and new jobs .
The European Union can play an important role in this sector on the global market .
The second aspect is the importance of the ' Resource efficient Europe ' flagship initiative .
The request made by the Commission for Member States to use the Structural Funds to invest in constructing energy-efficient public buildings certainly provides part of the solution .
However , I think that we need to devote at least as much attention to the residential sector , more specifically to the collective residential buildings constructed in the past which were heavy consumers of energy in some Member States , especially those in Eastern Europe .
I think that we have learnt from the failure of Copenhagen .
As proof of this , we must review our strategy so that we can achieve a legally binding agreement in Mexico .
Prompt action is required to translate the political agreement reached into action , as well as to put into operation the EUR 7.2 billion earmarked for ' fast-start financing ' for developing countries .
The EU has made known its wish to be associated with the Accord and has made , by way of information , a unilateral commitment to reduce the EU 's global emissions by 20 % on 1990 levels and a conditional offer of raising this reduction percentage to 30 % if other major producers of emissions also agree to contribute by an equivalent proportion to the global effort to cut emissions .
As of 18 February , 40 states have made known their reduction plans and 100 have signed up to the Accord , but this is not enough .
I urge the High Representative and Commissioner for Climate Action to present to us urgently a climate diplomacy strategy and the EU and Member States to include climate change policies in all bilateral and multilateral strategic partnerships in order to achieve this major objective .
Strategic partnerships for combating climate change must include NGOs and civil society .
in writing . - Despite the disappointment of Copenhagen , some good progress was made , including the short-term financing we secured for developing countries .
Not only will this provide concrete help on the ground ; it will also help to build trust between partners who were divided at Copenhagen .
In the coming months and years , we have to show the developing world that we will honour our commitments to funding for adaptation and mitigation , and we need to be sure that the funds are spent in the best possible way in order to achieve their objectives .
Essential progress was also made in Copenhagen regarding monitoring , reporting and verification .
These link directly to building trust , because such a system will enable us to see that everyone is playing their part and will allow us to determine the effectiveness of our policies and how we should adapt them in the future .
The European Union needs to continue to implement its Emission Trading Scheme and other initiatives , such as energy reductions in buildings .
We need to meet our emissions targets and show how we can all benefit from energy savings .
Providing a successful example of an emission reduction policy which translates into benefits for ordinary people is the best way of convincing others to follow .
Second European Roma Summit ( debate )
The next item is the oral questions to the Council and Commission regarding the second European Roma Summit .
( B7-0013 / 2010 ; B7-0014 / 2010 ; B7-0202 / 2010 ; B7-0203 / 2010 ) .
All parliamentary questions submitted to the Commission and to the Council on the occasion of the forthcoming European summit on Roma are linked by several common denominators .
The first is dissatisfaction with the current situation of most Roma in the European Union .
This issue is also closely related to dissatisfaction with spending or the level of spending pre-accession and structural funds for the purpose of integrating Roma into the rest of the society , as well as their social rehabilitation .
Another important point is the role of civil society , including Roma organisations , to engage in problem solving .
Both points are important , but I would like to suggest that it is very important how these problems are going to be solved .
Let us be honest with ourselves - after many years of vague political declarations and inactivity , several of us feel an acute need to finally move towards concrete action .
I am an uncompromising advocate of human rights and all my statements on the floor of the European Parliament during the past six years have always been in this context .
In these six years , I have also listened to several discussions about discrimination against ethnic Roma and the need for solutions to ethnic Roma problems .
Despite this abundant debate , we have not been able to take any substantial steps towards concrete solution and I believe this is mainly due to us formally focusing on the technical term discrimination and not addressing the real reasons which are the cause of the current situation , in which our fellow Roma citizens live .
Therefore , if we really want to address the Roma problem , we will have to focus primarily on compliance with both international treaties on domestic law , as well as on international conventions .
I am thinking in particular about the Convention of the Rights of the Child , whose provisions are being violated by many Roma families .
I am talking about the Slovak Republic , where there are provisions for free care and free education at primary and secondary schools .
All this is provided for and financed by the state .
Yet even in these two policies , the basic rights of the child are not being respected .
If you really want to talk objectively about solving the problems of the Roma , then we have to address the reasons and the causes that lead to discrimination .
Mr President , the Agency for Fundamental Rights reports that the Roma suffer every type of discrimination in every area , whether it be in relation to access to employment , to health care , to education or to housing .
They are therefore the minority that is most discriminated against in Europe .
In 2009 , for example , on average , one in every four Roma was a victim of a crime against the person - specifically assaults , threats and serious harassment - on at least one occasion in the course of the previous 12 months whilst , at the same time , one in every three Roma was questioned by the police on average four times in the course of the previous 12 months .
Their marginalised situation is compounded by their lack of awareness of their rights .
This situation , which affects almost 10 million people at the heart of the European Union , which is now endowed with the Charter of Fundamental Rights and will soon be a signatory to the European Convention on Human Rights , casts serious doubts over the policy of non-discrimination and effectiveness of rights , both at EU and Member State level .
It took the racist violence in Italy in December 2007 to have a large-scale , high-level European mobilisation finally result in the organisation of the first European summit in September 2008 .
However , the call for a European Union framework strategy on the integration of the Roma , including a directive on the inclusion of the Roma , has still not seen the light of day .
Member States - such as France and some others too - that maintain temporary measures for access to their markets for Bulgarians and Romanians are primarily penalising the Roma and must remove those measures as soon as possible as a sign of political goodwill .
Member States must finally abandon the negotiation of bilateral readmission agreements with Kosovo , which are leading to Roma being returned to lead-contaminated camps in northern Mitrovica , as Mr Hammarberg , the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights , has been able to demonstrate .
As regards the European Commission , I wish to remind it of the European Parliament resolution of 11 March 2009 on the social situation of the Roma .
In this year for combating poverty , I believe that we can at last decide to make the best use of our instruments and our Structural Funds with a view to resolving this serious situation .
Mr President , I am going to answer the questions raised by Mrs Flašíková Beňová and Mrs Flautre on a matter which directly affects human rights , which affects all of us , and which also affects a large community , because the Roma population , as you are aware , is the largest ethnic minority living in the European Union , and it cannot be said that they have the same standard of living as the average European citizen .
With regard to the questions that have been put to me , the first raises the matter of the Structural Funds in this area , and I would like to say that the conclusions that the Spanish Presidency intends to adopt in the Council contain those ten basic principles , which include the revision or modification of the current operational programmes of the Structural Funds , as well as future regulations for the period beginning in 2014 .
We have stressed that full use should be made of the Structural Funds in order to promote the integration of the Roma population and , specifically , we have proposed that integrated actions be implemented both in rural and urban areas , based on the recent amendment of Article 7 of the European Regional Development Fund .
The aim of this is the comprehensive promotion of Roma communities beginning with improvements to their living and social situation .
The second question concerns the action to be taken by local authorities .
We are aware that , in order for the Roma population to have access to the Structural Funds , local authorities , Roma organisations and the Roma population itself need to be actively involved in all phases of the process ; in other words , in the planning , management , monitoring and assessment of European funds .
In its conclusions , the Council is also going to propose that the European Commission provide technical support and guidance to Member States and local authorities , and that it facilitate horizontal coordination between Member States and vertical coordination from European level down to national , regional and local level .
The third question asks whether the Trio of Presidencies has a strategic proposal or a strategic agenda for this issue .
I can confirm that , in the programme drawn up by the Trio of Presidencies , the social and economic integration of Roma people is dealt with explicitly .
This intention is laid down in the programme adopted unanimously by the General Affairs Council and is , therefore , in line with the strategy for the next 18 months , which is the period covered by the programme of the Trio of Presidencies .
We understand the need to commit to both short-term and long-term measures .
In order to rectify inequalities , in the short term , we have to prioritise the tools I mentioned earlier and adopt an action plan to immediately tackle issues such as pupils attending special schools that are , in some cases , mainly or entirely for Roma children - a situation which causes clear segregation ; housing problems , as mentioned earlier ; health issues , and access to employment .
In the long term , we also want to see a horizontal , mainstreaming approach to Roma issues in all areas of European Union policy , and this will have to be carried out within the context of the open method of coordination and in areas such as fundamental rights , combating discrimination , regional development , education , and access to public employment and public services .
Finally , with regard to the issue of non-discrimination , it is well known that during the course of its term , the Spanish Presidency , and indeed the Trio of Presidencies , intends to promote the adoption of a directive which , for some time now , has not been adopted or brought to its final conclusion in the European Union : an integrated directive on combating discrimination and promoting equal rights ; this is vital , precisely for those groups who suffer particular discrimination and , specifically , the Roma community .

Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Swoboda and his colleagues for tabling this oral question on the European Roma Summit .
It allows the Commission to express its commitment to ensuring the protection of fundamental rights , on the one hand , and full social and economic integration into our societies on the other .
We have just heard the Council making a real plea about the way the Member States have to go ahead by putting this in the mainstream of their policies .
As you know , this debate is taking place just some weeks before the second Roma Summit , which will be hosted in Córdoba by the Spanish Presidency on 8 and 9 April .
The Commission welcomes and actively supports this initiative .
I think this initiative will be a welcome moment to take stock of developments at national , European and international level since 2008 .
It will then help us to contribute to a common perspective for the future .
Two years ago , the first summit was held .
How far have we got ?
You can see a glass as being half full or half empty .
Of course , there have been significant improvements but there are also significant gaps .
Your question rightly highlights the central role of the European Union 's instruments and policies and the importance of strengthening cooperation between all the key actors - Member States , institutions at European level , international organisations and civil society .
The Commission is committed to enforcing a directive which prohibits discrimination on the grounds of race and ethnic origin , and Roma discrimination is fully covered by this directive .
We now have legislation at European level and the framework decision on racism and xenophobia , which will be a key tool to tackle the racism that Roma people suffer from .
By November of this year , all Member States should put into place criminal penalties for racist and xenophobic crimes , as laid down in the framework decision .
As I have already announced , I am committed to monitoring the implementation of this framework decision as closely as possible .
The Commission is fully aware that this is not enough and that strong legislation needs to be complemented by information and awareness raising about rights and obligations .
To this end , the Commission is addressing Roma issues in the context of the EU campaign ' For Diversity .
Against Discrimination ' and in specific training for legal practitioners .
Quite rightly , the structural funds , the rural development funds and the instruments for pre-accession were underlined as being important levers for change because they allow Member States to implement ambitious programmes which are targeted to the Roma .
It is evident that these programmes must be very down to earth and pragmatic , based on evidence , and must approach the living conditions of the Roma in all their complexity .
This is not an issue that can be solved by a simple slogan .
It needs a lot of concrete work .
That is why the Commission is encouraging Member States to use the full potential of these funds to support Roma inclusion .
To this end , we have launched a series of high-level bilateral visits to Member States with significant Roma populations .
They should lead the concrete commitments with agreed targets .
The first event took place in October 2009 in Hungary with the full cooperation of the government .
Others will be organised in the future .
Another concrete example of the Commission 's commitment to using the Structural Funds for tackling Roma exclusion is the amendment that has been proposed to Article 7 ( 2 ) of the Regulation on the European Regional Development Fund .
A very large majority in this House voted for the report by your colleague , Mr van Nistelrooij , at the beginning of last month : a measure which opens new policy and funding opportunities for housing for the benefit of marginalised communities where we can target the Roma specifically , although not exclusively .
Finally , thanks to the European Parliament , there are the pilot projects on Roma inclusion , with a budget of EUR 5 million over two years .
This pilot project addresses early childhood education , self-employment through micro credits and public awareness .
The evaluation of this pilot project will be carried out jointly by the UNDP and the World Bank .
I am very much looking forward to this evaluation because the evaluation will bring us the information about what we have done well and where the deficiencies are so that we can build on this in order to go ahead with a very targeted action afterwards .
The European platform for Roma inclusion was launched as a joint initiative of the Commission and the Czech Presidency in April 2009 .
Its objective is to bring together relevant actors at European , national and international level , as well as actors from civil society , and make existing policies altogether much more coherent .
This platform has led to the elaboration of the common basic principles for Roma inclusion , which is annexed to the Council conclusions on Roma inclusion adopted in June of last year .
These conclusions call upon the Commission to take the 10 common basic principles for Roma inclusion into account when designing and implementing policies .
Further meetings of the platform are expected to take place under the Spanish Presidency and the Belgian Presidency so it is not a one-off action but it is followed up .
I very much welcome the strong commitment of the Trio of Presidencies on this objective because we need to play into each other 's hands so that progress can be made .
The Commission will continue to contribute to the Trio 's actions through its policies and instruments , in close partnership , of course , with Member States and civil society .
Ahead of the Roma Summit , I would like to inform this House that my colleague , Commissioner Andor , and I will publish a communication on the social inclusion of the Roma people , looking at the challenges ahead and outlining the EU 's contribution to meeting this challenge .
This communication will then be the basis of the discussion in Córdoba .
In addition to a more effective implementation of the international and national anti-discrimination laws , as we just heard from Commissioner Reding , particular emphasis must be given in Córdoba to the economic aspect of the inclusion of the Roma , because their integration in the labour market and education is a key economic interest of the Member States .
In recent years , a number of international organisations have developed forward-looking plans , but they have not been implemented at Member State level due to a lack of binding power , of the prospect of potential sanctions and of appropriate budget allocations .
The European Union is capable of ensuring the development , appropriate enforcement and assessment based on clear indicators of a non-mandatory Community strategy going beyond ' soft law ' measures .
As European Parliament rapporteur on the European Roma strategy , I believe that it is particularly important for the strategy to define the crisis areas within Member States which require immediate intervention .
Social disadvantages are unevenly spread across geographical regions , with extreme poverty and social exclusion concentrated in certain micro-regions densely populated by Roma and non-Roma .
This creates serious obstacles in the way of the social development of Europe .
These regions should be removed from a competition which is unfair to them , and their development should be started by using intensive programmes adjusted to their own particular needs .
In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , the supervision and monitoring of the strategy should be the responsibility of local organisations .
I also suggest extensive surveys on the needs of local target groups , similar to the agricultural projects in Ireland .
In order to be able to evaluate the results of the programme , it is also indispensable to collect statistical data broken down by ethnic groups and evaluate them independently .
According to the European People 's Party , these are the essential issues which the Córdoba Summit should address .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , as the previous speaker said , and as the Commissioner said , this is a deeply complex problem , so the oral question that we pose today is a bid from our group , certainly , and I am sure from all the groups , to renew and refresh the debate on the Roma issue .
Roma communities in Europe continue to face unacceptable levels of prejudice and , in many cases , violence .
However , as we see from the Decade of Roma Inclusion Initiative , there is a genuine feeling in this House that we want to see a comprehensive approach .
However , we have talked about this comprehensive approach before .
There is a need in this House to reassess what we have done from the issue of micro credits to tackling racial violence , and for all of these complex issues , we must have a comprehensive strategy .
There is a growing amount of evidence that the situation on the ground is not improving enough .
The Open Society Institute talks about prejudice and violence faced by Roma communities across Europe not decreasing .
Additionally , the Fundamental Rights Agency 's discrimination survey found that the Roma were discriminated against more than any other group surveyed .
We owe it to this House to see that the existing legislation - the Race Equality Directive , the Council framework on tackling violence - is actually implemented , and we owe it to our comprehensive strategy , as has been said earlier , that we look at this as a complex problem but a problem that requires action , an integrated approach , a comprehensive approach .
So let this oral question be a bid to refresh this debate and come up with new solutions and implement those laws which already exist which should be helping Roma communities .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , in view of the second Roma Summit , I would like to share with you a couple of ideas in the hope that they will take effect as soon as possible .
Firstly , I strongly believe we need a broad and coherent strategy on Roma inclusion and we also need an action plan with clear benchmarks and appropriate budgeting .
In my view , it should be a strategy not only for the EU Member States , but also for other countries where Roma communities live and which are either in the enlargement process or in the Neighbourhood Policy , thus allowing the EU to use the most appropriate tools available to it on Roma policies .
Secondly , I am convinced that we must apply the lessons learned from the gender equality policy , namely mainstreaming .
' Roma mainstreaming ' should become the working approach of all EU institutions .
Thirdly , when it comes to the expertise on Roma , we should consider some affirmative actions , especially hiring Roma experts in the Council , the Commission and Parliament .

It is on this note that I have prepared letters to President Van Rompuy and President Barroso recommending them to lead by example and hire Roma advisors .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to echo the calls that have been made for a comprehensive strategy here .
As has been pointed out , we are now in the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , which we know is difficult in times of recession , and that is why we have been asking for social conditionality on rescue packages so that those who are the most excluded do not find themselves falling even further behind .
We have heard already that the gap is widening , which is why our EU 2020 strategy also needs to take into account the need to reduce the gaps between rich and poor .
The changes in the regional development funds are important .
Local authorities , we would agree with the Council , are important because that is so often where discrimination is most closely felt , on housing and the specific needs of the Roma people there , on education , and on the police whose job it is to protect and not simply to criminalise , as seems to be the way in some Member States .
And we want to see high-quality public services .
Council will remember its recommendation on the active inclusion of those furthest from the labour market where high-quality public services are seen as crucial .
We are interested to know whether the Council and Commission are happy with the absorption rate being shown for funds at the moment .
I would also welcome the context change that was strongly put out by the Commission in terms of anti-racism and xenophobia , and would hope that every Member State government would commit itself to those ideals .
Mr President , it is both good and necessary for this House to concern itself about the fate of the Roma .
In the last few centuries , discrimination has been possibly the least of the ills that have befallen them .
It is necessary to use European funds and European directives to promote the integration of the Roma and to eliminate their disadvantaged position .
I also think it important to develop a good strategy to ensure that the European millions really reach the people who need them .
The emphasis here must lie on education .
We must equip the Roma children to break out of the negative cycle that is an unfortunate reality .
However , I should like to add two elements to today 's discussion .
Firstly , I do not think it a good thing that many Roma remain stuck in the role of victim .
They must also take action themselves to eliminate the many abuses in their communities .
Secondly , the integration of the Roma cannot be enforced by means of European funds and European legislation .
Ultimately , those Member States in which Roma live , and have often lived for many generations , will have to assume a leading role in taking up the issue of Roma integration in their own countries .
This is a social much more than a political or financial challenge .
European funds can and should at most provide a helping hand .
Mr President , in December 2009 , when I was in Pristina and Mitrovica and saw how people are living in the Mahala and , in particular , in the lead-contaminated camps , I was rather shocked , particularly about the plight of the children .
In almost every conversation I had , I was told that , not only in Kosovo , but also in many countries in Europe , the situation is dire for one of the oldest population groups in Europe , namely the Roma .
I met Bekim Syla from the Roma and Ashkali Documentation Centre in Pristina , who received us with the words ' We are tired of talking ' .
Action needs to be taken , and therefore our absolute highest expectation of the Córdoba Summit is that there will be more than mere talk and that action will be taken immediately .
Immediate action means not resting on our laurels behind the EU directives implementing the principle of equal treatment , of equal treatment of persons irrespective of race or ethnic origin , and also the Employment Framework Directive , because it will not do any good .
Immediate action requires the recognition and assumption that these directives are not sufficient to protect the Roma in the European Union from degrading and discriminatory treatment and - most importantly - to enable their permanent integration .
What we need , therefore , is a European Roma strategy that is a component of all policy areas - an integral component of all policies .
However , the majority of governments implement projects that are merely sporadic measures .
What we need are medium and long-term political initiatives .
We urgently need measures for the economic development of the Roma communities .
The EU must not wait until 2014 to make its structural and regional funding more flexible ; it must do so now , so that the Roma can also benefit from it .
This includes micro-credit loans , which need to be issued with as little bureaucracy as possible , for example , for the reconstruction of Roma settlements .
It includes very specific measures for the promotion of health and for education , training and the development of the labour market .
I would like to make it quite clear that no child should fail because of educational or language barriers .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left does not want Roma schools , but schools for everyone , where the Roma can also live and learn .
I would like to add that this is not only about the money , but also about taking decisive measures to counter racism .
Antiziganism must not be regarded as or remain a trivial offence , but must be punished as a crime .
The EU bears a lot of the responsibility for the extent to which , it is to be hoped , we will soon succeed in bringing about justice for the more than 10 million Roma in Europe , because it starts with justice and should continue with equality .
For this , we need a very clear political ' yes ' and a resolute , powerful European framework strategy , and - quite frankly - it also needs our passionate commitment , as MEPs and as people , to this population group - the Roma and Sinti .
Let us take action now .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( SK ) The second European Union summit on Roma would surely be a great opportunity for the participants to share their experiences with the results of the numerous measures taken to encourage the successful integration of the Roma into society .
Historians say the Roma came to Europe between the 5th and 9th centuries AD , and many European nations have been looking since then for a way to coexist with the Roma in the best way possible .
It needs to be objectively acknowledged that even after a thousand years of searching for such a model , we have failed to find a way to integrate the Roma properly into our society .
I do not know whether the cause of the persistent problems lies with us or on the other side , but after experiences in my country , I know for sure that to help them only by giving makes no sense .
Our government has collected considerable funds from taxes on all working people and has given them to Roma citizens in order to enable them to lead a dignified life .
Modern flats have been built and given to them , the same which other people have to buy .
Our government provided them with access to work , medical assistance and education on equal terms with all other citizens .
The same support and social benefits are being given to the unemployed Roma as to other citizens .
So what is the result ?
Modern dwellings have been destroyed while sanitary facilities and other furnishings are being dismantled and stolen .
Sewage and rubbish are being thrown by the people in these flats out the window directly into the street .
They do not want to go to work , even if the local government offers it to them .
Medical workers who have been bringing them protection against infectious diseases are chased out of the Roma settlements .
Children are neglected , hungry and often even do not go to school .
Therefore , I am convinced that if we want to really help the Roma , we will have to endeavour first of all to teach Roma children a civilised , cultured and decent way of life .
( HU ) Since I am going to speak Hungarian , my mother tongue , instead of the standard Roma term I will use the word Gipsy , which has no pejorative meaning in my language and it is also used in our Constitution .
This item on the agenda is action against the exclusion and discrimination of the Gipsy .
The essential precondition of the solution is the social integration of the Gipsy people .
School is an important tool for this .
In many cases , there is a reason for separate treatment or positive discrimination if you like , in order to eliminate disadvantages .
When they hear this , minority rights activists immediately cry segregation , even though the objective is rapid inclusion .
Generations of Gipsy in certain regions of Hungary have grown up in families living on benefits rather than earning a living .
There is no way out without creating jobs .
This is why we must break away from neoliberal economic policies .
Even the difficult social situation cannot justify the violation of the law .
In Hungary , Gypsies are involved in a very high percentage of crime .
We have to act against this not only for the benefit of the majority of society , but also for the benefit of the honest Gipsy people .
We have never specified genetic or ethnic labels as a reason .
So there is no mention of racism , we only mentioned special socio-cultural circumstances as a background .
If we routinely stigmatise persons stating this as racists , we only pursue an ostrich policy .
We need to find the way out together .
In order to do this , it is imperative that Gypsies have leaders recognised by their communities and by society as a whole .
Indeed , we need a common European strategy , but this should be a strategy which faces all aspects of the issue and intends to find a solution by examining them with honesty .
( ES ) Mr President , I shall begin by congratulating Mrs Járóka on defending the Roma population within European Union institutions .
It should be pointed out that Mrs Járóka and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) have designed the first European strategy for the integration of the Roma minority , proposing specific Community actions to benefit over nine million citizens living in the European Union .
The Roma population 's situation is different from that of other national minorities in Europe , which is why we need to adopt specific measures concerning them .
The second European summit on Roma inclusion to be held in Córdoba should serve as a forum in which to courageously tackle the problems experienced by this community and to design specific financial and legal instruments which will benefit a minority that has to play the leading role in designing its own future , putting behind us previous paternalist approaches .
I agree that no one has the right to gain political capital at their expense .
Only multidisciplinary , coordinated action between the Commission , the Council and Member States can bring positive results for the Roma population .
The various European commissioners involved will need to coordinate their approach so as to put an end to any action that excludes or discriminates against Roma people .
The Council , together with the Member States , should promote the full integration of the Roma population .
Finally , Member States are responsible for promoting measures to combat the discrimination so often suffered by the Roma .
Access to health care , quality education , further training and professional retraining are indispensable goals for Roma people to be able to achieve decent employment and full participation in civil society .
In that regard , it is vital for local authorities to participate , and I know very well what I am talking about .
We must do everything we can for them , but nothing can be done without them , and in this Chamber , Mr President , we already have some excellent Roma Members .
( HU ) I believe that the second Roma Summit in Córdoba provides an excellent opportunity to take stock of what has been achieved in the past few years concerning the integration of the largest and most vulnerable ethnic minority in Europe , the Roma .
First of all , I would like to emphasise that we have made very important steps to make this a European issue .
This is not just a Central and Eastern European issue , but rather an all-European issue .
In order to be able to find solutions , we have to use the same approach in the future .
Important steps have been taken by the European Parliament by passing a resolution on the necessity of the Roma strategy .
Unfortunately , this has not been adopted yet and we sincerely hope that further significant steps will be made during the mandate of the Trio Presidency and this Commission .
The 2009 report of the European Parliament on the social and labour market situation of the Roma was an important landmark , and we are half-way through the Decade of Roma Inclusion , which is also an important programme .
In order to make our strategy successful , we need to see the extent to which the structural and cohesion funds have been utilised , and whether and in which circumstances they contributed to the social integration of the Roma .
We need data , but we are aware that the data on ethnic origin are always sensitive , and we must be cautious when requesting and handling them .
While numerous positive steps have been made , we also note that the enforcement of readmission agreements has also raised numerous problems .
Kosovo has already been mentioned here .
I sincerely hope that the summit will contribute to solving these issues .
( FR ) Mr President , the Roma issue is being keenly felt in my region , the west of France .
In Nantes , over 1 000 Roma are being expelled from one place after another due to a lack of government regulated sites in which to accommodate them .
The few municipalities with facilities to accommodate the Roma , for example , Rezé and Indre , located in the Nantes conurbation , are stretched to the limit and lack the support of the public authorities .
The most proactive and open mayors are therefore facing enormous difficulties .
Responses cannot be local .
They must be global .
Inclusion of the Roma must be incorporated in every European Union policy in order to put an end to the discrimination suffered by these European citizens .
I would also like to draw attention to the specific situation of the women .
The problems faced by Roma women are particularly striking , for example , in relation to marital violence or unwanted pregnancies .
In France then , according to Médecins du monde , one in two Roma women , or 43 % of that group , will have had an abortion by the age of 22 .
The average age for the first pregnancy is 17 .
Only 10 % of Roma women use contraception .
The European Union must therefore include the gender perspective in all studies and laws that concern the Roma .
Education must be a major priority .
We must act urgently with the Roma communities to make them aware of their fundamental rights and to facilitate their access to public services .
I hope that , at the second European summit on Roma inclusion , the European Union will show its determination to deal with the Roma issue in a comprehensive fashion .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Roma issue is becoming increasingly complex and requires effective and immediate responses .
Their representatives , the institutions , associations and a section of civil society , are calling for their inclusion in the socio-economic fabric , but rarely is the essential point brought to the fore ; namely that integration is a two-sided , historical and cultural process .
Without the genuine will of some of the Roma people to accept the rules and culture of the countries in which they live and without , at the same time , refraining from all behaviour that is incompatible with civil harmony , their inclusion will never come to pass : in this case , we could continue to come up with projects and allocate funds , but we will never see appreciable results .
The challenge should not be tackled with demagogy : we ask that the issue be approached with due pragmatism and bearing in mind that the worrying economic and employment situation will be a factor that makes inclusion of the Roma people in the labour market more difficult .
We believe that , as centuries of history teach us , this problematic integration cannot be attributed solely to host countries and that responsibility for the current lack of integration should at least be attributed to both parties .
( MT ) I would also like to extend my support , in particular , to MEP Lívia Járóka , who has worked incessantly on this sensitive and important subject .
Mr President , as my fellow Member said , the situation of the Roma population in Europe is one which does not only concern a limited number of countries .
It is a situation which concerns the entire European Union since the Roma community are the largest ethnic minority in Europe .
In this light , it is necessary that we evaluate what the European Union is currently doing in order to see how we can do things in a better way .
I was pleased to listen to the Vice-President of the European Commission , Viviane Reding , give us a full explanation on this matter .
And this is a good time to do so in view of the Roma Summit which will be held in Córdoba in the coming month .
What is certain is that we cannot leave the situation unchanged because it will not resolve itself and if we do not take the necessary steps , these people will remain marginalised and caught in a poverty trap .
We must therefore adopt an integration policy which leads to the Roma community truly having access to the opportunities available to others .
In particular , the opportunity to work , to exploit their capabilities , to live a dignified life and to be successful must be provided to these people .
Thus , not only will they be able to support themselves but also to contribute to the societies where they live .
However , in order to achieve this , we must take the necessary steps to remove the existing obstacles .
I hope that our message in this Chamber , in this Parliament , our message of solidarity with the Roma people , is received in view of next month 's summit .
( ES ) Mr President , the 10 million Roma people in Europe would constitute a medium-sized Member State of the European Union , if they were a State .
However , they are not one .
The Roma people have always put their Europeanism before any border .
In fact , they are like second-class citizens because of the discrimination they have suffered throughout history , not only in the areas of education , health , and housing , but also as migrants , which is their very essence .
The Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights has said that , in certain countries in the European Union , Roma migrants are not treated in the same way as other European migrants , which is a flagrant violation of the right to free movement .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament is committed to building a Europe in which ethnic and cultural minorities are recognised , and in which we progress towards an inclusive European citizenship and an area of equality , freedom and coexistence in diversity .
For this reason , we welcome the directive on non-discrimination in all areas - a directive that has not always received support from all the political groups in this Chamber .
We also welcome the Spanish Presidency 's programme in this area ; we believe it is needed because there cannot be any more delays when it comes to establishing European initiatives that recognise and support the Roma people .
The Córdoba Summit , to be held under the Spanish Presidency , is a major opportunity to establish a comprehensive plan for the Roma people , leaving behind years of silence and racism .
Mr President , there is very little to add - just a plea .
As has been said , let us not forget that the Roma Summit was an initiative of this Parliament and it was tabled during the Slovenian Presidency , aimed at bringing together the EU governments to work together on Roma issues .
This is another reason for this Parliament to be active on this issue .
The Greens differ , however , and we will not be proud if all Member States do not admit that we can do better on the Roma issue .
Issues like this one have to form part of a joint call for a European strategy for Roma inclusion .
We need that strategy ; we need that strategy because the European Union is also losing credibility at international level .
Many countries are singling us out because of this issue .
This is important as well because , even in the past , we understood that this is something that has to do with human rights and social inclusion .
We understand as well that it is a question of politics .
It is in the framework of political debate that we have to understand that a necessary solution has to be sought .
Mr President , Roma , the largest European minority , are suffering from institutional discrimination , anti-Gypsyism , extraordinary levels of poverty and social exclusion , segregated systems in housing , education and social welfare .
Short-term solutions are not an answer to the widespread and deep-rooted problems of Roma .
We need to evaluate existing good practices , as well as the negative effects of existing policies for the Roma population .
One , but not the only , example is taking Roma children away from their families and putting them in separate boarding schools .
These measures do not solve problems : they lead , rather , to more segregation , and impact deeply and negatively on the lives of Roma families .
Europe needs an effective long-term Roma strategy .
This summit gives us a new opportunity for affirmative action , different from the first Roma Summit , which did not include real political commitments in the EU .
The EU should start by setting a good example , by offering more positions to Roma people and including Roma and civil society in the strategy .
Mr President , the summit in Córdoba will be a test for all of us , European institutions and Member States .
It should demonstrate clear European commitment to considering a fully fledged political and operational strategy that would , in addressing Roma issues , go beyond obvious human rights perspectives , fundamental as they are , towards real economic and social inclusion .
We need an integrated strategy policy and an action plan cutting across all areas relevant to economic and social belonging .
Much has been done and achieved but , without any doubt , there is still a long journey ahead of us .
We need the Commission , Parliament , the Member States but also , as Minister López Garrido said , local and regional authorities working hand in hand .
We expect from the Commission a clear allocation of the responsibilities for this matter and effective coordination between all relevant services .
We expect the EUR 5 million pilot project currently implemented by the Commission to pave the way for efficient and effective solutions in the areas that matter most : early childhood education and economic inclusion , and provide progress on policy learning and evaluation .
We appreciate the Commission ' efforts , especially those by the Regional Policy DG , and we encourage the Commission to further enhance local and regional involvement in practical action strengthening the economic inclusion of Roma society .
In Parliament , many colleagues across the political groups have already demonstrated their involvement , but our duty is to put much greater political power into this issue .
Roma inclusion would give us a chance to move forward towards making the European labour market truly inclusive .
It would give us a chance to move forward in addressing European demographic challenges .
So let me conclude by saying that we must treat the Córdoba Summit as a last call for real inclusion of the Roma .
( HU ) As a developer of the first medium-term government programme for Europe on the Roma issue and the rapporteur of the 2002 Roma report of the Council of Europe , I agree with those stating that this is one of the most complex issues of Europe today .
I do not envy Commissioner Reding 's position , because this is currently the most complex issue in Europe .
Evidently , the Roma are not simply an ethnic and national minority , but are also a multiply disadvantaged social minority .
However , the distribution of responsibility between the majority and the minority is not evident .
The social responsibility is asymmetrically distributed between the majority and the minority , because the majority has far more responsibility , but the minority , in this case the Roma , also has its own responsibility .
The fourth and particularly important point is that we need integration without assimilation .
Finally , this is not simply a budgetary issue and it does not depend merely on resources .
This is an issue of whether there are people and mechanisms in place , both in the majority society and among the Roma .
As a former Secretary of State , I have to say that results were achieved in regions where there were local majority leaders committed to the issue , and credible local minority leaders capable of motivating the minority and supported by NGOs .
It is not a funding issue .
We need the European level , but success is to be reached at Member State and local level .
This is why I support the strategy of the Union .
( RO ) The economic and social development of the Roma minority group is one of the most delicate and controversial issues which the states in Central and Eastern Europe face .
We do not have exact estimates as to the actual number of Roma in the EU .
However , we know that the Roma minority is the largest and poorest cross-border ethnic minority .
The European Union needs to have a coherent long-term approach because national policies are inadequate when it comes to changing the Roma 's situation .
Each state is responsible for improving the living conditions of the Roma population .
However , the success of this process lies , to a large extent , in tackling this issue in its entirety through coordinated actions .
In my view , the lack of prospects for the young generation is one of the biggest problems we are facing .
The Roma population is a young population with a significant proportion of them under the age of 20 .
In the society based on knowledge and innovation which Europe wants to develop , if we fail to take immediate measures , the gaps between young Roma and the rest of the population will grow .
Children and young people are included in few of the current policies and strategies , even though the large number of children and young people in the Roma population makes them the generation of change .
The process of sustainable development must start from a generation of children who have access to education , medical aid and all the opportunities which children from the majority population enjoy .
This is why I wish to draw your attention to the fact that the Commission proposal on the EU 2020 strategy does not contain any objectives for resolving the problems of the Roma community .
If we are not going to take specific measures and if we are not going to make major changes in terms of approach , millions of young Roma will continue to face social exclusion and marginalisation throughout their entire lives .
The lack of hope will turn these communities into areas of insecurity for their inhabitants and the rest of the population .
We must offer the Roma community a real chance to change their prospects .
Solidarity is the fundamental value at the heart of the European project .
This is why we must shift from the political will to taking measures to actually put them into practice .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , according to a recent public opinion survey , 76 % of Czechs do not want to have Roma as neighbours .
Over the past 10 years or more , I have addressed in my everyday political life as a mayoress the problems of coexistence and neighbourly relations between Roma and non-Roma citizens in my home town .
As a consequence , I firmly believe that financial solutions are not the answer , which is anyway clear from the unimpressive overall results of the EU-funded projects to date aimed at improving the socio-economic situation of the Roma .
In my opinion , the solution can lie only in the cohesion of local communities in towns and villages , which must accept Roma as fully-fledged citizens for better or for worse .
However , the same applies in reverse .
The Roma , too , must have a sense of belonging to their community and accept its rules and standards .
Their own positive examples and role models are enormously important for relations with the majority community and for effective work within the Roma community .
It is fundamental , however , for there to be a consistent and uncompromising fight against xenophobia and racism in society at large .
Let us make it absolutely clear , through all possible resources , concrete actions and positions , that these are totally unacceptable for us .
We should make a common effort in this direction in the future .
( RO ) I would like , right at the start , to express the hope that the Roma Summit in Córdoba will be the crucial time for adopting a common strategy devoted to Roma inclusion .
The living conditions of this community remain unacceptable and discrimination against them is increasing , in spite of the fact that the sums allocated in recent years to projects aimed at improving their situation are approaching EUR 0.5 billion .
I think that the time has come for us to shift from good intentions to deeds .
Unfortunately , the European Commission has still not proved that it has the necessary desire to coordinate the actions for improving the Roma 's standard of living and social integration and for combating the racist actions directed against them .
I think that the Roma issue must be a special task , clearly defined for the Commissioner for Social Affairs .
It would also be extremely useful if the Commission experts tasked with dealing with this issue also include experts of Roma origin .
I also believe that we need to have a social and cultural approach so as to avoid increasing the already existing inequalities in terms of both literacy and employment levels .
With this in mind , I call on the Commission to encourage labour market access programmes for Roma migrants and cooperation between the local authorities and Roma communities , and to consider closer collaboration with non-governmental organisations .

( SL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr López Garrido , first of all , I should like to congratulate Spain on adding this summit to its list of priorities .
At the same time , allow me also to congratulate the Commission for deciding to prepare a comprehensive report on the position of the Roma in Europe .
It is testimony to the fact that we are aware of how topical this issue is .
However , it has only become topical in recent years , with the enlargement of the European Union .
Another thing I am pleased to see is that virtually all the parliamentary groups , or most of them , have approached the resolution of this issue seriously .
The Treaty of Lisbon has provided us with an additional legal basis , enabling us to approach more thoroughly the development of a comprehensive and powerful strategy for the resolution of the Roma question , in the framework of what is commonly termed ' soft law ' .
It is clear that we are not in a position to develop a common Roma policy at EU level , because the primary competence in this regard rests with Member States .
However , what we can develop are some indicators and a common database ; we can exchange good practice and , here , Member States can be of great help to each other .
I come from Slovenia where , for example , we have instituted the role of ' Roma classroom assistant ' , whose job it is to mediate between the school and the parents and who is of great assistance in introducing Roma children into the education system .
( RO ) The first European Roma Summit actually recognised the individual failure of European states to guarantee the Roma their rights and integration , and marked a first step towards adopting a common long-term strategy at EU level .
Unfortunately , a huge discrepancy persists between plans and studies and putting them into practice in order to tangibly improve the life of the Roma community , which remains the most vulnerable ethnic group in Europe , at a time when they are facing the highest level of poverty and social exclusion .
Indeed , their prospects are not at all encouraging if we consider that roughly half the Roma population is made up of minors due to the high birth rate and short life expectancy .
I believe that the first step towards a coherent inclusion strategy must be to guarantee the young generation of Roma non-discriminatory access to education .
This is the only measure which can play a crucial role in facilitating change so that the Roma can be integrated into the labour market and escape the vicious circle of social exclusion .
( RO ) The Roma is a cross-border ethnic and cultural community numbering more than 10 million across Europe .
The social problems affecting Roma require concerted , long-term action , involving the European Union and Member States .
Important initiatives have been launched in this area , but I believe that we need to go further .
We need to adopt a proper European strategy for Roma , based on well-targeted actions and a regular assessment of its impact .
I come from a country with a large Roma community and I welcome that today we are acknowledging that the Roma issue is an issue for the whole of Europe to deal with .
A strategy is in force in Romania , which dates back before the country joined the EU , aimed at improving the Roma 's situation .
Special places are provided to them free at public universities , which is helping greatly to raise the level of education and culture among the members of this community .
National and local public authorities are making efforts to promote social inclusion of the Roma and to integrate them into the labour market in order to combat dire poverty and provide them with access to health care services .
However , consistent financial support is required from Europe in order to achieve the desired results .
( HU ) For Gipsy children , Roma children , the only way to break out of their situation is to attend school on a regular basis .
Unfortunately , we regularly hear , as a manifestation of political correctness , excuses made on various grounds for parents who do not encourage or even prevent their children 's school attendance .
From this point of view , girls , Gipsy girls , are particularly subject to and victims of discrimination , because their irresponsible parents often burden them with looking after their many brothers and sisters and doing household chores instead of going to school .
The only approach in line with international human rights standards is if the government undertakes the obligation to step up in such cases and defend the rights of the child through penalties , sanctions or , if necessary , by withdrawing family benefit or other forms of assistance to make parents respect the rights of the child .
( SK ) The poorest group of people in the European Union are certainly the Roma .
Therefore , I am for utilising all means to integrate Roma into social and economic activities .
Above all , I see the education of children and young people as the solution .
I also agree that it is necessary to eliminate the hidden and overt discrimination of Roma .
However , I am also in favour of speaking quite openly about how the rights of Roma children are being repressed by their own parents .
Everybody has a right to a dignified life .
Roma children , to a predominant degree , do not have that .
At the next summit , let us also talk about how the Roma themselves , above all , must be active in solving their own problems ; first , regarding the education of their children , but also about their personal involvement in the process of improving their own living conditions .
And since I do not want to be a Commissioner in the future , I want to say here in this room that we should also be speaking at the next summit about how support for the Roma is being abused by the Roma themselves .
Mr President , the debate we have just had on the Roma population and the upcoming Córdoba Summit clearly shows once again that the social and economic integration of the Roma is a problem at European level and therefore requires a European strategy .
Following on from the insufficient progress which has been made , that is precisely what we hope to achieve at the Córdoba Summit , which has already been mentioned many times .
We need a strategy based on an action plan which the Council intends to follow , bearing in mind the overall programme set out by the Trio of Presidencies ; for it is a far-reaching programme , a working action plan which should , without doubt , have the Structural Funds as one of its main instruments - for that is Europe 's most powerful tool for social cohesion - and which should be implemented through specific actions .
To my mind , some of those actions should focus on specific issues faced by the Roma people : the discrimination they suffer as Roma , such as the difficulty they have in accessing public services and employment .
We must also look at the issue of Roma women , who suffer particular problems of poverty , access to housing , discrimination and violence ; and the problem of young Roma , too , for their lack of qualifications makes it even more difficult for them to gain access to employment during this time of economic crisis .
There is also the issue of Roma children : it is said that their life expectancy is 10 years shorter than that of the average European child .
At the same time , however , we need to take general action that benefits the Roma population as a whole ; they are one of the communities that suffers from the worst discrimination , and so any anti-discrimination policy is going to help them .
This is also the case with the action being taken against gender violence , which is why it is so important that , as soon as possible , we have the directive on the protection order that will combat gender violence , for this action will particularly benefit Roma women ; that is also the case with the directive on non-discrimination , which will particularly benefit the Roma population .
We must not take a paternalistic approach to all of this because , above all , we have to respect the identity and cultural characteristics of the Roma population .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the House for the many suggestions and proposals that have been made .
They will be taken on board by Commissioner Andor and myself when we present our communication before the summit .
In this communication , it will also be made very clear that the Commission cannot and will not accept that the Roma are discriminated against and excluded from our society because of their ethnicity .
Now , we do have instruments ; we do have policies .
The question is , how do we utilise them ?
How do we mainstream the question and the problems of the Roma in these instruments and policies ?
I believe that we do not need a Roma Directive or a Roma Fund .
What we need is to take Roma issues fully into account when we apply EU law and when we implement EU funds .
The key to this - and it has been said by many of you - is partnership and the cooperation of all the key actors .
The Commission pursues this approach in the European platform for Roma inclusion and with its internal procedures .
But I would also like to underline very clearly that , while , of course , Roma exclusion has a lot to do with fundamental rights , mostly it has to do with social and economic issues .
For instance , I would like to quote the World Bank 's study on the economic cost of Roma exclusion and to see that this is a very important piece of evidence showing that we need to find solutions for the sake of our society in general .
So to apply the instruments which we have in the most effective manner possible will need a strategic approach , of course - mainstream , as some of you have said .
This approach is based on cooperation , on mobilisation of the necessary resources and on a strategy learning from success as well as from failure .
What we must avoid doing is creating a strategy which exists only on paper .
Results are needed ; results which lead to the integration of Roma into mainstream schools .
I have heard many of you speaking about schooling .
I am looking forward to seeing the details of our action on pre-schooling , how this has been working out .
The mainstream labour market ; here , my colleague , Mr Andor , is going to look for precise targets to be achieved , and the mainstream society which is the responsibility of all our policies .
( HU ) Mr President , We have a technical problem .
I have just noticed that the computer cloned me , because my name , the Tabajdi name , appeared for my colleagues who had cards inserted .
I noticed it in the case of Mrs Gomez , and elsewhere , as well .
So there must be some problem with the computer .
My fellow Member , Mrs Kinga Göncz , also has the name Tabajdi displayed on the card .
Please check it , as I do not want to have so many clones in the European Parliament .
Please inform the technical service .
Thank you .
Zoli , is it the same for you ?
Thank you .
The technical services will take note of that .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the next part-session .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I would like to underline that by sharing responsibility for preventing discrimination against Roma and for aiding their integration into society , the Roma issue has become part of European human rights policy .
Therefore , as we approach the second European Roma Summit in Córdoba , we must discuss the social problems faced by Roma and the means of solving these problems .
I am pleased that the Spanish Presidency is hosting this summit , since we must raise and acknowledge the existence of Roma issues .
I would like to underline that in a democratic and free society , it is unacceptable that a group of people are isolated from society and that people 's fundamental rights and freedoms are openly violated .
Members of the Roma community face racist attacks , unequal access to public services and social provisions and huge living and educational segregation .
Moreover , we must draw attention to the fact that Roma not only experience direct discrimination , but face implicit , indirect discrimination , for example , the failure to employ Roma and , at the same time , their non-integration into social life .
Therefore , I agree that we must call on the European Commission to encourage Member State governments and regional and local authorities to better implement EU projects in respect of Roma .
I also call on the Commission to take concrete action and initiatives to combat direct and indirect discrimination against Roma in Europe .
in writing . - Statistics show that unfortunately , Roma are the most hated and discriminated ethnic minority in Europe .
We have seen the difficulties that several Member States , including mine , have concerning the social inclusion of the Roma .
This clearly shows that this is a broader European issue that we must handle together .
Better access to education and employment is crucial so that we avoid the tendency of Roma to choose other more easier but harmful ways of money making .
We need to fully apply the anti-discrimination legislation to Roma people and to take further initiatives to integrate them in our society .
So far , we haven 't had any coherent strategy .
I wish that this Second European Roma Summit brings about a real EU strategy for Roma .
Structural and pre-accession funds should be more efficiently used to finance such initiatives .
I would also like to insist on the fact that this strategy should be a tool of coordination and an impetus for the Member States .
The initiatives have to be taken at local level and benefit from the expertise of local NGOs and Roma themselves who know what the main difficulties are , so that this strategy really meets Roma people 's needs .
in writing . - The Roma continue to be one of the most disadvantaged minorities in all of Europe , subject to widespread discrimination in all spheres of life .
In the last decade , the European Union and its Member States have devoted attention and resources to improving the situation of the Roma .
Working in cooperation with the Roma rights movement , some Member States have begun to implement policies aimed at ensuring equal access to quality education for Roma children .
Continuing efforts in this area should remain the highest priority in the coming years .
Policies need to be comprehensive in order to achieve a maximum systemic impact in closing the gap between Roma and non-Roma in all areas : education , employment , housing and health .
The European Union and Member States should continue to evaluate their Roma-related policies to date and seek ways to eliminate any paternalistic approaches to the Roma issue , which treat the Roma as dependent , passive recipients of policy benefits .
A traineeship scheme should also be set up for young Roma to build up their professional expertise through programmes in Commission departments and appropriate government institutions .
We are halfway through the ten-year period ( 2005-2015 ) devoted to Roma inclusion .
What we can see is that a great deal is being said about the Roma minority , various programmes and platforms are being created , but the results are limited .
The problems associated with education , employment , regional development , etc. persist and are getting worse in some Member States .
The second Roma Summit being held this year in Córdoba is intended to revitalise the European aspect and find new courses of action .
I agree that the principles need to be redefined , but I believe that we should devise instead a transversal , horizontal strategy which will tackle this minority 's problems in an integrated , but not exclusive manner .
The most important aspect is that the pre-accession funds and Structural Funds are used properly and yield the results which we would like as political decision makers , and which civil society and , above all , the Roma minority , would like .
The first Roma Summit had at least one positive outcome : the conclusion reached at Community level that the Roma need education as a first step towards social integration .
In this respect , I also welcome the second meeting of the European Platform for Roma Inclusion devoted exclusively to the issue of Roma education in Europe .
The process of educational reform requires the involvement of not only State institutions but also of non-governmental organisations which no longer need to make it their main objective to identify acts of discrimination , but to educate ethnic groups .
Reducing illiteracy , ensuring children complete their schooling and the need for vocational training and retraining offer opportunities for accessing the labour market as well as means of social inclusion .
It is clear that we urgently need positive development among this minority , but this is something which both the authorities and the Roma community itself are responsible for .
The second Roma Summit must motivate the European Commission sufficiently to come up with legislative proposals aimed at achieving tangible results in this area .
The European Commission must also review the Social Fund and propose an increase in funding for projects aimed at improving the socio-economic situation of the largest minority in the European Union .
The Roma Summit in Córdoba is intended to be an opportunity to talk plainly about the parallel societies in Europe and this should be based on efficient integration at all levels .
It should be promoted at national as well as at European level .
However , there is one thing that we should not forget in this regard , and that is that , for effective integration , both sides need to work together .
The Roma people must also do their bit for integration and work from the inside to prevent the creation of parallel societies .
In this regard , I am particularly concerned about the school education of children , in particular , of girls .
In the middle of Europe , it must not be the case that children are barely or not at all integrated into the existing school system and then drop out of school early in large numbers .
Their future position in the labour market is jeopardised considerably as a result and they then take refuge on the edge of society to an even greater extent , thereby isolating themselves .
Problems relating to social security and their living conditions are then predetermined and the vicious circle is complete .
It is therefore crucial to appeal to the Roma in Europe to change their archaic attitude to school education and women 's rights , to actively fight to combat their own exclusion , and to work to integrate themselves into society and into the labour market in particular .
Although Member States have already spent significant EU and national resources on creating jobs for long-term unemployed Roma people , a coherent European-level solution has not been found : Member States faced the situation in different ways and to different degrees .
I believe that it is important to elaborate a coherent and efficient strategy to resolve the Roma issue , which has remained unsolved to this day and represents a common problem of the European Union as a legal entity and the Member States .
The most important issue of the European Roma Summit , to be held on 8 April in Córdoba , should be the formulation of the principles of the European-level strategy , to prevent any further ' migration ' of the Roma issue and to enable all Member States to find a solution based on the common European strategy .
I am convinced that the basic tool for tackling this is education .
I consider it necessary to develop a comprehensive programme package that promotes and encourages the return of young Roma intellectuals into the community and their work within the framework of the community and for the community .
Building a close partnership between different Roma advocacy organisations , responsible State institutions , the civil society and cooperating EU institutions could support this to a great extent .
A more significant role should be given to methods of granting subsidised micro credits or interest repayments by the State .
Access of Roma communities to the conditions required to earn their livelihood should be an important target within the concept of agricultural subsidies .
The situation is more serious than one would believe : the ratio of long-term unemployed has grown by leaps and bounds among the Roma , and more and more of them become marginalised .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0017 / 2010 ) .
This will be a little shorter this evening than it should be because the preceding debate overran by 25 minutes because of earlier delays .
I am sorry about that .
We will finish some time after 19.30 .
I intend to be very crisp on time .
Speakers from the floor have 30 seconds .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part one
Subject : Regulation of private pension funds
In recent years , the value of private pension fund assets has decreased a great deal .
The need for closer regulation of the private pension fund sector has been underlined by the high level group on financial supervision chaired by Jacques de Larosière .
The financial crisis has highlighted the extent to which Member States are vulnerable to a wide range of risks .
These risks are of direct concern to investors in those funds and to the stability and integrity of European financial markets , as well as seriously affecting financial market participants .
In this unstable period for the economy , many European citizens have lost confidence in the regulation of the private pension fund system .
Does the Commission not take the view that it should propose a comprehensive legal measure to lay down monitoring standards with the purpose of regulating private pension funds ?
Mrs Blinkevičiūthas asked a very important question about pension reform , which is a key issue for the coming years , given the challenges that we have to face together : demographic ageing , the viability of public finances and the mobility of employees in particular .
Moreover , pension funds are major institutional investors .
The financial crisis has shown up the weaknesses in the design of some pensions schemes and , ladies and gentlemen , following on from the de Larosière report , we are going to take some initiatives .
President Barroso has announced some policy guidelines on this matter to the European Parliament .
During 2010 , we are going to present a Green Paper on pensions that is expected to encourage a rigorous discussion of the regulation of private pension funds .
In this context , a revision of the directive on the activities and supervision of institutions for occupational retirement provision might be envisaged .
The Commission remains committed to strengthening the internal market in the area of pension funds .
This revision of the directive would also include solvency rules for pension funds .
Moreover , Mr President , this meets a demand made by the European Parliament during the negotiations on the Solvency II Directive .
To avoid any ambiguity on this very important issue that affects the citizens , I would add that , in the name of subsidiarity , the Commission will be very careful to respect the choices that are made in many of the Member States concerning their attachment to the pay-as-you-go pension scheme .

( LT ) Thank you , Commissioner , for your answer and we certainly hope that the European Commission will submit a Green Paper on pensions as soon as possible since , in the majority of European Union Member States , this is a particularly urgent matter .
In some Member States , like my country Lithuania , already small pensions were reduced even further , such was the reality of the current economic and financial situation .
However , Commissioner , I would also like to ask whether you can say why , in the EU 2020 strategy , the European Commission has devoted so little attention to the security and stability of pensions and to pension guarantees , since we have to take into account the current situation in the labour market , the current demographic situation and , indeed , this is one of the most important issues , what sort of pensions people will receive in 10 years time .
Mrs Blinkevičiūtė , it is evident that the document on the 2020 strategy , which is a document for green growth , for intelligent , equitable and inclusive growth , cannot mention all of the issues .
This is why we have other instruments , other occasions , and other frameworks in which we can fulfil our duty of dealing with fundamental questions such as pensions and the dependence of Europe 's citizens .
I have just said , Mrs Blinkevičiūtė , that pension funds are major institutional investors .
The various types of pension schemes operating on the basis of statutory funding , whether occupational or voluntary , today play an increasingly important role in the overall pension schemes in many Member States .
I repeat that we will work by showing respect , in the name of subsidiarity , for the commitment and the attachment of many countries - and I am fairly familiar with some of them - to the pay-as-you-go scheme and , on this basis , we will work on this Green Paper , which will be ready in the coming weeks or months , at the latest .
I should be happy to have as broad a debate as possible with you and other interested Members .
( DE ) Mr President , my home country , Austria , subsidises private pension provision by a maximum of EUR 210 per year , although pension speculation has been shown to have been one of the triggers of the financial crash in the United States .
I believe that the Commission needs to ask itself whether pension provision is not actually the quintessential task of the State and whether we should keep a tight rein on dubious financial speculators in this regard .
There is also the question of whether , in the Commission 's opinion , it is not short-sighted or even negligent to provide State subsidies for private pension provision without quality standards if there is a risk that , after these enormous losses , the pension recipients will be in even more need of support from the State .
Mr Barroso had the opportunity , a short while ago in this Chamber , to reply to several questions on the major issues relating to financial movements .
You spoke of speculation , Mr Obermayr .
As European Commissioner for the Internal Market and Services with responsibility for regulation and supervision , I am able to say that no product , market or territory will be excluded or immune from intelligent supervision and effective regulation .
Therefore , everyone in these markets , with their various products , will be affected by the work that we are going to undertake , work that has already begun in the form of the Supervision package , which is already under discussion , and by revising several directives , in particular , the Institutions for Occupational Retirement Provisions ( IORP ) Directive , we are going to establish strict investment rules .
I confirm that we will exclude none of these products or markets from the requirement for supervised transparency and for intelligent , effective regulation .
( RO ) I believe that strategic thinking is required long term about reforming the pensions system , both in the private and public sectors .
I am referring here to the fact that the birth rate soared in the 1970s .
In 30 years ' time , these people will be retiring , while at the moment , the birth rate is very low .
Those being born today will supply the workforce in 30 years ' time and they will not be able to provide the resources required for the pension funds at that time .
This is why I would like to ask you : what measures are you adopting to carry out a proper reform of the pensions systems in the long term , in a sustainable manner and for the benefit of Europe 's citizens ?
Mrs Ţicău , in the first part of my speech just now , which was quite short as per the rules , I myself mentioned one of the major challenges , other than mobility , which is that of demography .
Moreover , even though the question of a family or demographic policy does not come under the main European areas of responsibility , I do think that we would all benefit from having a debate and making comparisons on this issue , which concerns , to a greater or lesser extent , all of the European countries .
Our continent is probably one of the few continents in the world that will see its population fall relative to the other continents if birth rates do not recover .
It is against this extremely serious background , Mrs Ţicău , and going beyond the issue of retirement itself , that we have to work on the pensions issue and on the issue of taking responsibility for dependency .
That is why I believe that this Green Paper is a good tool that comes at the right time .
You will not have to wait too long .
We are working on the issue and we are going to put the final touches to it to ask all of these questions , whilst taking proper account of what falls under national responsibilities for pensions systems and what it is possible to do at European level , especially in relation to all these private pension funds and their proliferation on the European markets .
In any case , all of these issues - none of which will be excluded - will form part of the questions that we are going to be considering , whilst proposing some courses of action or guidelines in the Green Paper that I mentioned , which will be published in a few months ' time .
Subject : Flood insurance systems in the EU
Recent flooding in Ireland has caused approximately € 500 million worth of damage to both private and public infrastructure .
The Irish Government has made an application to the EU Solidarity Fund to cover a proportion of the damage to public infrastructure .
However , there is often no redress for private households and undertakings due to the prohibitive cost of private flood insurance .
It is worth noting that one of the causal factors of the unprecedented flooding was the uncoordinated planning of development , including , in some cases , on flood plains , and that some insurers are refusing to insure particular households and undertakings .
In the light of this , could the Commission outline any plans it has , if any , to draft legislative proposals to harmonise flood insurance provision in the EU , taking into account the market failure to provide adequate cover in some Member States ?
Failing that , could the Commission comment on any programmes it has developed to exchange best practice in this area between Member States ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Kelly is asking a question relating to a recent tragic event , one that has struck Madeira and the Atlantic coast , in my country in particular , causing dozens of deaths .
Whilst I am on the subject , I should naturally like to express once again our solidarity with all of the victims , and my colleague , Commissioner Hahn , has been at the scene in both of the places that I have just mentioned .
In this case , too , we have to confront the global challenge posed by climate change and we shall see a growing number of natural disasters , just as we shall continue to see , moreover , disasters that are not natural and that may have serious consequences for human life , nature and the economy .
For example , I am thinking about industrial disasters , fires and disasters at sea .
This is an issue to which I have been personally committed for a very long time .
It was here in this very Chamber , in 1999 , that I , as the recently appointed Commissioner for Regional Policy , had to respond to Greek Members who were worried about the consequences of the earthquakes that had just occurred in their country .
At the time , I proposed , firstly , the creation of a solidarity fund and , secondly , the creation of a European civil protection force .
We had to wait until 2002 and the major flooding that affected Germany , Austria and Slovakia before the Commission was able to create , in the space of three months , with the help of Parliament and of the Council , the Solidarity Fund that will intervene in Madeira and on the Atlantic coast , just as it has intervened in several major disasters since 2002 .
My colleague , Mrs Georgieva , is working with Baroness Ashton on the introduction of the European Civil Protection Force , and I hope that we will not have to wait for a new disaster before we pool our responses and our relief efforts under a single European flag in disasters such as that in Haiti or the tsunami .
The question that was asked relates to insurance , because not everything is related to uninsurable public property that can be covered by the Solidarity Fund .
I think that there is progress to be made on the risks that can be covered by insurance policies .
The 2009 White Paper on adapting to climate change suggests having publicly supported insurance systems where no insurance exists .
In the follow-up to this White Paper , I want to examine the role insurance products could play in supplementing these measures .
I intend to start with a benchmarking exercise : I have asked my services to examine what exists in the various Member States .
In situations where there could be a crossborder impact , it might even be appropriate to promote insurance schemes that are Europewide rather than national .
I am very aware of the complexity of this issue , Mr Kelly .
I shall carry out this work in cooperation with all of the stakeholders , with the insurance companies , with the Member States and the experts , to exchange best practices and to set the priorities at the correct level .
I am convinced that we can improve the protection of Europe 's citizens in the face of the increasing number of natural disasters .
That is why I wish to undertake this extremely practical task of screening , of benchmarking the various existing insurance systems for natural disasters in the 27 Member States .
We were all obviously very concerned about Madeira and France .
In my own country , fortunately , nobody was killed but the insurance problem manifested itself very quickly .
Lots of households cannot get insurance now and in one town , Clonmel , where there was flooding a number of years ago , insurance has risen six fold .
Obviously , that is a huge issue and I compliment the Commissioner on looking into it .
I would also just like to ask him about countries and governments that do not implement the Floods Directive .
Would he consider sanctions of some nature for them as well ?
This Floods Directive dates from 2007 .
There was also a Commission communication in 2009 on the prevention of natural or manmade disasters in general .
Mr Kelly , you are talking about fairly recent directives but the same thing applies to these and all the other directives , as soon as they become operative : the Commission must and will verify how the Member States are applying or not applying these directives .
When we speak of flooding , as has been seen clearly in France and as can be seen in your own country , the consequences for land management of a failure to take precautions and of construction in flood zones are obvious .
The Commission will act in this area , as in all others , by looking at what the Member States are doing or not doing and by taking the appropriate measures , including action against breaches , to ensure that these directives are applied .

Apropos what Mr Kelly raised , and that is the implementation of the Floods Directive : as you know , it has to be transposed into national law this year , 2010 , in all 27 Member States .
What I would urge is that the Commission keeps an eye on national authorities in relation to the implementation of it .
In 1995 , I was the Minister with responsibility for flooding in Ireland .
We brought a report out at that stage that there should be no further building of new houses in flood plains .
And yet many of the houses looking for compensation in parts of Ireland were built post that .
So we need to implement the Floods Directive very rigidly indeed and to impose penalties on the Irish Government and local authorities and on anybody who breaches the conditions of the Floods Directive .
( PL ) Mr Barnier , I would like to ask you about something else .
We are talking about insurance , but I think that when it comes to disasters , two measures of another kind are needed .
In relation to this , I would like to ask you about the following matter - should a rapid reaction centre not be established faster in Europe ?
We do not have a single centre which could react to disaster situations .
Secondly , should we not put greater effort into establishing civil capabilities ?
For example , we do not have transport aircraft .
In other words , apart from insurance , we need one centre and we need greater capabilities for giving help .

Two different questions have been asked .
First , on the question of the floods , I came as the Commissioner for the Internal Market and Services to reply to a specific question , Mr Kelly , which was as follows : how can best use be made of insurance policies , particularly to compensate people whose personal property has been affected ?
I am going to work on this snapshot of the various more or less sophisticated private insurance schemes , where some countries have hardly any insurance for this type of disaster and others , such as France , have a scheme that pays 100 % compensation in the event of a natural disaster .
Flooding , Mr Kelly , is not an issue for which I have responsibility .
I am going to ask Mr Potočnik , my colleague with responsibility for the environment , to give you a written answer informing you of how this directive on flooding is or is not being applied .
You are right , however , that the key issue lies in national and even regional or local powers in the areas of building or suitability for building .
One cannot ask Brussels for everything , although the general rule is obvious : there are areas where building or further building should not occur .
I even had a law passed in my country to move housing and factories located in areas that were regularly affected by flooding .
I had a law passed in 1995 , and people are compensated so that they leave before another disaster occurs .
Those are the ideas that I would like to bring together before coming back to you with some proposals on the issue of insurance policies .
I would like to say a final word on the issue of civil protection , even though the issue falls within the remit of other colleagues .
It is an issue on which I did some work - as you know - which was supported by the European Parliament , at the request of President Barroso , in 2006 .
This work led me to propose the creation of a European civil protection force provided by Member States on a voluntary basis .
We could introduce enhanced cooperation , starting from the bottom up , to get used to preparing our responses .
When there is a tsunami or a tragedy in Haiti , it is never goodwill that we lack , but coordination .
Human lives would be saved , time would be saved , money would be saved and , at the same time , there would be increased visibility if the European volunteers were to prepare their responses to the various categories of disasters .
Naturally , the responses cannot be the same for an industrial disaster , for a disaster such as the Erika , for flooding in Germany or France , for fires in Greece , for a tsunami , for major pandemics or even for a terrorist attack such as 11 September , which could still unfortunately occur in Europe .
The aim of this idea on which my colleagues are working - we shall come back to you with some concrete proposals - is to prepare a joint planned response .
In any case , I remain very attached to this idea on which I have done a great deal of work with the support of the European Parliament .
Subject : European action to combat poverty

According to Eurostat , around 85 million European citizens , 20 % of children and 19 % of European citizens over 65 , were at risk of poverty in 2008 .
At EU level , 8 % of the active population and 44 % of unemployed people had an income below the poverty threshold , and having a job is not sufficient to guarantee a decent standard of living .
Social protection measures in the Member States have cut the risk of poverty facing the EU population by 32 % .
The economic crisis has led to a rise in the unemployment rate to around 10 % and widening social gaps .
Can the Commission say what measures it plans to take to create and preserve jobs in the EU and to guarantee a decent standard of living for all EU citizens through a sound and adequate social protection system ?
Member of the Commission . - I very much share the concerns expressed in this question about the welfare and well-being of Europeans , the questions on employment and social protection and fighting poverty .
As you know , 2010 is the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , in order to raise awareness about social problems .
Hopefully this year will be good not only for discussing poverty , but also for committing ourselves to fighting it and to renewing this political commitment at EU level and among the Member States .
In order to provide an opportunity for this renewed commitment , the European Commission has included in the new EU 2020 strategy a headline target on poverty reduction , which is a reflection of our concern and the lessons learned over the past decades .
The objective now is to reduce poverty by a quarter by 2020 .
Fighting poverty requires prosperity , high-quality jobs for those who can work and sustain themselves , and solidarity towards those in need .
These elements are all present in the EU 2020 strategy .
Achieving the headline target on poverty will be supported by a dedicated flagship initiative which is called the European Platform Against Poverty .
There are concrete instruments for maintaining and creating jobs at European level through the European Social Fund , the European Globalisation Fund and also the recent micro-credit initiative .
The actions taken by individual Member States are especially important .
Still more needs to be done to ensure that high quality jobs are accessible to all to start with , but poverty reduction has to go well beyond questions of employment .
As is recognised in the EU 2020 Communication , effective well designed social protection is indispensable for preventing and tackling poverty and exclusion .
The Member States are responsible for the financing and organisation of social protection systems , with the Commission supporting them in this task .
As a key partner in the social open method of coordination , the Commission helps to identify and promote clear policy priorities , provides a monitoring framework and facilitates mutual learning .
A good example so far includes the active inclusion framework , the benchmarking exercise on child poverty and the monitoring of the social impact of the crisis .
We will work very closely with the two presidencies this year : the Spanish Presidency and the Belgian Presidency .
Both have important initiatives : the first stage of the Roma Summit , which was discussed a few minutes ago in this House and has a very strong impact on poverty reduction , while with the Belgian Presidency , we are preparing an initiative on reducing child poverty .
But it is not only governments we have to work with , but also NGOs .
Without the NGOs , we cannot make completely successful programmes .
We support NGOs dealing with poverty and social protection in general from the Progress Fund .
These are the main issues and they cover various directions where the Commission acts to reduce poverty .
Member of the Commission . - Indeed , creating more and better jobs is also included in the EU 2020 strategy .
I would like to draw your attention to two more flagship initiatives .
I already mentioned the one which focuses on poverty , but concerning the quantity and quality of jobs in Europe we have the ' new skills in jobs ' flagship initiative ; and under the sustainability pillar of Europe 2020 , there is a flagship initiative on industrial policy .
I think this is a crucial point in the context of this question , because it has to be recognised that European Union instruments should not only target the impact of companies leaving Europe , like the Globalisation Fund .
This plays a very important role in preventing poverty , preventing the loss of income and the loss of skills when corporations decide to relocate outside Europe ; and for the first time now in a very long time , there is going to be a flagship initiative on industrial policy for a sustainable economy .
I think this will address many of the issues of industrial development and the issue of location .
I fully agree with what was implied in the question , that without a comprehensive economic policy and employment policy , we cannot successfully fight poverty .
( DE ) During an economic crisis , the danger of social security fraud is particularly great .
Is the Commission aware that , in Central Europe , there is large-scale social security fraud among States with high social disparities ?
For example , compensation payments for minimum pensions were fraudulently claimed by EU citizens from nine Member States , with these compensation payments clearly exceeding the actual pensions .
My question is this : does the Commission intend to provide individual Member States with tools that they can use to prevent such large-scale social security fraud ?
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , in Greece , over 20 % of the population lives below the poverty line .
Of these , 34 % of people living in poverty are unemployed and 14 % are working poor .
The problem of poverty which my fellow Member raised in her question in connection with Europe and the statistics which I have given you for Greece are due , in my opinion , to the failure of the neoliberal economic model championed by the Treaty of Lisbon and included in the text of the 2020 strategy .
I should like to ask you : Is it possible to combat the increasing proportion of people living in poverty with fragmented policies with elements of charity , or do we need a different economic policy , which revolves around full-time employment , meaning that you need to revise the EU 2020 strategy ?
Member of the Commission . - Starting with the second question if you do not mind , it is indeed very important to have a more stable macro-economic environment .
In the previous answer , I referred to the importance of a comprehensive economic policy in order to create a more stable environment , and indeed what was mentioned as the ' neoliberal trend ' of recent decades needs to be reviewed .
In Europe 2020 , we have a number of initiatives , and I would like in particular to mention the chapter on financial regulation .
This is a substantial change as compared to the previous regime and comes from the intention to stabilise the macro-economic environment which would relieve the pressure on the fiscal systems that are meant to support social protection systems and employment policies .
Concerning the abuse and the effectiveness of the social protection systems , indeed , the crisis is a test in this respect .
What the Commission can do is to use the open method of coordination and the analytical and reporting capacity available to it to help Member States to better focus the social protection measures .
The challenge in crisis times , which was mentioned in the question , but also in the coming period , when various Member Sates will face the need for fiscal consolidation , will really be a test , and we cannot easily find more resources for fighting poverty .
That is why we need to share experiences about how to use our instruments more effectively and how to target the vulnerable groups better .
Subject : Evaluation of the Culture Programme 2007-2013
As part of efforts to promote and highlight European culture , in 2007 , the European Union adopted the Culture Programme which will run until 2013 .
It has a total budget of approximately EUR 400 million .
The objectives of this programme include raising awareness of those aspects of culture which are of European significance and promoting the transnational mobility of people working in the cultural sector .
How does the Commission evaluate progress so far in attaining these two objectives ?
Are Member States showing an interest and taking part in the Culture Programme , or does the Commission consider that it should launch new and more dynamic initiatives to attain its objectives by 2013 ?

Mr President , as Mr Papanikolaou said , the objective of the Culture Programme is to enrich the cultural experience of European citizens by promoting our common cultural heritage .
The Commission is promoting cultural cooperation between authors , people working in the cultural sector and the institutions in the countries participating in the programme , with a view to encouraging the emergence of a European nationality .
The Culture Programme aims , in particular , to promote the cross-border mobility of people working in the cultural sector , to encourage cross-border movements of artistic and cultural works and products and to support cross-cultural dialogue .
For example , under the Culture Programme in 2009 , 749 applications were submitted and 256 plans were selected for funding , the main objective of 127 of which was the mobility of people working in the cultural sector .
According to the legal basis , regular external and independent evaluation of the programme is required .
In July 2009 , the Commission invited an independent contractor to evaluate the first three years ' application of the Culture Programme 2007-2009 and , more importantly , the consistency of objectives , the initial results and the initial impact of the programme .
The contractor conducted the evaluation on the basis of data on the results from plans , recent individual evaluations and research and interviews with plan beneficiaries and interested persons working in the cultural sector .
His final report will be submitted in the second half of this year .
On that basis , the Commission will draft a report on the application of the programme and submit it to the European Parliament by no later than 31 December 2010 .
Please note that the programme does not primarily target the national authorities ; it targets people working in the cultural sector .
The participation of people working in the cultural sector in plans is relatively evenly distributed across the Member States .
The national authorities participate in groups of experts at European level in order to formulate the programme development policy .
Following two rounds of pilot studies on the mobility of artists inaugurated by the European Parliament for 2008 and 2009 , and bearing in mind the talks already held within the framework of the open method of coordination , the Commission is currently evaluating the progress made to date and looking at ways of improving the application of the current programme .
Later on , before the year end , the Commission will start a public consultation procedure in order to pave the way for the new Culture Programme for 2014 onwards .
( EL ) Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
I think this is the first time you have been here during this procedure .
May I wish you every success in your work and bon courage .
It is indeed vital to raise awareness among European citizens about the cultural elements which are important to Europe and which form points of reference for our European culture and common values .
I think that this point has become extremely important over recent years for Greece too , especially - to push the debate forward a little - under the weight of the use of cultural monuments for purposes unrelated to culture , in order to poke fun at my country .
I refer to an article in the German magazine Focus with a doctored picture of the Venus de Milo ; I refer to articles on the Internet which describe the Acropolis as a ruin .
I am afraid that this practice may no longer be the exception and I therefore ask you , Commissioner , if you have condemned these practices and if , within the framework of the programme we are debating , but not only within that framework , the Commission plans to adopt a more decisive , a more - if I may say so - aggressive policy to promote culture ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
If you do not mind , I would rather not comment just now on articles in various publications , because I do not think we shall get anywhere by responding to articles like this .
What I would say is that cultural monuments , such as the Acropolis and other monuments in Greece and other Member States , are a source of inspiration and cross-cultural wealth and just today , the European Commission adopted a new system for labelling the major cultural monuments of the European Union , including the Acropolis .
I think that speaks for itself in terms of how Europe thinks about these monuments .
Subject : Strengthening and funding grassroots sporting organisations in the EU
Grassroots sporting organisations make a huge contribution to European society , culture and the health of European citizens ; in the current economic climate , however , many grassroots sporting organisations are experiencing financial difficulties .
What action can the Commission take to strengthen grassroots sports and promote their development across the Member States ?
The Commission has recently closed its public consultation on funding for grassroots sports .
Can the Commission give further information on the aims of this public consultation and when further information on the outcome of this consultation will be available ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission fully acknowledges the important role of grass-root sport within European society .
The 2007 White Paper on Sport therefore focused on the societal aspects of sport and proposed a number of actions , including the promotion of health-enhancing physical activity or sport 's educational role of social inclusion in and through sport and of volunteering in sport , which have been , or are currently being , implemented .
Similarly , the new EU competence for sport enshrined in Article 165 highlights the sector 's specific nature , its social and educational function , and its structures based on voluntary activity .
It thereby provides the framework for future EU action and gives direction for promoting sport across the EU and for developing the European dimension in sport .
The Commission intends to propose initiatives for implementing the Lisbon Treaty in the field of sport later this year .
That will take account of the need to strengthen the grass-root sports sector .
The honourable Member also rightly points out that grass-root sports organisations face challenges in the current economic climate .
The ongoing EU study on internal market barriers to sports funding , which was announced in the White Paper and which focuses on grass-root sports funding , addresses such challenges .
The study aims to describe the key sources of financing , identify financing models in different Member States and for different sports disciplines and to analyse the EU regulatory environment and national policies that have an impact on sports funding .
Finally , the study should outline efficient business models that are also able to meet future challenges , such as the impact of the economic crisis on public sector budgets or on sponsorship , and identify means of strengthening the development of grass-root sport across the European Union .
The consultations on funding for grass-root sport referred to by the honourable Member were carried out within the framework of this study .
The initial results of these consultations were presented to interested stakeholders at a conference on sustainable funding models for grass-root sport in the internal market , organised by the study contractor on 16 February in Brussels .
The outcomes of the conference will soon be published on the website of the Internal Market and Services Directorate-General .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for her response .
I welcome her commitment , as outlined , to the development of sport at grass roots level .
Because of the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , I welcome the fact that the European Union now has competence in the area of sport with a support budget .
Can the Commission outline firstly how it intends to format the European Union sports programme and , secondly , say when we can expect the first communication from the Commission on this issue ?
Member of the Commission . - Indeed , we intend to promote communication on sport this summer .
So , we will have the communication before the summer recess .
That should provide the framework for enhanced cooperation , a new agenda for sport at EU level and also a draft decision for a two-year EU sport programme for 2012 and 2013 .
Of course , in the meantime , as you very well know , we have the ongoing sport actions in 2009 , 2010 and 2011 , focusing on grass-root sport and the social aspect of sport .
Actions for 2009 have already been approved and they are to be enforced this year .
We are about to approve the action for 2010 , which will also be ready in a couple of months .
Of course , as you very well know , unfortunately , the budget for 2010 has been cut from EUR 6 million to EUR 3 million .
According to the budget that we have for 2011 , we have new actions and new testing material in order to formulate our programme for 2012 and 2013 .
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Vassiliou , I would like to express enormous thanks for the declaration concerning the establishment of a new agenda for sport , but I would also like to present a certain idea related to this , which the Committee on Culture and Education is also talking about .
It is related to the new key competences , to which can also be added , today , abilities in sport , knowledge of culture and knowledge about the European Union .
Mrs Vassiliou , do you anticipate joining in the discussion on the new and very important aspect of key skills for young people throughout the European Union , so that the questions of sport , knowledge about the European Union and knowledge about culture , which are so important for building a European identity , will also be emphasised and accentuated ?
Member of the Commission . - Certainly , when I speak about the societal role of sport , matters concerning education and training are very important , and I think that education is even more important for our common European identity .
This will certainly be taken into account when we formulate our more permanent programme on sport .
Subject : Road deaths
Could the Commission please outline how it intends to combat the three main causes of road deaths : speed , drug / drink driving and inadequate road infrastructure ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Within the framework of the third European Action Programme on Road Safety up to 2010 , a number of actions were implemented to combat speeding , drug and drink driving as well as to improve road infrastructure .
Many of those actions have involved the European Parliament under the codecision procedure .
But , of course , further efforts are needed .
The Commission is currently working on the European Road Safety Strategy for the next decade .
It will stress the importance of proper enforcement and sanctions for dangerous behaviour , in particular , drink driving and excessive speed .
Citizens of Member States cannot understand why other EU nationals are not sanctioned when they violate the law .
For this reason , it is urgent to resume discussions on the proposals for a directive on cross-border enforcement , which received the full support of the European Parliament , but was blocked by the Council .
The Commission is determined to move forward with this proposal .
Besides control and sanctions , education and awareness are areas to which the Commission will give strong emphasis .
Specific actions should be proposed regarding alcohol and speed , such as alcohol locks in certain vehicles or more stringent requirements for novice drivers .
Drug driving is an increasing problem .
The Commission expects the ongoing DRUID research project to provide ideas for concrete action .
As far as infrastructure is concerned , the European Parliament and the Council have adopted legislation regarding safe management and safety requirements for roads and tunnels of the trans-European network .
The Commission , of course , will closely follow their proper implementation by the Member States .
But safety of road infrastructure is not limited to the major TEN roads ; 56 % of road deaths occur on rural roads .
So the Commission will therefore examine the extension of current legislation on safe management to the secondary road network of Member States .
Finally , the Commission will also verify that infrastructure projects receiving EU funding or loans take road safety requirements into account .
I must also underline that road safety is a shared responsibility between the EU institutions , Member States , local and regional bodies , associations and , of course , citizens .
To reach maximum efficiency , solutions must respond to concrete problems on the ground .
The next European Road Safety Strategy will propose a number of actions based on this principle .
Its main goal is to establish a common European road safety area which will form part of a single European transport area where all EU citizens will benefit from the same level of safety all over Europe .
( GA ) Mr President , I would also like to express my thanks to the Commissioner .
Listening to the Commissioner , it is clear that a lot of work has been done in relation to the involvement of speed and alcohol in causing road accidents .
However , it is clear that we are not researching the effect of drugs in these cases .
Driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs is a major cause of almost 25 % of road accidents in the European Union every year .
10 000 people die every year as a result of these accidents .
We most do more in relation to drugs , however , as it is clear that they are a major cause of road accidents and of deaths of people on the roads .
I propose to the Commissioner that we must do a lot more .
I welcome the research but we must do a lot more with regard to making it effective .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Of course , I can only share your concern .
The problem with drugs , as you know very well , is that , although we have relatively developed technology to find drivers who are under the influence of alcohol , it is much more difficult to detect the influence of drugs .
We really must carry out research to find the necessary technology , because today , it is only a visible observation by the police , who then send people for medical testing , and only then can it become clear that there is a problem .
We do , of course , need more .
( LT ) Thank you for the proposals submitted to solve that problem .
I would like to ask whether you agree with studies that show that using a mobile phone while driving can cause driver reaction time to be reduced as much as being under the influence of alcohol or drugs .
My other question concerns heavy goods vehicles .
This is an object of increased risk , especially during the hours of darkness and , as you know well , heavy goods vehicles damage the condition of roads too , which also contributes to the number of accidents .
Do you think that we should increase and maximise policies to transfer goods from road to rail .
( EL ) Commissioner , the matter we are discussing and which my fellow Member touched on in his question is very serious .
What we call ' road traffic accidents ' are , in my opinion , collisions due to numerous causes and the real reason for numerous fatalities in Europe .
I should like , therefore , to ask you two specific questions :
Firstly , as most of these collisions occur in towns and most victims are pedestrians and cyclists , what initiatives do you think should be developed in order to follow a policy of ' vision zero ' , in other words , no victims in towns , particular attention at schools , cycle lanes and so forth ?
My second question is : what do you intend to do so that justice is dispensed for the benefit of victims and their relatives within the framework of this vision , so that we can use this vision to achieve accident prevention ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Of course , the shift in modality , as it is called , to have a preference for the transport of goods by rail , is also a clear preference for the Commission , but that has been a desire for decades .
We must now find and abolish the bottlenecks that stop us taking full advantage of railways .
There are many things which must be done and I think that , during this Commission 's term in office , we can move this forward a little .
I should say that the use of mobile phones while driving , at least in some countries - my own country included - is prohibited .
Regarding actions to address casualties and deaths in road traffic accidents , this Commission had , during this action plan , the ambitious target of reducing the number of deaths by 50 % .
It was not achieved but the reduction in the number of deaths was substantial .
This was , of course , brought about by the common efforts of European institutions but , above all , of Member States .
In my own country , for instance , the reduction in the number of deaths has been even more remarkable during this decade - almost threefold .
We have reserves and , although we will never reach zero accidents , we can do a lot to reduce the number of casualties .
This is , of course , a very complex issue which includes not using alcohol , better roads , better conditions , education , training - all these things .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Subject : Railway accident in Buizingen and electronic safety system
The serious railway accident in Buizingen , Belgium , on 15 February 2010 , is being blamed on the absence of an electronic safety system which automatically applies trains ' brakes if they pass a red light .
In addition to the national automatic train protection ( ATP ) systems , which have existed for years in some Member States , work is proceeding apace on the introduction of ERTMS ( European Rail Traffic Management System ) in Europe .
To what extent and for how long have the various Member States been equipping their railway lines and trains with national ATP systems ?
What is the state of play with the introduction of ERTMS in the various Member States ( both on trains and on railway lines ) ?
In the case of Member States which do not yet have national train protection systems , is it still worthwhile to invest in them , in view of the ongoing introduction of ERTMS and the major investment involved in a changeover ?
How is the danger averted that railway infrastructure may be equipped with ERTMS but the trains may not , or vice versa ?
Does this problem arise at present , for example for intercity railway traffic on the Liège-Aachen line ?
What lessons should we perhaps learn here with regard to the liberalisation of the railways in Europe ?
Subject : Causes of the dreadful train crash on Monday , 15 February in Buizingen
Can the Commission demonstrate whether liberalisation has affected safety ?
In June 2008 , the Commission sent Belgium a reasoned opinion formally criticising the complex three-part structure of Belgian Railways .
Have the requisite measures since been taken in response to the objections raised by the Commission ?
How ?
Since when has the European ERTMS standard been available ?
Did any delay occur in comparison with the scheduled date of introduction ?
If so , what were the causes of this delay and what remedial action has the Commission taken ?
Did the debate on the European standard prevent the railways from introducing a system of their own to guarantee safety on domestic routes ?
Since when have the specifications for such national systems been available ?
In how many of the EU-27 countries does a national system already exist , and since when has it done so ?
Which countries score best ?
What is Belgium 's position in relation to the EU-27 regarding safety of the railway network ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The train accident in Buizingen on Monday , 15 February was a shocking tragedy and , in the aftermath of this serious accident , several technical and political questions concerning rail safety can be asked .
The causes of the accident are not yet fully known and the technical investigation has been launched in accordance with the provisions of the EU Safety Directive .
The Belgian investigation body has the responsibility for carrying this out .
Two investigators from the European Railway Agency joined the Belgian team in charge of the investigation just a few hours after the accident had occurred .
I would like to stress that , as long as the causes of the accident have not been clarified , it is inappropriate to draw conclusions .
As is all too often the case when rail accidents happen , remarks alleging a link between European rules or regulations and the accidents have been made .
I would first like to be very clear on the opening up of the market .
Alongside the opening up of the rail freight sector to competition and the establishment of requirements to separate the activities of infrastructure managers and railway undertakings , a stringent regulatory framework was introduced covering rail safety and interoperability .
We have carefully monitored this opening up of the rail sector to competition to ensure that it has no negative impact on rail safety , and the indicators clearly show no such impact .
I also see no relationship between the accident and the reasoned opinion we sent to Belgium in 2008 regarding the lack of independence between infrastructure managers and rail undertakings .
Any proposition linking rail safety levels to rail market opening is , in my view , just an excuse to steer the debate away from the true causes of the accident .
The question of the coexistence of national and European train control systems can be put in these terms .
More than 20 different national systems are used in Europe today to ensure the safe movement of trains .
The incompatibility of the different national systems poses a major problem for international trains because either locomotives have to be changed at each border or they have to be equipped with several onboard systems .
For this reason , a single system for use at European level has been designed and developed and is currently being installed on major international lines and trains in Europe .
The system is known as ERTMS , the European Rail Traffic Management System .
As regards the timing , most of the national systems were developed in the early 1980s , but their deployment is a long and costly process .
In most of the countries where these systems exist , only part of the national networks and locomotives have been equipped to date , and this partial installation of the equipment took approximately 20 years .
ERTMS specifications have been available since 2000 .
A number of pilot projects were carried out between 2000 and 2005 .
Since 2005 , several ERTMS equipped lines have been put into service .
At present , 10 Member States have lines with ERTMS and there are projects ongoing in almost all Member States .
In Belgium , for example , the line between Aachen and Liège is equipped and intercity trains running on this line are equipped .
The ERTMS will , therefore , probably coexist with national systems for a period of 20 years .
Some Member States will benefit earlier than others from the European system .
We see , for example , that the Italian and Spanish high-speed network is already almost fully equipped , that the conventional network of Luxembourg is also almost fully equipped , while in 15 Member States , there are only pilot lines or projects .
It should also be noted that automatic train protection systems are just one element contributing to the safety of the network .
Appropriate training , sound maintenance and better protection of level crossings are other important components for safety .
If we take a broader range of safety indicators , overall data show that railway safety standards in Europe are generally very high .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the lessons to be learned from this tragedy are indeed a matter for the Belgian services : the Belgian Government .
Indeed , a special investigation committee will shortly be setting to work on this in the Belgian Parliament .
I have one more question for you , Commissioner .
What are your views on the social aspect , that of the workload of train crews , and of train drivers in particular ?
Should we perhaps be looking into this , too , and could it be that European rules are required , particularly given that the competition in passenger transport is even set to increase in the next few years ?
( NL ) I should like to extend warm thanks to the Commissioner for his answers to a number of very specific questions .
There was one of my questions he did not answer , which related to the reasoned opinion sent to Belgium by the Commission back in 2008 .
In 2009 , a lack of independence of the Belgian railway infrastructure manager ( Infrabel ) from the National Railway Company of Belgium ( SNCB ) and the holding company was established once again .
I should like to know how much longer the Commission is going to give the SNCB to actually carry out the necessary restructuring operations ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Firstly , on the operators and social questions .
We can look at this in depth and analyse the situation because , of course , if we have more competition and more intensive traffic , we should address very seriously these social aspects as well .
We have various regulations already in place concerning , for instance , pilots in aviation .
You will know of the Driving Time Directive in road transport , and some similar control over the driving time should be applied to all drivers , including locomotive drivers .
So I think that we should look very seriously at this issue .
There is always national legislation as well , and these are primarily questions for national legislation also , but that is a question we should certainly look at .
I said that in 2008 , the Commission had communicated a reasoned opinion to Belgium on the lack of safeguards to guarantee the independence of the infrastructure manager from rail undertakings in the exercise of essential functions , track allocation and charging .
The Belgian authorities have replied to this and the Commission services are analysing this reply with a view to proposing a follow-up .
But , returning to the rail accident , this was a tragic event which should have been avoided , but never in the world will there be absolutely zero accidents .
This is a very complex question .
I suppose the investigation will give us concrete answers as to what the causes of the accident were and , in many cases , this is a tragic combination of several factors , including human factors .
From the 19th century onwards , it has been clear that a red light is a signal to stop .
So it does not mean that we can find one very simple answer as to why this accident happened .
( PL ) Mr Kallas , I think we should draw conclusions from this tragedy .
Of course , a very detailed procedure will explain if the human factor was to blame , or if , perhaps , it was a matter of equipment or of the lack of a system .
In your opinion , how long will it be before the ERTMS will come into use , and do you not think that , with the liberalisation of both passenger and freight railway transport , the system of very clear verification of quality of service and equipment should be separate from national systems ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The plan is to deploy the ERTMS system on main European railway networks before 2015 , so there is a date where we think that this deployment plan will be implemented , but this does not mean that every line , especially regional lines , will be equipped with such high-level equipment , so there must always be other systems as well .
This deployment plan exists , but it is a costly operation and a big investment .
A European system of measuring quality is a good idea .
When I express the idea of developing transport as a whole as an entity for Europe , under the possible name of the European single transport area , then of course this means that we must also harmonise quality requirements and the quality of services must be maintained at a very high level .
Subject : Daylight Saving Time
Do any up-to-date studies support the practice of changing the clocks twice a year , which severely disrupts the daily lives of EU citizens ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Of course , we have had a directive since January 2001 , when the Council and Parliament adopted the current directive on summer time in the European Union .
This directive harmonises the calendar of the application of summer time in the EU .
This is the ninth directive on the issue since 1980 when the first Summer Time Directive was adopted .
In accordance with the above directives , in 2007 , the Commission presented a report on the impact of the current summer time regime .
The report concluded that , on the basis of the information placed at the disposal of the Commission , the summer time regime has no negative impact and generated some energy savings .
The current arrangements do not constitute any subject of concern in the Member States of the European Union .
No Member State has required or has , since the report was published , ever required a modification of the current arrangements .
The honourable Member could hardly find a more suitable person to answer this question , not because I am responsible for transport , but because I was in the Estonian Government which did exactly what is behind your question .
First , in 1999 , from 2000 we abolished turning the clock .
We changed this regime and maintained one time regime .
In 2002 , we turned back and again introduced summer time .
So , I have very personal experience of this .
Two unpleasant things happened , which is why this step made in 2000 became extremely unpopular .
One thing was that the daylight disappears in the evening .
Morning will be bright but you have nothing to do with this sunlight in the morning .
In the evening , it will get dark too soon and , if you come home from work and want to have some exercise or go out with children , it is already evening .
People did not like this at all .
Secondly , of course , there was a total confusion about timetables and schedule - as you can imagine - relating to all travel arrangements to other countries .
So we restored the present summer time regime , turning the clock twice a year .
People are happy and this question has not been raised again .


( PL ) Mr President , Mr Kallas , one doubt I have is related to the fact that some countries in Europe , for example , the United Kingdom , use a different time in relation to continental Europe , and this lack of change does not cause problems there .
Is it not , after all , the case that standardising the time all across Europe to one time zone would be beneficial just from the transport perspective ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - As I said , I have had personal experience and I do not see any reason to start changing the system again or to make some changes to this system .
It can become more complicated .
Subject : The freedom / security balance
In many countries across the European Union , the alarmism caused by global terrorism has led to a frightening erosion of civil liberties .
A fundamental principle underpinning the social contract is that a government must justify any restriction on the rights of the citizen by clearly and irrefutably demonstrating the necessity of that restriction for the general security of the nation .
The burden of proof appears to have been transferred from the authorities implementing the security measure to the people subject to it .
Does the Commission agree with this assessment ?
How will the Commission go about redressing the imbalance between security and freedom ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The protection and promotion of fundamental rights should not be seen in opposition to the measures addressing the continuing threat of terrorism : they should go hand in hand .
Anti-terrorism activities must be conducted with full respect for the principle of the rule of law and the full respect of fundamental rights as they are enshrined at the level of the European Union in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
This is not a question of compromise or balancing one requirement against the other ; it is a question of delivering both , but without compromising on fundamental rights of course .
Complying with fundamental rights does not prevent the adoption of effective security measures , and this has been recognised by the way in the Stockholm Programme which calls on the European institutions to ensure that all tools deployed to fight against terrorism fully respect fundamental rights .
Therefore , I believe that this is a question of balance and not a question of balancing the one against the other .
As far as I am concerned , hammer the terrorists , hammer the criminals .
I have no problem with that whatsoever , but what I am concerned about is that we , as parliamentarians , are not stressing sufficiently , either in the European Parliament or in Member States , that we expect that to be done in a way that protects the public , rather than undermining it or its privacy , that data is protected , that citizens ' privacy is protected , and that citizens who are innocent and law abiding are not subject to intrusion by the State .
It is imperative that this is included .
Vice-President of the Commission . - I could not agree more with the honourable Member .
You know , from my hearing and also from my actions before as Telecoms Commissioner , that data protection is very high on the agenda .
I have pledged to reform the Data Protection Directive of 1995 in order to adapt it to the modern world of technology , but I have also made it very clear that it is not because we have to protect society that we can give data out .
The private data of the individual cannot be jeopardised by other measures .
I have seen how Parliament argued and voted on the SWIFT question .
The Commission will take the views of Parliament into consideration when developing a new mandate in order to have a new SWIFT Agreement with our American partners : one which balances the right to privacy and the need to combat terrorism .
Subject : Green Paper on volunteering
In order to raise awareness of the value of volunteering throughout the EU , would the Commission consider , in conjunction with the proposed initiatives to celebrate the European Year on Volunteering , drawing up a comprehensive Green Paper on volunteering to facilitate , recognise and add value to volunteering ?
In addition to drawing up such a Green Paper , does the Commission consider it important to build synergies between other international organisations such as the ILO and the UN in relation to the JHU / ILO Volunteer Measurement Project and the UN Non-Profit Handbook ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I am very sorry , I do not have this question .
I have many questions here , but not this one .
( The President proposed that the question be answered in writing )
I shall be perfectly happy to get a reply from the Commissioner in writing .
Vice-President of the Commission . - I am sorry .
Something must have gone wrong in the organisation .
I would hope that the Commissioner would look carefully at what I have suggested given the possibilities with 2011 as the European Year on Volunteering , and perhaps also look at the possibility of a Green Paper following on from that after consultation with voluntary groups , etc .
I also hope that you take on board the importance of using either the ILO manual or the UN handbook to measure volunteering across the Member States .
Vice-President of the Commission . - I can assure the honourable Member that on volunteering - which is a very important question , and the Commission is working on this - she will get the right answers to what she has asked .
Subject : Long-standing minorities
What possibilities of developing a strategy to protect and promote ethnic groups and minorities of long standing do the Lisbon Treaty and the EU Fundamental Rights Charter give the Commission , and what practical steps are planned ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - You are aware that one of the values on which the European Union is founded is the respect for the rights of persons who belong to minorities , and with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , this is explicitly mentioned in Article 2 of the treaty .
Article 21 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights explicitly prohibits any discrimination on grounds of language or membership of a national minority .
The Commission will ensure , within the scope of its mandate , that these fundamental rights are respected in EU law , including when Member States implement EU law .
There are also a number of pieces of EU legislation and EU programmes that can contribute to improving the situation of persons belonging to minorities ; the Commission intends to combine these instruments to address difficulties including acts of discrimination which are likely to affect persons belonging to minorities .
You are also aware that there is the existing EU anti-discrimination legislation , which will be used to ensure equal treatment of persons belonging to a minority , and the Commission has adopted a proposal for a new directive currently under discussion that would extend protection against discrimination on the grounds of religion and beliefs , disability , age and sexual orientation to fields other than employment and occupation .
The Council framework decision on combating certain forms and expressions of racism and xenophobia by means of criminal law also aims to ensure that hate speech on grounds of race , colour , religion , descent or national and ethnic groups and hate crimes are penalised in all Member States .
Now the Commission is monitoring the implementation of this framework decision as closely as possible and a group of national experts has been created to this end .
There is also the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights , which plays a key role in assisting the Commission to enforce its task ; and there is a Council of Europe Charter for Regional and Minority Languages and the framework convention for the protection of national minorities .
I would like to tell the honourable Member that I hope that more Member States would follow the example of those who have already signed and ratified those important conventions .
( DE ) Commissioner , that last point relates to precisely what I am concerned about .
I would like to ask once again : are there any instruments for positive discrimination in favour of long-standing national minorities ?
We should develop strategies for these people in the same way as we do for others .
Secondly , is the Agency for Fundamental Rights in Vienna also responsible for this and how do they arrange their contacts with civil society ?
That is in progress at the moment , of course , but are the traditional minorities also included in this ?
There is nothing so unfair as treating unequal groups equally .
Vice-President of the Commission . - I agree with the honourable Member .
There is nothing more unfair than treating unequal groups in the same way .
We really have to consider utilising the scarce resources which we have in a very active and intelligent way .
The European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights has , of course , some objectives to fulfil but , if Parliament or the Commission ask the Agency to accomplish a certain task , the Agency will certainly do that .
Therefore , I would ask the Member to hand me the questions he would like to ask the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights to tackle and I will see what can be done in a positive way .
( FR ) Mr President , I fully understand the timing requirements .
I would just like to stress the need for a special year dedicated to violence against women , such are the taboos that often still exist in relation to this issue .
Too many women are victims of violence , which is often physical , of course , but which can also be verbal and psychological .
Moreover , it often occurs within the family environment , and these women are ashamed to admit it .
It is true that a year dedicated to this problem would certainly help to ensure that this phenomenon , which is still taboo , diminishes and thus to combat violence against women more effectively .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.50 and resumed at 21.00 )

Implementation of the first railway package directives ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Brian Simpson , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the implementation of the first railway package ( Directives 2001 / 12 / EC , 2001 / 13 / EC and 2001 / 14 / EC ) - B7-0204 / 2010 )
author . - Mr President , I do not think I will pull my punches here tonight in regard to this particular oral question on the implementation of the first railway package .
You will be aware , Commissioner , that the three directives that make up the first railway package were adopted in 2001 , with a deadline of March 2006 for their transposition into national law .
It is my obligation , as Chair of the Transport Committee , to raise this issue with you now by way of this oral question .
Here we are , nine years later , debating the fact that 21 Member States had , by October 2009 , failed to enact these directives and have now been sent reasoned opinions because of this failure .
It beggars belief that , as we approach the revision of the first railway package , a number of states - including so-called influential states , including states that like to inform us of their pro-European credentials - have failed to enact this significant piece of European legislation .
Those Member States should hang their heads in shame and remember and honour the obligations they gave to this Parliament in 2001 .
It is one of politics ' most bewildering facts that we can deliver throughout the European Union the single market in numerous areas , but we cannot deliver it in the railway sector .
That is not a failure of this Parliament .
That is a failure of the Member States , often supported by sections of the railway industry and , frankly , Parliament 's patience is beginning to run out .
This oral question is born out of a frustration , a frustration that the law is being deliberately flouted and that as yet , the Commission has failed to bring Member States to book .
We are now demanding to know what aspects in each failing Member State of each directive have not been enacted .
We need to know why certain Member States have not correctly implemented these directives .
We want to know which Member States are still resisting the concept of fair competition in the railway sector and deliberately protecting their own national companies .
We have concerns regarding the powers and independence of regulators and infrastructure managers in some of these Member States .
We believe the lack of transparency and lack of harmonisation on infrastructure charges is leading to a protectionist practice and is acting as a break on delivering the single market to the railway sector , as well as stifling cross-border activity .
If you add to this various national measures such as rolling stock taxes , then you have to question whether certain Member States ever intended to implement these directives in the first place .
Today , we need to know many things .
We need to know how the Commission , via the recast , will facilitate the full implementation of the full railway package .
Today , we need to know what the Commission is doing to enforce European law on this issue .
Today , we need to know why it has taken so long for action to be taken against those Member States who have failed .
We on the Transport Committee often highlight the need for effective interoperability in the rail sector .
Without that , and without the opening of national infrastructure , European rail freight is doomed .
Transborder European passenger trains will be stifled .
The single market will never be delivered , and the ERTMS will never happen .
The time has come to develop a true European perspective for our railway network , and the first step for that development is the first railway package .
Without that first step being taken , then others cannot follow .
We need direct action and we need it now .
Let us name and shame those Member States that are failing , and let us take action against them now .

Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Simpson and the Committee on Transport and Tourism for initiating this discussion and for promoting competitiveness and openness in the railway sector .
I have always had strong support in Parliament and I hope this will continue .
The report on rail market monitoring which the Commission published at the end of 2009 shows that the progressive decline of the railways since the 1970s has been stopped in all market segments after the opening of the market and adoption of the first package .
So there are some positive notes as well .
However , the economic crisis has had a serious impact on rail , with rail freight operators losing up to 30 % of their business ; this crisis has highlighted and increased existing structural problems of the railways .
These problems are , on the one hand , linked to the economics of rail and the persisting financial weakness of some actors .
A number of Member States still fail to ensure sufficient budget for the infrastructure managers .
This not only results in underinvestment which undermines the quality and performance of the rail network ; it also builds up indebtedness levels .
On the other hand , there are still economic and technical barriers to market entry .
Very often , new entrants find themselves discriminated against , in particular , where incumbent rail operators also have indirect control over the provision and use of rail infrastructure .
The newly established regulatory bodies do not all have the necessary powers and independence to ensure fair and transparent market conditions .
The Commission adopted a two-tier approach to tackle these problems : infringement procedures to address incorrect implementation of the rules , and changes to the rules when they were not clear or precise enough .
The first line of approach - infringement procedures - required a detailed analysis of the legal situation in all the 25 Member States that have railway systems and resulted in the reasoned opinions that were sent out in 2009 .
The main problems are , first , insufficient implementation of the provisions of the directive on track access charging ; second , lack of independence of the infrastructure manager in relation to railway operators and the failure to ensure sufficient independence , resources and powers for the regulatory body .
The second line of approach was to take advantage of the announced process of recasting the existing rail packages to propose improvements to the existing rules on rail market access .
In parallel , we will pursue our holistic approach with a view to achieving a genuine internal market for rail .
We will continue to promote the technical harmonisation of rail in conjunction with the European Railway Agency .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if the Belgian painter Magritte had painted the first railway package directives , he would have written underneath ' These are not directives ' .
In fact , the whole debate that we have been having for some time seems , to me , almost surreal .
In 2003 , we decided that the transposition should be completed in 2006 and now , in 2010 , we are asking why 21 countries are not doing what they themselves have put their signature to .
Liberalisation was intended to allow new players onto the market .
That was the theory .
In practice , things look rather different in this regard , too .
Today , we are in a position in which - whether we are for or against liberalisation in this area - we have to assess this liberalisation and we are faced with the problem that it has largely not been transposed .
The companies themselves - as we have seen in various countries - have made decisions in the name of liberalisation relating to staffing and technology that were not always pleasant , even though this liberalisation had not been transposed .
In the light of this , we have to conclude that , seen in this way , historical beneficiaries of the railways still hold the keys to the opening of the market in their hands - access to the tracks , technical interoperability , training and certification , to give just a few examples .
With these keys , they can open the door to an open market , but they can also close it .
That has been the case in most countries and it is still the case today .
Therefore , the proposals that you have made here and that we have briefly looked at represent an initial step .
For me , in order to correctly assess liberalisation , it is important that we quickly carry out implementation or enforce it using the means available to the Commission or means that it still needs to grant itself .

Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to start by noting that rail freight 's share of the market first decreased , from approximately 13 % in 1995 to 10.5 % in 2002 , and then stabilised , whereas in the case of passenger transport , where liberalisation has also been unsuccessful or has not been implemented , we have actually seen an increase over recent years .
My main point in saying this is that market opening is just one instrument , and that a successful single European railway market actually requires a combination of measures .
These include measures relating to market forces , of course , but also social ground rules , human resources aspects , more advanced interoperability - on which I believe we have a great deal more work to do - and indeed , sufficient instruments for financing infrastructure projects .
Only if we tackle this in a consistent , coherent manner can we achieve our objective .
I have one more question for the Commissioner .
We hear that a revision of the first railway package is indeed on the way .
My question is : when can we expect this revision , and what does the Commissioner see as the main objective to be achieved by this means ?
Mr President , Commissioner , in the hearing in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I was very pleased to hear you say that the greatest thing that we have been able to achieve in Europe is mobility and freedom of movement for the people .
With regard to the freedom of movement as well as the internal market , you also mentioned that it is essential not only for people to be able to move from A to B , but for goods to be able to do so too .
In 1992 , we adopted the internal market de facto in the European Parliament and , with the first railway package in 2001 , we also created the conditions for the free internal market in the railway sector .
It has already been said that it is now 2010 and we still do not have this in place .
It is , in fact , shameful that 21 states are still setting up obstacles .
This is protectionism - that has already been mentioned as well - and it is most regrettable that this is the case .
Of course , we now need to consider why this is the case .
You mentioned the different rail systems , Commissioner , but that cannot be the only reason .
In fact , there are still many countries that think they can escape this if they try to return to old times by saying that anything to do with the separation of infrastructures and services should not be taken so seriously .
That is completely the wrong way to go .
I am also eager to see when you might be able to carry out this revision of the directive .
I would also like to urge you specifically - and this has already been said by previous speakers - to be strict with the Member States .
We of course come from different Member States , but within the transport sector , we are all agreed that it is very important finally to bring some order here .
You are a new Commissioner so you are not to blame for what has - or has not - been done in the past .
You therefore have a unique opportunity now to make progress relatively quickly in the railway sector and really take the internal market forward , and with it all European citizens , too .
I am counting on this and I am already looking forward to seeing what you are going to do in the near future .
Mr President , Commissioner , the inspiration for the first railway package came almost 15 years ago .
At the time , the priority objective , which of course I share , was for rail transport to increase its market share .
Liberalisation , which was one of the ways to achieve this , is showing mixed and not always very conclusive results .
It has already been said that rail transport 's share of the freight market is stagnating whilst road transport is gaining market share .
At the same time , the number of travellers has increased considerably , even without any liberalisation process , and the high-speed rail network , which is built on the basis of cooperation rather than of competition , is quite a success .
In addition , you have mentioned newcomers .
There are far too few of these newcomers , and many of them have been absorbed by large companies .
Put another way , I am not sure that monopoly by large companies was the intended aim .
As regards application , if we consider the number of infringement procedures , there is , objectively speaking , a well-known problem , in other words , a lack of independence of the regulatory and appeals bodies , even where there is functional or institutional separation , and this separation may also entail other issues and costs relating to internal coordination .
Whilst awaiting your answers , Commissioner , I can only urge you to adopt a prudent attitude , which does not force the matter , which takes the holistic approach that you mentioned , which fully and objectively assesses the previous packages , but which makes a full assessment before taking the next step .
This assessment must therefore be thorough and must include the issues of working conditions , security and safety , public service obligations and the lack of internalisation of external costs , before any further progress is made in the liberalisation process .
I should therefore be interested to hear what your priorities are in relation to this matter , given that some progress has been made - it has to be recognised and others have spoken about it - namely , improved transparency in accounts reporting , progress on interoperability , harmonisation of training and licences , and improved signalling and safety .
Much remains to be done , however , and I shall insist on a prudent , thorough assessment that is free from taboos so that we do not progress too quickly to the following stages .
Ladies and gentlemen , when the European regulatory framework for railways was approved , we all hoped that it would lead to greater transparency in the financing of this sector of the economy and that new opportunities would be created for the involvement of new players .
It seemed that the European rail transport sector was standing on the threshold of a new era .
However , the hoped-for market liberalisation failed to materialise .
As we all know , in 21 Member States , including the Czech Republic , there has been no proper implementation of the first railway package , while questions remain unresolved relating , in particular , to the opening of railway markets to economic competition .
The situation in the Czech Republic provides evidence of the fact that there is a real problem .
Although the state has now taken the first steps , which allow the entry of other rail transport operators onto the market , in reality , the political will for allowing real competition on the railways is lacking .
This is confirmed by the behaviour of the socialist leaders of various regions who , at the end of last year , concluded ten-year agreements with Czech rail company , České dráhy , with the option of a further five years for the provision of regional rail services , and all this without any form of public tender .
Local leaders , who won four-year mandates in the elections , have therefore actually closed the railway market for 15 years .
The monopoly holder , České dráhy , will not now be forced to improve its services in any way whatsoever , and this will have fatal consequences for the railways .
In this context , there is therefore a question as to whether the current debate on taxing employment benefits , which trade unionists have opened up in the Czech Republic , and the related threat of strikes , only serves in reality to distract attention from the real issues .
The result of these issues is that rail transport is increasingly being relegated to the periphery of social and economic concern , while , on the contrary , road transport , so heavily criticised by the Greens , is logically growing in popularity .
I would therefore like to urge the European Commission to increase its efforts to promote genuine liberalisation of the rail sector and to monitor closely whether the non-market behaviour of various actors is in accordance with European law .

I would like to begin by saying that I completely disagree with Mr Vlasák , whose government has also participated in what he himself is criticising .
Now to the matter in hand .
As the objective of this railway package was to open up the rail transport market by separating infrastructure , passenger transport and freight transport , it is possible to find out relatively easily whether the Member States , following transition periods of varying lengths , have fulfilled the formal requirements of the directive .
What is not so easy to find out , and what the directive does not focus on , are the varying safety regulations of the individual states , the minimal conformity of work conditions for the crews that are manning the trains and the workers securing the operation of the infrastructure and the many differences in technical regulations .
The ERTMS is supposed to be a magic formula that should technically unify both infrastructure and rolling stock .
I am therefore looking forward to a clear answer concerning the compatibility of the EU rail network with the ERTMS standard .
I have not heard one yet .
Perhaps this question has a bearing on the logically connected question of how the opening of the rail transport markets is being exploited at present by foreign and national entities in the various countries .
I am not interested , of course , in the entities with interlinked ownership which provide regional transport services on a formally independent basis in countries such as Germany , for example , but in independent operators on the market .
I would like to end by emphasising that neither the first nor the subsequent railway packages will resolve the social conditions of employees .
This may soon become a major problem for the opening up of the railway market .
It is not acceptable to adopt the lowest possible standard as a solution .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , to the disadvantage of the United Kingdom , the UK Government has implemented the EU rail package .
This is mainly because , these days , the Lib-Lab-Con sit at Westminster and like to be told what to do , having given away control to the EU .
The separation of train operators and separation of the rail network is leading to major problems , courtesy of the EU .
No wonder 21 countries are too wise to get caught in an EU rail web leading to mayhem on all stations to Brussels .
I am not a Socialist , but if you need an integrated transport system , then state ownership is best - and not separation into multiple private hands .
Having six different companies on the network between Birmingham and Berlin will create a complete ' dog 's breakfast ' , or should I say a ' Dachshunds Frühstück ' .
When Eurorail is broken up to allow the surplus capacity to be run by different companies , we will no longer have rolling stock , just laughing stock .
Brian Simpson , who is responsible for this debate , is a member of the Labour Party .
Labour was once Socialist , and he was elected by people who still think Labour is Socialist .
Yet here he is , hiding in the EU , away from his faithful supporters .
What is he calling for ?
He is calling for privatisation .
More than that ; he is calling for an EU model which does not work and is against the wishes of his own voters .
He is , in fact , the ' Fat Controller ' , creating fat pay packets for fat cats .
The one thing that we can be sure of is that there is fat chance that this EU directive will be accepted , as it will derail the EU rail network .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I welcome the review of the transposition of the first railway package and the planned recast .
I believe that this review is long overdue .
However , I regret the fact that the Commission is receiving no , or only insufficient , information from the Member States .
That makes an efficient and honest assessment extremely difficult .
However , it is not only necessary to make an assessment .
We also need to urge the Member States to actually implement the necessary steps .
In any assessment , it is essential that importance be attached to the subject of safety .
Have we learned from the recent negative experiences and will these be taken into account ?
That is my question .
On this issue , the Commission is far too reticent towards the public , who are extremely concerned .
This applies to quality , too .
I would like to ask the Commission to consider how generally binding quality criteria can be set .
A great deal has been said about inadequate quality , but it is not possible to measure this reliably .
The lack of investment , which you have already mentioned , Commissioner , is also regrettable .
Despite Cohesion Fund cofinancing , in most countries , investment in roads is still significantly higher than in the rail system .
I would like , in this context , to mention ERTMS - this system categorically must be introduced across Europe for the network , but also for the rolling stock , in order to improve route safety .
I would warn against further steps in the direction of the planned liberalisation of national passenger transport .
The initiatives already taken in this connection have shown that there are still many hurdles to be overcome and that the Commission would do well to first of all carry out a complete technical harmonisation and ensure the thorough transposition of the directives adopted .
( RO ) Rail transport must be a priority in the EU 's transport policy up to 2020 , supporting such objectives as opening up competition , improving the national networks ' interoperability and safety and developing the rail transport infrastructure .
However , competition must not be increased to the detriment of the safety or quality of rail services .
I believe that the review of the first railway package must identify the problems facing the Member States that have received reasoned opinions from the Commission , along with a method for resolving them .
I wish to draw your attention to the fact that , due to the crisis , thousands of redundancies have been made in the rail transport sector , which may have an adverse impact on European rail transport .
The ERTMS was implemented at the end of last year along approximately 2 700 km of railway lines in the European Union and it will be implemented along 24 000 km of railway lines by 2020 .
This means huge investment is required , and we are expecting , Commissioner , new solutions and financial instruments that are capable of providing the necessary funding , as well as investment in the appropriate modernisation of the rolling stock .

( PL ) In my country , we have a saying , a proverb , which says that if one person tells you that you are drunk , you do not have to worry about it , but when five people tell you that you are drunk , you had better go to bed , lie down and go to sleep .
If only one or two Member States had not introduced this first package , we would be able to impose sanctions today and fulminate in this Chamber , but if twenty-something Member States have not introduced this package , then perhaps the package - to put it mildly - is not the best .
Perhaps the cause lies here , or the problem is this .
If I hear substantial criticism a moment ago from my fellow Member from the United Kingdom , and in fact , that country has introduced the package , one might wonder if use of the package is , in fact , completely appropriate .
There is , of course , the other side of the coin - in the context of accidents , which we also spoke about , here , two hours ago , during Question Time with the Commission .
I am thinking of the matter of safety .
From this point of view , safety is , indeed , increased .
The Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Kallas , drew attention to a significant problem when he said that a number of Member States are not investing in railways and that the possibilities for investment in infrastructure are not being realised .
One such country is my country of Poland where , in the last two years , there has been a kind of collapse in terms of financing of the railways , with all the results that this brings .
Finally , I think that very easy definitions and very easy recipes are , by definition , suspect .
( FR ) Mr President , some people here are bemoaning the difficulties and the slow progress in implementing the first railway package directives .
As for me , I am pleased about this .
In my country , in my region , we are fighting with the railway unions and with the users ' committees to ensure that these wicked directives are not applied and are thus consigned to the dustbin of history .
In France , one of the challenges of the regional elections is precisely the fact that the regional councils are blocking implementation of the Public Service Obligation ( PSO ) regulation on the opening up to competition of regional rail transport .
We do not want a twospeed railway whereby private companies have the market in fast , comfortable business trains with reserved seats whose fares only the wealthy can afford , whilst the public has unsafe , uncomfortable , antiquated second class trains for the poor .
Each passing day proves this : the separation of the infrastructure from the business of transport imposed by the directives so as to enable the system to be opened up to brutal competition is a technical and organisational nonsense that is costly both to taxpayers and to users .
Whilst it is useful to the big corporations , it is dislocating public transport and is responsible for the declining state of the network and of safety .
The directives mentioned also destroy jobs and constitute a theft of public property for the benefit of private interests .
( SK ) With the adoption of three sets of directives governing traffic on railway lines , the European Commission has taken over joint responsibility for the organisation of railway transport in the European Union .
There is no doubt that implementation of new railway rules into the various national laws may bring certain problems and price rises .
However , it is definitely in our common interest to have well-organised transport and a well-operating rail transport structure as a meaningful alternative , in particular , to road transport , which undoubtedly places a very significant burden on our environment .
Therefore , it is certainly correct to speak openly about the problems that have been hampering more rapid development of rail transport .
Not just rules though , but also an insight into the future may be in our interest .
European railways from three points of the compass end in coastal ports , while in the eastern direction , the railway lines run as far as the Pacific .
Good links between European railways on the EU 's eastern border would open new opportunities for European carriers to transport goods .
And therefore , if high-speed rail lines could be successfully extended from Paris to Vienna and Bratislava in the near future and , at the same time , a wide-gauge line could be extended from Čierna and Tisou at the Ukrainian border to Bratislava and Vienna , then three different railway systems - classic rail , high-speed and wide-gauge - would meet at a section between Bratislava and Vienna .
In conjunction with two airports - Vienna and Bratislava , two ports on the Danube River - Vienna and Bratislava again , and motorway junctions , a new and important logistics and transportation hub is being created right in the centre of Europe .
There is no dispute that , in addition to maintaining and specifying the rules , we still have significant reserves to effectively increase the dynamics of rail transport .
We only need to look at the investment opportunities and possibly toward making the rules more precise , as well as investing in new projects to support rail transport so that it will become more profitable and better able to serve the citizens of Europe .
) . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in this period , we have been talking a great deal about transport planning and we will be talking about it in the next period as well .
I believe that it is discouraging to begin with the revision of the first package in light of what has happened up to now .
We therefore need to be bolder in order to try and turn things around .
I believe that everything rests on and revolves around three main points .
The first point , in my opinion , is the liberalisation of railway transport to create competition and stimulate competitiveness , obviously with clear and transparent rules for all , as has already been mentioned .
The second key point is interoperability between the Member States and between the various internal modes of railway transport .
The third point is , of course , safety , and safety certification has to be a prerequisite for obtaining a licence to operate .
Still on the subject of safety , and in view of the common market , it is not enough to penalise the inefficiency of the States relative to the regulatory bodies : the powers of the European Railway Agency need to be broadened so as to give it greater authority over inspections and controls .
I believe that these are the efforts we have to make in the forthcoming period as we work towards the sustainable future of transport , the revision of the Trans-European Transport Networks ( TEN-T ) and freight transport , which is already under way in our committee and , not least , this revision that we must take control of and carry out in order to change the path that has been taken up to this point .
( ES ) Mr President , my country was one of the 20 issued with a warning in October 2009 , and I can assure you that we have since got moving on this issue .
It is not for nothing that Spain heads the list of European Union countries whose passenger rail transportation increased the most in 2007-2008 .
Goods transportation , however , is another matter .
Yet I would ask you this , Commissioner : when an outlying country is separated from Europe by a mountain range more than 500 kilometres in length - the Pyrenees - which railways can only cross at either end and which requires the axles to be changed on every train that crosses the border , on account of the different track width passed on to us by a long history of autarchies , what can possibly be the incentive for other operators to cross the border with France when there are so many obstacles ?
Even though Deutsche Bahn has bought Transfesa , it is still having a difficult time .
For that reason , I sincerely believe that , as well as the stick of warnings and sanctions my fellow Members are requesting , we need the carrot of European-level infrastructures .
Trans-European networks are urgently required .
This is why we urgently need to give a definitive push to ambitious cross-border railway projects such as the central Pyrenees crossing , with a low-level tunnel devoted to goods transportation .
That will oblige the more protectionist , reticent Member States to join the north-south , east-west railway network that Europe needs for its 2020 strategy .
author . - Mr President , I was named by one of the Members opposite .
Mr Nattrass made some very personal remarks against me before sneaking out of the Chamber without listening to the debate .
Of course , this is a man who would not know one end of a railway locomotive from the other and whose expertise is restricted to Thomas the Tank Engine .
I do appreciate that UKIP have no idea with regard to manners and parliamentary procedure ; this was evident recently in Brussels .
However , as a democrat adhering to democratic principles and procedures , I presented this oral question on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism as its Chair , which it is my proud duty to do .
That is why I delivered it as such , so I really do not think I should be subjected to abuse from the other side of the Chamber from that group of rogues .
As an aside , I just thought I would mention in passing that , under the Labour Government in the United Kingdom , railway patronage has increased 20 % over recent years - even on the route from London to Birmingham !
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me simply tell you about a personal experience .
I live on an important rail route - the route via the Brenner Pass to Verona .
The Italian national railways have been neglecting both goods and passenger transport here for years .
Austrian railways now travel this route five times a day .
However , no timetables for this are provided at Italian railway stations , nor do they issue tickets .
Now , the reconstruction of this route at a cost of around EUR 20 billion is currently being considered and the European Union has also invested a lot of money in this .
So we can see how absurd things sometimes are in this area .
It is not always the very big things that make the issue complicated ; sometimes it is the small things .
For this reason , Commissioner , I urge you to take decisive action here , to impose sanctions and to actively ensure that the Commission 's directives are complied with .
( PT ) Mr President , it is now apparent what has been the true objective of the so-called railway package , which was launched with the stated aim , a laudable one , of setting up connection points which would secure interoperability .
The real intention , which we denounced at the time , was to open up rail transport , particularly that of merchandise , to competition and private interests , as a first step towards the complete liberalisation of the sector at Community level .
As in other instances of liberalisation , the process begins by making the most out of the fact that something does not operate well at a particular time , neglecting the real causes of such situations , particularly the years of persistent policies of dismantling and neglecting the public sector , in order to justify liberalising measures and to promote the aforementioned competition , without any real reflection on how or why it will improve matters .
Experience , as we have already heard here today , shows us quite the opposite : liberalisation is the cause of , and not the solution to , the principal problems of the sector , most obviously of all those relating to the quality and accessibility of the services and the rights of workers .
There can be no doubt that public investment in the railway sector is of a strategic nature for energy and environmental reasons , but it must not take place to serve the profit seeking of those large private interests which are intent on taking control of this vital public sector in every country through its liberalisation at the level of the EU internal market .
( RO ) I would like to mention again the situation which faces trained and accredited rail sector staff during a time of crisis .
In Romania , more than 6 000 redundancies will be made in the rail transport sector during this period .
The European Social Fund and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund will certainly be mobilised to support those affected , but these are only temporary solutions .
This is why , Commissioner , I hope that we will manage to devise together a strategy promoting the sustainable development of rail transport so that we can offer safe , good-quality services and jobs for qualified staff in the rail transport sector .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank the honourable Members for their remarks .
We will have ample opportunity to discuss the recasting of the first railway package .
I just want to reply to some remarks .
First , information about the 21 Member States and the concrete reasons why the reasoned opinion was sent is public information , so anybody who wants can get that information .
This first railway package has very good intentions : to remove barriers and to improve the conditions for better functioning of transport .
We will pursue the same goal with the recasting of the package .
The problem is not that the package was bad , but that implementation was insufficient .
Barriers still exist and resistance to removing barriers is still very strong .
We must change the old system of state-owned monopolies with great privileges and no interoperability .
We must change that system and improve interoperability .
That is the purpose of developing this railway reform .
The problem is precisely that this has not been completed .
We must , of course , always balance all the steps taken with quality control .
That is also where the railway package has ideas , such as on how to strengthen the role of regulatory agencies .
The problem is that the regulatory agencies remain very mixed in with the interests of state-owned companies .
You cannot then expect a high level of quality control .
These issues must and will be addressed in the recasting of the railway package , and perhaps in other strategic documents as well .
Adequate financing remains a very big problem , and we need to find innovative ways to finance the bottlenecks .
Many Members mentioned the need for investment .
We must combine all possible tools and find new tools to pinpoint resources for investment in railways , including modern traffic management systems , booking systems for buying tickets in the same way as for air transport , and also better connect eastern Europe to western Europe , which is another substantial problem .
The detailed list of all the elements in the process of preparing this recast railway package is very long .
I would be very happy to come back to you with concrete proposals once we have the concrete legislative documents .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I welcome the fact that by announcing the first railway package , the European Commission started a process which can be considered as the first step in harmonising railway services within Europe .
However , the fact that the transposition of the three directives included in the package caused serious problems for 21 Member States created a serious difficulty which could hinder the proper transposition of any further packages .
I draw the European Commission 's attention to a contradiction between the high level of economic and efficiency requirements laid down in connection with railway systems in Europe , on the one hand , and the positive effect of the railway on regional development , improving the mobility of rural populations and people with disabilities , and the environment , on the other .
I suggest that the Commission resolves this contradiction by finding an appropriate balance and compromise , bearing in mind the clarification of the principle of cost sharing between Member States and the European Union , and the importance of establishing harmonised transport within the EU .
A healthy competition involving all participants of the industry should be developed , where the actual competition is between individual and public transportation rather than between the different modes of public transport .
A problem for the proper functioning of the railway market in the new Member States and , in turn , a factor which restricts liberalisation of the market , is the incorrect financing of the railways , in other words , a lack of sufficient means to maintain the railway infrastructure .
This results in high access prices and , as a consequence , restricts the competitiveness of this branch of the transportation industry because of the high costs of transport .
A further problem is the underfunding of services which are a public service , a result of which is the debts of companies operating in the passenger sector .
This then limits the possibilities for investment , for example , in new rolling stock .
In the context of appropriate regulation of the European railway market , it is essential to strengthen the national market regulators .
By strengthening , I mean increasing their independence and effectiveness , improving the quality of staff , etc .
It would also appear to be legitimate to establish a European market regulator , which will monitor correct performance of functions assigned to national regulators and report directly to the European Commission on any irregularities found .
Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Carl Schlyter , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , Daniel Caspary , on behalf of the PPE Group , Kader Arif , on behalf of the S & D Group , Niccolò Rinaldi , on behalf of the ALDE Group , Helmut Scholz , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , and Syed Kamall , on behalf of the ECR Group , on transparency and the state of play of the ACTA negotiations ( Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ) - B7-0020 / 2010 )
Mr President , each institution has to defend its role .
Parliament is the voice of the people of the EU and must uphold the interests of its citizens .
The Commission calls itself the guardian of the treaty , but in this case , it is the principles of transparency , human rights and parliamentary rights that you need to defend .
If we are not given access to the documents , none of the EU institutions will be fulfilling its role or meeting our citizens ' expectations .
Some of the Commissioners emphasised in their hearings that Parliament must have access to documents on the same terms as the Council of Ministers , and Parliament expects the Commission to stand by its promises .
Many of our citizens are concerned that they are being robbed of their freedoms and rights by the continual torrents of invasive legislation , such as the legislation on data retention , Ipred 1 , Ipred 2 , SWIFT , and so on .
The EU cannot continue to negotiate on ACTA unless its citizens are given an opportunity to be involved in the process .
The main issue today is transparency , although naturally , the content is also sensitive .
The EU must clearly indicate that the terms of our participation in the ACTA process are transparency and the defence of human rights and freedoms .
Only once we have set out the inalienable rights that exist in a free and open society can we then , within the framework of these rights , fight crime and debate the form that various agreements are to take .
It is an absolutely absurd and unacceptable situation if we have to ask the Commission behind closed doors about the content of the agreements that we are expected to make decisions about .
Our citizens want guarantees that their electronic devices will not be searched at borders , that they are entitled to be connected and that criminal sanctions will not be brought in over their heads .
We expect you to promise us today full participation in ACTA ; if not , I will have to conclude with a classic response : see you in court .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , counterfeiting , smuggling , and the violation of intellectual property rights doubtless pose a huge problem , first of all , for us as the European Union as a whole , but also for many Member States .
It is a problem for entrepreneurs , workers and consumers that more and more counterfeit products are also finding their way onto the European internal market .
We now estimate that counterfeit goods to the value of around EUR 250 billion are flooding our market .
In the best case scenario , if a medicine like the contraceptive pill is counterfeited and does not work - as has recently been said at an event - a woman would simply become pregnant .
However , in the worst case scenario , if the medicine does not work , it can be a matter of life and death , and that cannot be in our interests .
We urgently need to do something about the violation of intellectual property rights , smuggling and counterfeiting .
It is unacceptable that , in 2008 , we confiscated 178 million counterfeit articles at our borders , 20 million of which were dangerous , with more than 50 % of these articles coming from China .
Therefore , we must take action in this area .
The problem is clear : the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force on 1 December .
Negotiations regarding ACTA have been going on for three years and therefore we , as the European Parliament , were not nearly as involved in the past as we need to be in the future .
I therefore hope that , in the next few weeks and months , we definitely attain more transparency in this area .
We need access to data that clearly tell us what is happening at the moment in the negotiations and what position the European Commission is adopting .
The negotiations must continue .
We need the successful conclusion of an appropriate agreement .
The points of criticism from the various groups are sufficiently well known in this House .
In the interests of workers , employers , industry and consumers , I hope that we reach a meaningful conclusion , but that in arriving at this conclusion , we take account in the negotiations of the existing acquis communautaire and do not go beyond it .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have three questions on my mind .
The first is , why are we still lacking transparency when the Treaty of Lisbon has been in force since 1 December and we have had an interinstitutional agreement with the Commission since 10 February ?
I cannot understand why it is still the case that the Council is sitting at the table as an observer in the negotiations , Parliament is not involved and the documents are not publicly accessible .
So why is this , Commissioner ?
The second question that is of concern to me is this : who is actually negotiating the ACTA Agreement ?
This is not being negotiated as some sort of follow-up agreement to TRIPS within the framework of the World Trade Organisation .
It is only being negotiated by individual States and - as we hear from the United States - also by powerful economic interests .
I ask myself whether , in fact , standards are not being set which will ultimately apply to everyone even though not everyone is sitting round the negotiating table .
The third question that is troubling me , Commissioner , is this : what actually is the substance of the negotiations ?
In your hearing , you answered my question and assured me that the acquis communautaire was secure .
However , when I look at individual papers that have leaked out I unfortunately have my doubts about this .
I understand that negotiations are being held , that blocks on the Internet are possible , that providers are to be used , so to speak , to help police the Internet for economic interests , that restrictions on research and science may sometimes be imposed and that some people are even trying to introduce general surveillance systems .
I therefore ask myself , where in all this is the acquis communautaire ?
There is also the question of compensation .
The fact that the inclusion of lost profit in the compensation is being negotiated is not appropriate for our policy .
Of course , my third question , Commissioner , is what is the actual relationship between online and offline ?
When I read that online and offline are both supposed to represent the digital world , does that essentially mean that there are also to be restrictions and searches of laptops , iPods and MP3 players at borders ?
Would you please provide answers to these three questions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that there is an original sin in the subject that we are debating this evening , and that is the secrecy with which the negotiations have been carried out up to now .
This secrecy has also possibly been exacerbated by an imbalance , if it is true that US industries , unlike the European public and institutions , have had access to a series of information resources on the basis of a confidentiality pact .
The nontransparency of the negotiations is a problem that we face in other cases as well - we talked about this in the context of the agreement with Korea - and it is something that now , with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , must end .
It seems to me that this original sin is also the result of an abuse : that of using the fight against counterfeiting to lead other battles as if it were a kind of watchword in the name of which anything is allowed .
Moreover , this is certainly an incredibly important battle for a trade power such as the European Union .
Commissioner , I am from Venice , a city that you know well , where the regulations on counterfeiting products - I am thinking , for example , of Murano glass - used to be very severe ( even extending so far as the death penalty ) .
Therefore , this is definitely something that we must take seriously in an increasingly global economy such as our own .
However , this agreement is giving rise to serious threats , which are alarming the public , and the Commission must , of course , be aware of this .
In fact , this issue , which really should be specific to the Committee on International Trade , is becoming less and less so , while the same committee is increasingly doing the work of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
We worry about issues relating to freedom of information and of expression via the Internet , the right to privacy and the possible criminal and civil consequences for Internet service providers .
There is a sort of red line that should not be crossed , and I would ask the Commission to proceed very cautiously on this matter .
More strictly from a trade point of view , I would like to ask the Commissioner for reassurance that the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) may not be used to hinder the sale of medicines available at more competitive prices ; safe , generic medicines that do not infringe copyright and whose only crime is that they are produced by emerging countries such as India and Brazil and that they may encroach on western pharmaceutical industries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner De Gucht , if you meet with representatives from ten governments in a small group in a back room in order to agree on a global surveillance regulation containing such sensitive chapter headings as ' enforcement of the law ' and ' civil penal measures in connection with border controls and the Internet ' , you can hardly be surprised if rumours emerge and if questions are raised to which citizens rightly want answers .
I totally agree with the criticism levelled by my fellow Members .
However , you need to be aware of the concerns behind the questions from the Committee on International Trade , which have cross-group support , namely , that an agreement that was originally supposed to be about the protection of engineering achievements and patents is now reaching deep into the area of civil rights , the democracy of communication , the decentralised potential for innovation and cultural development and the protection of personal data .
However , Articles 7 and 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights also govern your negotiations and we will remind you of this continually .
Such an agreement will affect the whole world .
However , you are excluding the emerging economies and developing countries , as well as civil society organisations , trade unions and national parliaments from the negotiations - to put it simply , you are excluding the general public in whose service and under whose control you are supposed to be .
You are negotiating without a mandate from the European Parliament .
You continue to fob us off with two-page summaries of the results of whole negotiating rounds .
You refuse to follow the new law and disclose to us the same documents that the Member States receive in relation to these negotiations .
If you now claim that the concerns of my group are unfounded , then prove it .
Lay the negotiation documents on the table straight away .
If you dream of one day receiving the approval of this Parliament for the results of your negotiations , then you ought to learn from the experience of the democratic decision taken against the SWIFT Agreement .
All I can say to you is welcome to democracy .
This Parliament will no longer permit back-room debates and decisions .

author . - Mr President , I think the Commissioner can see the strength of feeling across Parliament , across all the parliamentary groups , where we are clearly calling , whatever our differences are on different aspects of ACTA and counterfeit trading and also the intellectual property rights , we are all agreed here on the need for greater transparency .
I hope that has come across quite clearly .
Commissioner , we are all concerned that when you have negotiations where there is not sufficient transparency - we are not aware of the principles and what our negotiating position is in these talks - then what will happen is that you create a vacuum and , when you create a vacuum , we all know that rumours fill that vacuum .
We have seen leaks purporting to be official documents .
We have no way of knowing whether they are actually official documents or whether they are made up , but it just shows what happens when you do not have enough transparency and you do not share information .
I think some of us really also understand the need sometimes for a bit of confidentiality .
Surely , when we are in negotiations , we do not want to give away all our negotiating positions ; we do not want to give away our chips .
But what we are asking for is reasonable transparency .
Why can we not have access to these documents ?
Why can we not have access to the texts ?
And if you feel that , for reasons of transparency and for negotiations , you cannot give us this , then at least give us summary positions and tell us what our basic principles are in these negotiations .
So , for example , are we going to support proposals that appear to be on the table , according to what is on the blogosphere , that MP3 players and laptops can be confiscated at borders ?
Will there be criminal sanctions ?
Is the EU position to support this ?
I think we need to know and I think it shows the strength of feeling across this Parliament that we have been able to come together on a broad compromise , even though we may have slight differences and nuances here , to agree on a common text .
So , Commissioner , it is over to you to demonstrate transparency and demonstrate that you recognise the democratic accountability that we all seek .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I understand Members ' concerns about the ACTA negotiations .
Let me first recall that we are negotiating this agreement in order to improve the protection of ' made in Europe ' innovation in all areas where intellectual property rights can be breached .
If we want to remain a competitive economy , we will have to rely on innovation , creativity and brand exclusivity .
That is one of our main competitive advantages on the world market .
So we need the tools to ensure that this competitive advantage is adequately protected in our main export markets .
We have tried to raise this issue for several years in multilateral organisations like the WTO or the World Intellectual Property Organisation .
Those attempts have been systematically blocked by other countries .
So , despite our preference for a truly global solution , we have had no other choice but to engage with a coalition of the willing .
The final agreement will only be binding on those countries that have signed , although we would of course be happy if more countries , and especially emerging economies , could subsequently join .
As I said during my hearing , those international negotiations are confidential .
That is not unusual .
Negotiations are about seeking an agreed outcome and require a minimum confidentiality in order for each party to feel comfortable to make concessions and / or to try out options before finally settling on an agreement .
On the other hand , I agree that Parliament needs to be adequately informed about the evolution of the negotiations .
We are doing our utmost in two areas : to inform Parliament , and to convince our negotiating partners to agree to more transparency .
Firstly , as regards information to Parliament , we have provided you with the negotiating guidelines , full reports on the negotiating rounds and , in general , all the relevant documents originating from DG Trade that have been shared with the Member States through the Trade Policy Committee .
We have done this in accordance with the framework agreement .
Also , ACTA has been discussed several times in the Committee on International Trade in the last three years .
Let me add to this that the Commission organised two stakeholder conferences on ACTA in June 2008 and April 2009 , which were open to all citizens , industry , NGOs and the media .
Another public conference will be organised on 22 March in Brussels .
I understand that you may feel that this is not sufficient for you to have a clear picture on where we stand in these negotiations .
I have instructed my services to provided dedicated briefings with interested MEPs on all aspects of the negotiations .
They will be at your disposal for discussion before and after each further negotiating round .
Secondly , I realise that the best way for you to know what is going on in these negotiations would be to read the draft negotiating text .
This would give you a very clear picture of where exactly we are in those negotiations .
As you probably know , there is an agreement amongst ACTA parties that the negotiating text can only be made public if all parties agree .
The Commission is in favour of releasing the negotiating documents as soon as possible .
However , a few ACTA negotiating parties remain opposed to early release .
I strongly disagree with their approach but I cannot unilaterally breach a confidentiality commitment .
My credibility as a negotiator is at stake .
Nevertheless , I will see to it that , at the next negotiating round in April , the Commission vigorously pushes its negotiating partners to agree to releasing the text , and I will raise Parliament 's concerns bilaterally with ACTA parties , like the US , whom I am scheduled to meet before then .
It is in the interests of all that everyone has a clear idea of what exactly these negotiations are about and even more importantly , also of what they are not about .
Finally , as regards your concerns on the substance , I would like to recall the main principles that are driving the Commission in the negotiation of this agreement .
First , the objective is to address large-scale infringements of intellectual property rights which have a significant commercial impact .
It will not lead to the limitation of civil liberties or harassment of consumers .
Secondly , ACTA is only about enforcement of intellectual property rights .
It will not include provisions modifying substantive intellectual property law such as the creation of new rights , the scope of protection or duration .
However , it should set minimum rules on how innovators can enforce their rights in courts , at the borders or over the Internet .
For example , a European fashion designer , when confronted with counterfeiting of his creations outside Europe , can ensure that his rights are adequately safeguarded abroad .
Thirdly , ACTA must , and will , remain in line with the acquis communautaire , including the current level of harmonisation of IPR enforcement , the e-Commerce Directive , the telecoms regulatory framework and , last but not least , the applicable EU legislation on data protection and piracy .
There will be no harmonisation or changes to EU legislation through the back door .
In this sense , ACTA will have no impact on European citizens , since it will not create new obligations for the EU and no need for implementing legislation .
However , it will provide our innovators increased protection in overseas markets .
I am aware of the concerns expressed by some of you about the introduction of a compulsory ' three strike ' rule or graduated response to fight copyright infringements and Internet piracy .
Let me be very clear on this so there is no room for ambiguity .
The three strike rule or graduated response systems are not compulsory in Europe .
Different EU countries have different approaches and we want to keep that flexibility while fully respecting fundamental rights , freedoms and civil liberties .
The EU does not support , and will not accept , ACTA creating an obligation to disconnect people from the Internet because of illegal downloads .
Similarly , we will make sure that ACTA does not hamper access to generic medicines .
I know there has been some controversy on the impact of EU customs legislation on trade in generic medicines .
As I have already told you at my hearing , that problem will be addressed in the upcoming revision of our customs legislation .
Finally , you also asked about an impact assessment on ACTA .
In fact , considering that the Commission will not go beyond the acquis communautaire , we took as our basis the studies made for the 2004 directive on the enforcement of intellectual property rights and for the 2005 Proposal for a directive on criminal enforcement of IPR ( which was not adopted ) .
We also considered the conclusions of the 2008 OECD study on the economic impact of counterfeiting and piracy .
That study values the economy of physical internationally traded counterfeits at USD 250 billion , which is to say , more than the individual GDP of 150 countries .
It also contains an exhaustive analysis of the piracy of digital contents .
In short , I hear your concerns and will defend them to the best of my ability .
Your confidence and support will help me carry this important task forward .
Mr President , Commissioner , since the Treaty of Lisbon came into force , we have had new powers that we wish henceforth to see respected .
Therefore , we have listened to you and we ask you to introduce an ongoing , transparent consultation procedure on the AntiCounterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) , ensuring that the European Parliament and the citizens represented by this Chamber are regularly and fully informed of the progress of the negotiations , whilst respecting the confidentiality clauses which , as you have just indicated to us , are related to the agreement .
We wish today to have access to the text and the summary of the negotiations so that we may be fully involved in the legislative process .
Moreover , my group and I would encourage you to pursue the negotiations in order to achieve a multilateral treaty that improves the standards of application and of respect for intellectual property rights to which , eventually , the emerging economies such as China could subscribe .
Counterfeiting is a scourge , an underground activity and one aspect of unfair competition that , as well as being a danger to the body , society and the economy , is a danger to the mind .
By depriving authors as well as the companies which have invested many years in researching and developing the fruits of their work , it discourages others from pursuing their efforts to innovate and create .
However , we know that this is where the heart of European Union competitiveness resides .
Finally , I believe that with the development of our digital environment , we cannot deny that counterfeiting has become intangible .
Therefore , I remain convinced that it is possible to make Internet users , especially those who hijack copyright , liable without comprising respect for fundamental rights and civil liberties .
Let us work together to find this balance between rights and responsibilities .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his contribution .
Commissioner , you said at the end of your contribution that you have heard our concerns and you are responding to them .
Well , I think , as they say , ' up to a point ' .
I am not convinced that you have entirely grasped all our concerns about the ACTA negotiations .
It is true that there is common ground between us in terms of the fact that IPR right holders deserve a fair return on their rights , but counterfeit goods can and do sometimes pose a threat to human health .
So , like you , we are not against international cooperation to tackle piracy , to tackle counterfeiting and to deal with other abuses of intellectual property rights .
But , we repeat , it has to be based on the existing acquis communautaire .
If you are giving us an absolute assurance on that , then I accept it , but you said you were not going to do it through the back door - which it seemed to me still gave you the opportunity to do it through the front door - but if you are saying absolutely no move to the acquis communautaire , then I am pleased to hear that and I accept your word on that .
Similarly , you said you would not criminalise individuals for downloading from the Internet , but then you talked about the external borders of the Community and what might happen with people going away rather than coming into the EU , so again , we do not want anything in ACTA which criminalises anyone for individual use .
Even though we might frown on it , nobody should be criminalised for personal use of copyright material .
Of course , any action through ACTA has to be proportional to the aims .
It is not a blank cheque for copyright holders .
The problem , as other Members have said , is that we do not know the situation because of the secrecy surrounding this .
I welcome the fact that you have given a strong commitment to get the draft negotiating text and that you will put pressure on the other parties .
I think you have to tell the other parties , though , that this will not strengthen you as a negotiator : it will weaken you as a negotiator if you cannot release the draft text , because you will not have - as was very clear tonight - the support of this House if we cannot see the draft text on which you are working .
Finally , on a positive note , I welcome your comments on generic medicine and I look forward to seeing the review of the Customs Regulation .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , when preparing for this debate about copyright , intellectual property rights and how we want to protect the creative and intellectual efforts of our fellow citizens , I had to think back to the theft a couple of years ago of a truck containing the new Harry Potter books , just days before their release .
But today the thief would not bother stealing a truck ; he would simply illegally download it on to his laptop or MP3 player and carry it across the border .
I welcome the Commission 's commitment to transparency but , according to the briefing note kindly provided by your services , the assertion that negotiators were required to sign a non-disclosure agreement is incorrect .
You have just said that you signed , or the previous Commission signed , such an agreement and that you are therefore bound by it .
I would like to understand which of the two statements is true .
If there is no such non-disclosure clause , all relevant documents must be made immediately and publicly available .
If , on the other hand , there is such a clause , we need to hear from the Commissioner what he will do to ensure full transparency and information of the public , not just of this House , because restricted access for Members of Parliament only , subject to confidentiality , is not enough .
European citizens have a right to know about decisions that deeply affect their rights and freedoms .
In any case , such non-disclosure agreements must become a thing of the past .
The EU should , in future , insist that European standards of transparency apply .
The democratic legitimacy of these negotiations is weak .
There has not been any debate to establish the aims and principles of the EU .
The mandate has not received any parliamentary approval .
You may argue that there is no legal requirement but that is beside the point because , if 27 individuals - national ministers - consider that they can give themselves a mandate to negotiate in secret on the fundamental rights and freedoms of European citizens , I can only conclude that their understanding of democracy differs fundamentally from mine .
Parliament means business .
No ' three strikes out ' ; no warrantless searches and confiscation of laptops or mobile phones .
Parliament needs to have watertight guarantees that such clauses will not be introduced via the back door of an international agreement .
Finally , I wish you an excellent trip to New Zealand next month , and please make sure that your iPod does not contain any illegally downloaded material !
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate the Commission on finally having achieved what EU leaders have been talking about for decades .
They have actually managed to get ordinary citizens interested in EU politics .
ACTA is an issue that people on the net really care about .
But , having said that , I still feel I must criticise the Commission for the method it has used .
The reason so many citizens are following the ACTA issue is because they are furious .
They are furious at proposals to limit their freedom and invade their privacy just because some big companies are asking for it .
They are furious because they see their fundamental civil liberties balanced against industry interests and coming up short .
They are furious at the complete lack of transparency .
This is not how it should be in a democracy .
Tomorrow , we will be voting on a resolution that calls on the Commission to live up to the treaty and put all ACTA papers on the table .
I hope the resolution will be adopted by an overwhelming majority .
The right to privacy , to information freedom and to fair and proper trial are the cornerstones of a free and open society .
Tomorrow , we will show that this is a parliament that is prepared to stand up for those rights in the information age .
We will demand the information that is both our right and our due as the elected representatives , and we will respectfully remind the Commission that this is Parliament , not a doormat .

Mr President , I originally wanted to thank Commissioner Karl De Gucht for breaking with the approach of his predecessor , who circumvented the European Parliament as the only directly-elected European institution and failed to provide information on the process of negotiating this agreement , but I feel rather embarrassed because I was always brought up to show respect for important personages and the fact that Mr De Gucht was ostentatiously cleaning his glasses while my colleague Mr Kamall was standing here has therefore quite thrown me .
Nevertheless , I will now turn to the matter in hand .
Personally , I welcome the fact that this agreement is coming into being , since intellectual property deserves better protection than is currently the case .
Despite this , I am concerned that the signatories to the agreement do not include Russia and China , who are the main source of copyright violations .
I also have concerns over the actual effectiveness of this agreement .
Since the content of the agreement is always veiled in a kind of mist , as many Members have mentioned here , I would like to call on the Commission , which is negotiating the agreement on behalf of the Member States , to ensure that it does not serve as an instrument for exporting the French digital guillotine to other states and , at the same time , does not become an importer of software patents into the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am surprised and deeply concerned at the Commission defending the use of confidential negotiations when it comes to legislation on our citizens ' freedoms , fundamental rights , privacy , and so on .
Withholding information on such negotiations from our citizens can never be defended .
I demand that the negotiations are broken off immediately .
We can resume negotiations when the parties to ACTA agree that the negotiations will take place transparently and democratically .
I want to have all the documents on the table now , and for all citizens .
Transparency and information are among the most fundamental principles of a democracy , particularly in respect of fundamental freedoms and citizens ' rights .
We therefore request that all the documents are put on the table now and for all citizens , since this is , of course , only what is expected of a democracy .
( NL ) Mr President , when dossiers are cooked up behind closed doors , alarm bells start ringing in my group .
The Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) is one such dossier .
Many people in my country wondered why the Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) had to be elected to the European Parliament , and here is why .
It was so we could oppose the EU kitchen , which is ready and waiting to prepare all kinds of unsavoury concoctions behind closed doors without the public having any say in the matter .
This time , we do not even know as yet what will emerge from this EU kitchen ; the European Parliament is expected to have an opinion on something that is still under wraps in there .
Is there anything more ridiculous ?
This shows utter contempt for Parliament and the public .
The information that has come to light about this ACTA court up to now is very dispiriting .
The consumer would be the victim , with the possibility of excluding citizens from the Internet : a very serious matter .
Europe has always been the continent where people 's freedom to accumulate knowledge takes pride of place .
This freedom would now be under serious threat , which cannot and must not happen .
In addition , we are looking at a violation of the principle of subsidiarity .
The Member States have absolutely no say in this dossier any more .
My group stands for full transparency and vehemently opposes the criminalisation of citizens .
ACTA breeds a culture of stifling surveillance and imputation ; the State is watching you .
ACTA circumvents all the existing international bodies , such as the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
What is the Commission up to in that secret kitchen ?
Why is it almost exclusively American companies who are involved in the consultations ; what are they doing there ?
Are they there to safeguard their commercial interests ?
Yet what about the interests of European citizens ?
Could it be that they are less important ?
This is where the importance of the PVV becomes clear .
We fight for the interests of the citizen wherever secrecy and back-room politics are to be found .
I should just like to place on record that the PVV opposes the counterfeiting of medicines and products .
That is not what this discussion is about ; it is about the fact that the Members of this House are unable to express a proper opinion on this dossier purely and simply because it has been kept secret and so we do not know its contents .
We cannot imagine a more flagrant violation of the parliamentary mandate .
As far as we are concerned , the whole stinking , secretive kitchen should be closed down and a large sign hung on the door reading ' Closed owing to violation of the rules ' .
( CS ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we know that globalisation and , in particular , the entry of China into the WTO have created an enormous problem .
Europe is awash with counterfeit goods which are ever more hazardous to human health and represent large economic losses to companies .
Citizens and companies do not take kindly to the fact that the control mechanisms of Member States are totally insufficient , and they are rightly calling for more effective measures at the European level , including big fines for counterfeiters .
This agreement should fundamentally improve international cooperation in detecting counterfeiters , but I do not think that our aim should be to prosecute secondary-school students who download games from the Internet .
The content of the agreement negotiated over two years is secret , and so information concerning controversial articles which might affect the current rights of Europeans , their privacy and their personal data , only drips through .
We gave the Commission no mandate for this .
I therefore fear that the ratification of this highly necessary agreement may be rejected in the European Parliament in a similar way to the SWIFT Agreement , unless the Commission can inform Parliament regularly as to the structure and limits of the negotiated agreement .
I do not want us to be faced again with a finished article , in other words , an act that we must approve or reject , without being able to discuss its content in detail and dispel the concerns of our citizens .
I also consider it a strategic error that China , which is the largest source of counterfeits , was not invited to the negotiations on this agreement .
I would therefore like to ask , Commissioner , if you could explain to us the tactics that are involved and whether you are in talks with the Chinese over China signing up to the agreement at a later date .
Do you really believe this will happen ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe 's ambition to remain the world 's largest economy must increasingly be linked to the revival of its competitiveness , to the quality of its manufacturing system and to its ability to conquer new markets .
The fight against counterfeiting and commercial infringement plays an essential role in this context .
However , the protection of trademarks , patents and intellectual property are not only nonfinancial instruments that make the system more competitive , they are also a tangible example of the application to the industrial economy of principles of a democratic legal culture founded on respect for the rules , for those rules which have been violated in past years under the force of international financial speculation .
The Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) is a fundamental instrument with which to combat counterfeiting , a phenomenon which yields incredible revenues of USD 500 billion per year , which has links with organised crime and which affects - indeed threatens - fundamental human rights such as health , if we only think of the counterfeiting of medicines .
If we are to assess the need for ACTA , we must bear this international context in mind .
On the other hand , we must call for this treaty to also respect certain basic , fundamental principles of coexistence inspired by respect for the rules .
We cannot hide the fact that we are concerned about the legal basis of the treaty , about the negotiating mandate and its transparency .
Those who represent , as this Parliament does , 500 million citizens , must be informed officially , not confidentially .
The negotiators from the Commission must report back to this House on the state of progress of the work , and access to the documents and information must be provided so that a detailed opinion can be expressed .
The difficult yet fruitful cooperation between Parliament and the Commission can help the European Union to realise its potential in the best possible way .
The resolution is along these lines and , as such , it is worthy of our vote .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner De Gucht , you are inheriting a weighty legacy and if the subject matter was not so serious , I could almost smile at the speculation triggered by ACTA .
However , there are two reasons why I absolutely cannot smile about this .
Firstly , counterfeiting and violations of copyright and trademark law are things that jeopardise both the integrity of the economy and people 's health .
The global economic loss as a result of counterfeiting and violations of copyright and trademark law is estimated to have been EUR 185 billion in 2007 alone .
That is significantly more than the European Union 's budget .
This jeopardises our businesses , promotes crime and destroys jobs .
That certainly cannot be in our interests .
In addition , counterfeit medicines can have life-threatening consequences for people who take these medicines unaware that they are counterfeit .
That is also an unacceptable risk .
It also goes without saying that it is very much in our interests to take action in this regard .
Secondly , it must doubtless be clear that the European Commission 's negotiating mandate should be strictly confined within the framework of the acquis communautaire to ensure that ACTA does not , in future , stand for ' another crazy treaty agreed ' .
After the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , this includes providing extensive and ad-hoc information to the European Parliament on the current status of the negotiations on the agreement .
After all , we will be asked to give our approval .
In other words , the European Parliament expects complete transparency and publication of the negotiation documents along with all other relevant papers .
If the Commission wants to avoid further rumours and assumptions surrounding ACTA , I see no other option than for it to provide the interested public with detailed information .
I have three important questions in this regard .
Firstly - even though you have already touched on this - can the Commission guarantee that there will be no introduction of a ' three strikes and you are out ' rule ?
That would , of course , be contrary to the new Electronic Communications Framework Directive .
Secondly , can the Commission guarantee that there will be no introduction of third-party liability on the part of Internet service providers for the content that they transmit ?
That would , of course , be contrary to the e-Commerce Directive .
Thirdly , can the Commission provide assurances that , within the framework of ACTA , no penal measures will be introduced that lie outside the competence of the European Union , and I am very well aware that it will be the Member States that assume the responsibility in this respect .
However , I assume that , as guardian of the treaties , you will do what is expected of you .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr De Gucht , more than a year ago , the European Parliament asked you , the Commission , very clearly to make the negotiations on the ACTA Agreement transparent in future and to involve the public and the parliaments in these negotiations .
We also urged you to retain the narrow focus on anti-counterfeiting , as indicated in the title of the agreement .
What have you done since then ?
Nothing , absolutely nothing .
On the contrary , together with your so-called unholy coalition of the willing , in particular , the rich industrialised nations , you are negotiating an agreement by means of highly undemocratic , even illegal , secret diplomacy , and in many areas , this agreement clearly goes far beyond the current regulations for enforcing intellectual property law in Europe .
Of course , we cannot be certain of this because we have received no information from you .
However , the actual scandal is yet to come .
As of 1 December of last year , in many areas , you will no longer be able to ignore us and conduct your back-room politics with the Council , because the citizens - represented by their Parliament - have , quite rightly , finally put an end to this behaviour through the Treaty of Lisbon .
I therefore ask myself , what are you actually doing in this regard ?
As the Commission , you are the guardian of the treaties .
You are therefore responsible for ensuring that the clearly-formulated EU Treaty is actually complied with .
If you are not able to guarantee full compliance with the treaty , then you will once again receive a ' no ' from this House .
If you do not believe that you can guarantee compliance with the treaties in these negotiations , then please stop the negotiations until you can do so .
Therefore , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance says : act now .
Act on ACTA !
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , all of us here are against counterfeiting and piracy .
However , Commissioner , you have just told us a fairy tale to justify the fact that you are discussing an international agreement behind the backs of the peoples and behind the backs of their representatives .
I would remind you , Commissioner , that Article 218 of the Treaty of Lisbon states , and I quote : ' The European Parliament shall be immediately and fully informed at all stages of the procedure ' in the framework of the negotiation or conclusion of international agreements .
The AntiCounterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) is precisely such a case , so keep your word and comply with your own treaty !
We cannot but worry about fundamental freedoms .
Indeed , interpretation of one offence - piracy - and its punishment will seemingly , in future , no longer be delegated to a judicial authority but to Internet access providers .
What is more , in future , the customs services in those countries that are signatories to the agreement will seemingly be given permission to search telephones , laptop computers and personal stereos on the pretext of combating piracy , in line with the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication ( SWIFT ) Agreement , which was meant to combat terrorism .
Remember though , Commissioner : Parliament beat you on SWIFT and it will beat you on ACTA if need be .
One therefore wishes to mix together the fight against counterfeiting and piracy , invasions of privacy , infringements of intellectual property and even , in the case of medicines , infringement of the right to health .
Commissioner , put this agreement on the table immediately .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) is fundamental for achieving full harmonisation of the measures to protect European trade from counterfeiting and piracy .
The ACTA negotiations concern sensitive European legislative issues such as guaranteeing the application of intellectual property rights , data transmission and data protection , and this is why we are once again requesting greater transparency .
The Commission must commit itself fully , in accordance with the level of confidentiality .
The current negotiating texts must be made available to Parliament so that it can supervise the agreements and possibly offer suggestions to ACTA participants .
The Commissioner 's words this evening give us hope , but we want those words to be acted on .
Parliament has always fought to defend European consumers and manufacturers against counterfeiting and measures that infringe Internet privacy .
That is why it is vitally important for the Commission to continue to play an active role in the current negotiations , attracting a greater number of participants ; there are , unfortunately , only twelve at present .
We hope that an increasing number of countries - developing and emerging countries alike - will be tempted to take part in the negotiations and to sign the final agreement , so as to allow for a broader perspective on matters .
Countries must abide by and respect their shared obligations so as to combat counterfeiting and piracy more effectively .
This economic scourge is destroying many manufacturing sectors that work in compliance with the rules .
Therefore consumers , who are exposed to significant dangers to their health as well , must be provided with clear rules because , Commissioner , in the absence of clear and enforced rules , including for Internet use , the Internet will no longer represent an opportunity ; rather , it will have a boomerang effect .
We must all make a commitment to stop this happening because this is not only a question of individual privacy ; it is also a question of our countries ' security .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , an agreement behind closed doors is not something the European public either deserves or wants .
The European Union is currently negotiating a very important trade agreement , the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) , and once again , this is being done in back rooms .
The national parliaments and the European Parliament have not had a single opportunity for democratic scrutiny of the substance or scope of the negotiations , as the negotiating parties have agreed on a confidentiality clause .
Therefore , Parliament and the European public are being sidelined again , damaging public trust in Europe once more .
This time , it is trade interests rather than the fight against terrorism that are at issue .
Do not get me wrong ; the European economy must be stimulated , and intellectual property is an important aspect of this .
Yet the uncertainty being created at the moment by the confidentiality of the negotiating documents has given rise to many rumours .
I should like to ask how the communication works between the Commissioner for Trade and the Commissioner for Fundamental Rights in this regard .
Is Commissioner De Gucht going to inform his colleagues about the substance of the agreement at any stage ?
Is Commissioner Reding planning , at any stage , to ask her colleague , the Trade Commissioner , to provide transparency ?
The European Parliament demands such transparency , and now is the time to provide it , before our institution has to endorse this trade agreement .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , during the hearings of the new Commissioners , transparency was one of the words that was used the most .
You have said again today that everything is already transparent and open .
I have to tell you honestly that this definition of transparency is , unfortunately , not one I can go along with .
This is clearly the case for a large number of my fellow Members here in this House , too .
Transparency is more than simply throwing out a few bits of information and saying ' Well , unfortunately , we cannot disclose the rest because we have promised someone that it will all remain confidential ' .
We have entered a new era .
It is no longer possible to use international treaties to make blind agreements with trade partners that will then affect European legislation down the line .
Now that we have the Treaty of Lisbon in place , that is no longer possible .
That means that blind agreements , as well as the secretiveness and the lack of transparency , must stop at the doors of the European Parliament .
We need credibility for the protection of innovation that you are putting forward here as the main argument .
However , you will not achieve credibility if you negotiate everything behind closed doors and then try to console people by saying that it will not be so bad after all .
That , Commissioner , is the wrong way to go .

( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let us say this clearly : the way in which the negotiations on the AntiCounterfeiting Trade Agreement are being carried out is unacceptable to the European Parliament .
As a new colegislator on this issue , the Treaty of Lisbon now guarantees us the right to full information at the same time as it is received by the Council .
The documents that have ' leaked out ' up to now have proved to us that , as far as form is concerned , this dimension absolutely was not respected .
What can be said about the content ?
The fool 's bargain that seems to have been offered to Internet access providers is as follows : should they decide to cooperate in the systematic monitoring of the content carried on their networks , their current nonliability for such content would be maintained .
Otherwise , they would be exposing themselves to legal actions by right holders and would be systematically penalised .
I find such a turnaround extremely dangerous , as it would call into question the acquis communautaire , not only on the principle of mere conduit - referred to in French as simple transport - in the eCommerce Directive , but also in relation to respect for the fundamental rights of the citizens , which was brought up recently in our debate on the Telecoms package .
I will conclude by reminding you that our Chamber has already shown its attachment to these principles by rejecting the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication ( SWIFT ) Agreement .
I have no doubt about its ability to start again .
Therefore , I am anxious to stress the importance of the resolution that is being debated this evening .
I welcome the work of our coordinator , Mr Arif , and of all of the negotiators from the Committee on International Trade , who have ensured that the signal that the European Parliament will give tomorrow will be extremely symbolic because it is unanimous .
( EL ) Mr President , counterfeit goods not only harm the competitiveness of European undertakings , but also harbour dangers to human health .
The answer is to strengthen the application of intellectual property rights at global level .
We need as many trading partners as possible to join the multilateral agreement being discussed .
The agreement being negotiated must be fully in keeping with the relevant Community acquis , must respect fundamental freedoms and protect personal data , must safeguard the free flow of information and must not place unwarranted burdens on legal trade .
Finally , Parliament should have full and substantial information at its disposal at all stages of the negotiation , with due regard for reasonable confidentiality .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , something relatively clear has emerged from the obscure process which has been directed by the European Commission , namely , the intention to widen the scope and costs of intellectual property rights , leading to still more profit for large corporations .
Where necessary to achieve this objective , basic rules about democratic , transparent procedures have been disregarded , whilst information has been concealed and has escaped democratic scrutiny and control .
Where necessary to achieve this objective , global access to essential goods such as safe medicines , including generic versions , has been restricted and the rights to privacy and confidentiality of correspondence , as well as to the protection of personal information , have been violated .
The omnipresence of the market and the defence of economic interests which aim to achieve their own objectives within their sectors are not compatible with the defence and safeguarding of the common good .
The results of this policy are now quite clear to see .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I must say that , listening to the speeches after I took the floor , it comes to my mind that a lot of you were not listening properly to what I was saying , because I made it very clear that we were going to respect the acquis communautaire , that I would try to make sure the other parties to the agreement give their OK to the disclosure of the text that is currently being negotiated ; I made it clear that it would only apply to the commercial infringement of intellectual property rights , and I could continue for some time like this .
So I am not going to respond again to all these questions that have been put because , honestly , I think I already answered them in my first speech .
David Martin put the question , what happens when somebody is , in fact , leaving not only the European Union but leaving a country that is a party to the ACTA Agreement ?
That is an interesting question because it depends , of course , on where he is going to .
If he is going to a country that is not a party to the ACTA Agreement , then it will depend upon the customs and police of the country concerned , but that is beyond our reach .
As far as it is within our reach , we will make sure that this is not happening but , of course , we cannot speak for others .
I do not quite agree with the whole of Ms in ' t Veld 's reasoning on parliamentary approval and parliamentary control , but let me just say very clearly what I think the case is in the Treaty of Lisbon .
The case is that the Council gives a mandate to the Commission , and the Commission negotiates , and the Council has taken a decision on a mandate following their own rules of procedure .
Whether or not a minister in the Council of Ministers needs the approval of his national parliament beforehand is not a matter of European law , but a matter of national law , and that differs from one country to another .
I know that in your country , for example , for many positions of that kind , they need approval beforehand from the Parliament - OK , but there are other countries where this is not the case .
We should not , I think , judge the way the Council takes a decision .
Insofar as the Council respects the treaty and their own rules of procedure , I think that it is their business and not directly ours .
You were , to a certain extent , protecting me in that they should not check my iPod .
I have no iPod , so there is no problem yet .
In fact , I have had one since yesterday , but I have not yet used it and I am not going to New Zealand .
It is a little bit too far .
For that , you need officials who have a little bit more time to go there .
( NL ) I shall leave the whole discussion on the kitchen for Mrs Stassen ...
Interesting question , what about China ?
Well , China is not , as you know , Ms Roithová , a party to the present negotiations .
China is a serious problem because , as you rightly state , they are the number one source of counterfeiting .
Now we have several negotiations with them and discussions with them , also the high-level economic dialogue .
Repeatedly , we put emphasis on intellectual property rights , which is one of the main problems , not only within Internet trade but also in a lot of other activities .
Once ACTA is concluded , it will be open to all countries to sign it , and I hope that China will come to the conclusion that , for their own industry too , it would be beneficial if there were better protection of intellectual property rights , and sooner or later , that will come .
Look at other countries where this also happened in the past : now they have much more interest in intellectual property rights .
I do not quite agree on the interpretation by Mr Le Hyaric and Mrs Trautmann concerning Article 218 .
What Article 218 says is that Parliament should be informed about all steps in the procedure ; well , you are , and even more than that .
What we do by way of information goes far beyond what is mentioned in Article 218 , far beyond , but I have no problem with that .
I made it clear in my introductory statement that we will insist on other parties agreeing that we be in a position to disclose the present draft of the text , but it is not correct that we would not be respecting Article 218 .
By the way , let me say to Ms in ' t Veld , we sent you Annex 16 to the agreed statement by all ACTA participants about maintaining the confidentiality of documents .
That was sent to you by the Director-General , Mr David O 'Sullivan , on 21 January 2009 .
Of course , that was in the previous Parliament , but it is still the same person .
Mr O 'Sullivan is the same and Ms in ' t Veld is the same , so you got it .
So it is a little bit difficult then to question me as to what this is all about .
Finally , let me make it very clear that what I have been saying and what I said in the hearing should be taken seriously .
I will do my utmost to have the agreement of the contracting parties that we can fully inform you .
As long as that is not the case , I cannot disclose to you the drafts of the agreement because that would breach the confidentiality agreement and breaching such an agreement would have effects that are not limited to the ACTA negotiations but would spill over to a lot of other negotiations we have with these countries concerned .
It would breach the confidentiality as such and that makes all negotiations very difficult , if not impossible , but I will do my best to see that you get the stuff .
I have received five motions for resolutionstabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 10 March 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Whilst Parliament has been demanding access to the texts for months , the AntiCounterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) has been negotiated in the greatest possible secrecy behind the backs of the citizens and their representatives , and that is unacceptable .
The Commission itself cannot make head nor tail of it .
It tells us that it has already sent us the documents and , at the same time , that it will ask the Council to publish everything : who is it trying to kid ?
Beyond the issue of transparency , we wish here to remind the Commission and the Council that they will have to obtain consent from Parliament at the end of the negotiations .
From the leaks that have reached us , it would appear that we have a Trojan horse : on the pretext of a wholly legitimate fight against counterfeiting , the Member States , with the French Government at the forefront , wish to vote through a text that could undermine access to medicine , freedom of expression , the neutrality of the Internet and the legal liability of its intermediaries .
The fact is , Parliament will oppose any undermining of the acquis communautaire .
If the Commission and the Council do not change strategy , we shall protect the individual freedoms of our fellow citizens by rejecting ACTA , just as we rejected the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication ( SWIFT ) Agreement .
I welcome the question submitted to the Commission concerning the transparency and state of play of the negotiations on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) .
In my view , urgent action must be taken to resolve the situation we are in .
It is unacceptable for the European Parliament to be excluded by the Commission from the negotiations on drawing up the ACTA , given that we have to give our approval to the provisions of this treaty .
As has already been said , the Commission must make public as soon as possible all the negotiations which have taken place in connection with the ACTA , as well as the prospects envisaged for the meeting in April .
Issues such as forcing Internet providers to monitor traffic and impose restrictions within their networks may have an adverse impact on the population , both from the perspective of respecting their right to privacy and due to additional costs incurred by users .
Such an issue must be debated openly and public opinion must be consulted on it .
The stance taken by European citizens and industry on these measures must be known and respected in order to be able to avoid any kind of abusive , anti-democratic behaviour .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement , which is currently being negotiated by the European Commission , goes beyond the principle of proportionality , which is enshrined in EU law .
This principle says that action taken by the Union must not go beyond what is necessary to achieve the objectives of the treaty .
The chapter on the Internet is a cause of particular anxiety .
It is being said that the agreement contains regulations which could restrict freedom of speech in the Internet , on the one hand , and commercial activity , on the other .
This will be the result of what is said to have been proposed concerning making Internet providers liable for the content of information sent , as well as penal sanctions for downloading files for private use .
I say that these things are being said , because information about the content of the agreement does not come from official sources , but only from gossip and leaks , since the Commission does not keep Parliament informed about progress in negotiations .
However , the Treaty of Lisbon does , now , foresee such a procedure .
In addition , the consent of Parliament , expressed by a majority of votes , is essential for any agreement to be made by the Council .
The new treaty also brings in a competence allowing action to be taken in the area of intellectual property , and this belongs equally to Parliament and the Council .
Therefore , I add my voice to those of other fellow Members who are demanding greater transparency concerning the current negotiations , and I think interinstitutional cooperation on the matter of the ACTA should demonstrate that all the institutions are treating the new treaty , which is now in force , seriously .
At the moment , this is not the case .
in writing . - The Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement has a mandate which is vital for the protection of Intellectual Property Rights .
Post-crisis , there needs to be an incentive for intellectuals and artists to use their creativity and publish new material , without fear , online .
This right needs to be balanced against an individuals right to access to information and , furthermore , sanctions should only be targeted at the larger commercial exploiters of copyright material .
However that is an issue for another day .
Right now , I am most concerned about the level to which this House is being kept informed of negotiations .
Under Lisbon , this agreement requires the approval of this House and I would guess from my colleagues that the way the agreement is developing , it will receive a cold reception .
Negotiations surrounding ACTA need to be more open , and the Commission and Council need to show their willingness in this by ensuring Parliament has broad access to documents on the issue .
in writing . - I hope that the written declaration on ACTA that I submitted two weeks ago together with my colleagues , Castex , Alvaro and Roithová , and today 's debate will serve as a belated wake-up call to the Council and the Commission .
This Parliament will not sit back silently while the fundamental rights of millions of citizens are being negotiated away behind closed doors .
We oppose any ' legislation laundering ' on an international level of what would be very difficult to get through most national legislatures - let alone the European Parliament .
Here , of course , I refer to the infamous ' three strikes ' laws .
This Parliament firmly believes that intellectual property rights must be protected , but not by giving private companies sweeping rights to monitor indiscriminately every citizen 's activities on the Internet - something that we refuse to allow even our police to do when fighting terrorism - and certainly not through the disproportionate penalty of cutting whole households off from the Internet .
Access to the Internet is itself a fundamental right .
It must be treated and protected as such .
The European Commission 's negotiations relating to the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) have raised a few questions .
Although the agreement deals with justified concerns , namely combating the counterfeiting and smuggling of products and brands , it needs to be more firmly based on our European principles .
It must not lead to the harmonisation of copyright law , patent law or trade mark law in the EU - on the contrary , the principle of subsidiarity must remain our most important principle .
Trade agreements must not be misused in order to curtail the fundamental rights and freedoms of individuals .
Before Parliament can give the approval that is required for the ratification of this agreement , significant improvements still need to be made , and not only in terms of content .
Parliament must be involved to a greater degree in the negotiations and the negotiation documents must be made available to us in full .
Regulation applying a scheme of generalised tariff preferences ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Daniel Caspary , on behalf of the PPE Group , Kader Arif , on behalf of the S & D Group , Niccolò Rinaldi , on behalf of the ALDE Group , Yannick Jadot , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , Joe Higgins , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , and Robert Sturdy , on behalf of the ECR Group , on the Regulation applying a scheme of generalised tariff preferences - B7-0018 / 2010 )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with the Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) , the European Union is currently granting market access by way of reduced import duties to 176 developing countries .
These are benefits that we as the European Union offer without expecting anything in return from our partners .
There is also GSP + for certain countries facing particular challenges and for those that fulfil special conditions .
What is our starting position ?
We will need a new regulation from 1 January 2012 onwards because the old one will have expired .
We need time for a proper procedure that gives us the opportunity to have two readings .
On behalf of my group , I therefore expect the Commission to submit a new proposal as quickly as possible .
As I said , we need sufficient time for a procedure with two readings and it would be unacceptable if we , as the European Parliament , were to have to take dubious decisions under pressure .
We also need an evaluation of the existing system .
I hope that we will very soon receive facts , figures and data that reveal how successful the existing system has been in practice .
Has the existing system really facilitated trade for the States that benefit from it ?
Have the export figures also risen ?
Are the right countries benefiting from this system ?
I will throw this question out to everyone here : is everything in order with the existing system ?
For example , if countries like Qatar , whose per capita income is higher than that of 25 Member States of the European Union , are included in the GSP system , I am certain that we need to take a very critical look at this when reviewing the whole system .
There is one thing I would ask of my fellow Members from all of the groups in respect of the vote tomorrow : we should keep the resolution very general , as agreed in the original draft .
I would be very grateful to my fellow Members if we did not mention in the resolution the specific cases that have been discussed .

deputising for the author . - Mr President , like Mr Caspary , I welcome the three preference regimes we have under the GSP - Everything But Arms , GSP and GSP + .
It is right that the 49 poorest countries in the world should get open access to our markets for everything but their arms .
It is right , as Mr Caspary has said , that the 176 developing countries should be given preferential access to our market .
It is also right that 16 countries should get even better access to our market , through GSP + , in return for setting up and implementing 27 specified international conventions on human rights , co-labour standards , sustainable development and good governance .
However , it is also right that we expect those 16 beneficiary countries to apply and respect their commitments under those conventions .
If we allow countries to get away with not applying their commitments or respecting the laws under those conventions , then we lose the incentive that GSP + is supposed to give .
That is not all , as we in effect punish the other GSP countries by eroding their preferences and giving preferences to 16 countries not respecting their rights .
That is why I welcome the fact that Sri Lanka has been investigated by the Commission , which has also proposed action against Sri Lanka .
That is also why I believe strongly that the Commission should launch an investigation into Colombia 's respect or otherwise of the 27 conventions .
That does not mean that we would take action against Colombia .
It simply means that we would investigate it , as we did with El Salvador but decided that there was no need for action .
I have three questions for the Commissioner .
Does the Commission accept that , in the future , Parliament should be given the right to call for investigations under GSP + ?
Secondly , in the meantime , will the Commission present to Parliament the requested report on the status of the ratification and implementation of the conventions by the existing GSP + beneficiaries ?
Finally , when does the Commission plan to transmit to Parliament the revised regulation for the next phase of GSP ?
We were promised it by June and we would like to see it delivered by June .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , shortly after this Parliament was voted in , we were immediately faced with the issue of suspending the Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP + ) , in particular , with regard to the application or nonapplication of this mechanism to Sri Lanka and Colombia .
In the first case , we witnessed a series of errors , some serious , being committed by Sri Lanka , a country which has the extenuating circumstance of having emerged from a very long civil war against a terrible terrorist organisation .
The Commission , in my view , acted rather hastily in this case , and this quickly gave rise to the proposal to suspend the GSP + .
However , Sri Lanka had no ' guardians ' , if we may call them such , in the Council , and so the decision was taken .
As for the European Parliament , it had no role to play : nobody asked our opinion .
In the second case , we have a country that has to combat terrible internal guerrilla warfare and where there have been serious human rights violations , including the frequent killings of trade unionists .
Up to now , the Commission has not expressed an opinion on the timeliness of opening an investigation and , in actual fact , it has continued on the path of the free trade agreement , which I personally am in agreement with .
In the Council , we know that there are governments that are very active in protecting the interests of the Colombian authorities and , once again , the role of the European Parliament has been nonexistent : nobody has requested Parliament 's opinion , despite the fact that it has to listen to the opinions of the others nearly every day .
In both cases , we have had no impact studies on the occupational and economic consequences of the possible suspension .
However , among all the inconsistencies , there is one common element : the marginal role of the European Parliament .
Yet these decisions are eminently political , not technical , and I find this unacceptable .
We therefore need a new regulation , taking advantage of the end of 2011 expiry date , and I believe that these two concrete examples demonstrate this .
In the meantime , however , it would also be beneficial to discuss what has been happening in recent months in these particular countries .
For example , it would be interesting to know what threshold of human rights violations the Commission believes must be surpassed before it launches an investigation in Colombia or in another country , and what concrete steps the Sri Lankan Government should take , for example , such as suspending martial law , to halt the suspension .
Commissioner , we are asking for the following : a new proposal , if possible by June ; clear criteria regarding the eligibility of beneficiary countries , bearing in mind that the GSP is a development instrument and that we have some countries on the list that are frankly not really developing countries ; the signing and application of the 27 International Labour Organisation conventions in the beneficiary countries ; transparency of the rules on their conduct ; a system by which to assess the impact of the GSP ; and a communication to Parliament .
As Mr Martin also mentioned , Parliament must have a full role in the event of suspension , since this is , I repeat , an eminently political decision .
Mr President , our debate today is motivated by three aspects concerning the generalised system of tariff preferences .
First , the current regulation expires on 31 December 2011 .
To allow the European Parliament to exercise the powers it possesses under the Treaty of Lisbon , the Commission must give us a new draft regulation by June 2010 at the latest .
Secondly , the way the Generalised System of Preferences + ( GSP + ) operates is anything but perfect .
Who decides the list of beneficiary countries and on the basis of which criteria ?
Amazing !
Who actually monitors the implementation of the 27 international conventions on social and environmental issues that are a requirement for becoming a beneficiary of the GSP + ?
We do not know .
What results has the GSP + shown ?
Has it resulted in sustainable development , the diversification of production and the creation of respectable employment , or rather in the proliferation of shortterm contracts , an increase in the number of abandoned farms and the concentration of large holdings dedicated to export ?
We have no idea .
Therefore , a thorough reform of the regulation is required to guarantee democratic control and to ensure that the measures taken do indeed achieve the desired objectives .
However , the real reason for the debate this evening is the regrettable case of Colombia .
Until today , the Commission has refused to launch an investigation into the very serious human rights violations in that country .
Such an investigation is , however , provided for in the regulation .
It is inconceivable , given the values advocated by the European Union , that , in seeking profits in the dairy , automotive , pharmaceuticals , telecoms and banking sector for our own multinationals , the EU should abandon GSP conditionality and , in the past few days , rush into a free trade agreement with Colombia .
This is a fatal blow to Colombia 's trade unions , small farmers and consumers and to its national industrial production .
author . - Mr President , the system whereby the EU gives preferential treatment in trade to some countries has been in place since 1971 .
It is supposed to be a mechanism to resolve trade imbalances between developed capitalist countries and the poorer countries of the world and to contribute to sustainable development .
Commissioner , will you agree that in that respect , it has been really a dismal failure and that EU trade agreements have mainly benefited EU-based transnational corporations who use their superior resources to batter small local producers in many poorer countries , causing serious dislocation , including loss of local employment and environmental destruction ?
Is that not the real meaning of the EU Commission 's document strategy paper on ' Global Europe : competing in the world ' , published only three years ago ?
And , Commissioner , what hope have the working people of Africa , Asia and Latin America when your Commission , only in recent weeks , cravenly bent the knee to the criminal speculation of free-booting hedge fund merchants seeking massive quick profits through outrageous speculation against the euro and Greece in particular ?
And you handed over the working class of Greece and the poor of Greece to the tender mercies of these parasites - criminals in fact .
What hope have the poor and working people outside the borders of Europe in view of that situation ?
Now the question asks how the EU Commission evaluates whether the states that benefit from preferential trade agreements with the EU protect workers ' rights and protect human rights .
Please tell us that .
And how can you continue relations with the government of Colombia where , quite clearly , government-controlled agencies , especially the army , are ongoingly guilty of the most heinous crimes , as only recently shown in the horrific discovery of the mass grave of innocent murder victims in La Macarena .
And , finally , what is the Commission 's up-to-date view with regard to continuing GSP + with Sri Lanka , considering that , after the election , the policies of Mr Rajapaksa 's government continue to be against human rights and workers ' rights in that country ?
deputising for the author . - Mr President , I think we all understand that one of the aims of the GSP system was to integrate the poorer countries into the global trading system .
Granting preferential treatment was seen as a positive way of tackling some of the trade imbalances between the richer countries and the poorer countries .
As someone who has many friends and relatives in many of these poorer countries , I think we have to look no further than the governments of many of these countries : poor governance issues ; state monopolies and corrupt governments that are preventing entrepreneurs in these countries from creating wealth ; the fact that they find it difficult to import the materials that they need to add value and create wealth ; also the fact that many citizens of the countries are denied access to goods and services that we take for granted here in the EU and in many richer countries .
Let us also recognise that the best way to help people out of poverty is to help the entrepreneurs .
The entrepreneurs will create the jobs , they will create the wealth and they will take poor people out of poverty .
During recent negotiations on the economic partnership agreements , many Members right across the political spectrum were concerned about the Commission 's one-size-fits-all approach to the EPAs .
In one case in which I was concerned , the Commission official , when questioned in committee , said that the EPAs are not only about trade ; they are also about regional integration and exporting the EU model .
But when we asked whether some of the ACP countries that had specific concerns could be given GSP + as an alternative , we were told this was not possible because they violate certain of the conventions and therefore do not qualify for GSP + .
Going forward , surely we should look to be more flexible in our application of GSP + , perhaps as an alternative to the EPAs .
We can treat this in a number of ways .
We can either impose sanctions on countries that do not meet standards or we can engage in ongoing dialogue to ensure that conditions in these countries are improved , and understand that Rome was not built in a day and neither were Europe 's superior high standards .
It is time to engage and to help entrepreneurs in developing countries rather than to over-politicise the issue .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the current GSP scheme expires on 31 December 2011 .
The Commission is already working on a substantive updating and review of the current scheme .
Later this month , I will launch a wide public consultation on possible improvements and changes followed by a thorough impact reassessment .
The Commission proposal for a successor regulation can therefore be expected to be ready during the first quarter of 2011 .
This proposal will , of course , be subject to the ordinary legislative procedure , which may well last beyond the expiry date of the current scheme , 31 December 2011 .
You will all agree that we must avoid a situation whereby GSP beneficiaries lose all their preferences on 1 January 2012 .
We will therefore submit , in parallel with the launch of this essential preparatory work for a new GSP scheme , a proposal to extend the current regulation granting continuity until the new scheme is in place .
This should give you the time to work in earnest on the successor scheme whilst ensuring that GSP beneficiaries are not left out in the cold .
You should receive this document in April .
I have noted your question on all concerns as regards the way in which the Commission monitors beneficiary countries ' compliance with the current criteria for GSP + treatment .
The basic criterion for GSP + is the ratification and effective implementation of 27 international conventions in the fields of human rights , core labour standards , sustainable development and good governance .
It is the Commission 's task to closely monitor all beneficiary countries ' compliance with these criteria .
The Commission is obliged and determined to operate GSP in a fair , objective manner .
In this respect , we base our monitoring and evaluation of effective implementation of the GSP + arrangements as much as possible on the findings and reports of international organisations such as the United Nations , the ILO and other relevant agencies , as well as on the monitoring mechanisms envisaged in the conventions themselves .
This provides for an unambiguous and impartial review process .
The monitoring is also supported by the Commission 's bilateral dialogue with the GSP + countries on implementation issues .
If such reports contain information that GSP criteria are not being fully respected , the GSP regulation provides for the possibility that the Commission undertake an investigation to clarify the factual situation and propose appropriate action .
This investigation tool is a serious instrument that should be deployed when the situation justifies it , but launching an investigation is not a step to be taken lightly as it may impact on our wider relationship with the partner countries .
Think , for example , of the recent case with Sri Lanka .
As the objective of the GSP + scheme is to incentivise countries to adhere to international good governance standards , GSP + countries should first be given the opportunity to prove their commitment to the GSP + objectives , their willingness to cooperate with international monitoring bodies and to address the shortcomings identified .
This approach gives credit for the steps already taken by those countries and is in line with the general incentive-based approach that underpins the GSP + .
I am eager to engage with you in a debate on the future of the GSP scheme and of the GSP + in particular .
In preparing the review of the current scheme , which will also concern the GSP + criteria and the monitoring of respect , the themes raised by the European Parliament will be carefully looked at .
Since this review will now follow the ordinary legislative procedure , the European Parliament will be in an equal position with the Council in determining the final shape of the new GSP scheme .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , following on from what has been said by our colleague Daniel Caspary , whom I fully support , I would like to stress a few points .
First of all , the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon in many ways reshapes the role of Parliament in the formulation of EU trade policy .
The GSP is one of those areas where Parliament will have a bigger say and more leverage .
Commissioner , I would also like to urge you to look favourably on the increased role of Parliament in the domain you oversee .
I therefore urge you to consult Parliament when it comes to the conclusion or the review of the GSP and GSP + beneficiaries list .
Thirdly , Parliament should also be drawn into the process of monitoring whether the GSP beneficiaries uphold - not only ratify but also effectively implement - the 27 ILO and United Nations conventions .
The Commission should , at least , consult Parliament on this issue and it is , of course , our duty in Parliament to make sure that we develop mechanisms inside our relevant bodies , our committees , to contribute to such monitoring .
On a final note , I would like to reiterate the call expressed in the draft resolution we will be voting on tomorrow .
The Commission should draft the new regulation on GSP as soon as possible .
Last but not least , I disagree with what has been said by some colleagues on Colombia .
Colombia is a country like many countries in the region and we cannot ignore positive developments , achievements in the field of human rights and on the situation of human rights defenders in this country .
There is no need to name and shame this particular country , as our resolution is on the new regulation and the need to have a new regulation .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is good to hear Commissioner De Gucht guarantee that , in short , the Commission will send Parliament the legislative initiative aimed at revising the scheme of generalised preferences so that the legislative process can be given enough time to prevent the expiry of the present scheme of generalised preferences , which is due to finish at the end of next year .
This system must be reviewed .
In the first place , it is an instrument of development aid , providing countries with privileged access to the European market , without any reciprocity .
Secondly , this scheme is also an instrument for improving the human rights situation and good governance in those same countries , given that its granting is subject to conditions which must be fulfilled by the beneficiary countries .
For these two reasons , the European Union must renew the use of this instrument , which places trade at the service of development and of human rights .
Even so , renewal must make use of an evaluation of the results of the previous period .
On the other hand , the new regulation should observe the following requirements , which are based on practice up to now .
Firstly , keeping the provision of the generalised preferences scheme temporary so that it can be withdrawn when it is no longer necessary .
Secondly , deepening and refining the methods of differentiating and selecting beneficiary countries , based on the level of development of each one and its external competitiveness .
Thirdly , and finally , improving mechanisms for monitoring compliance with the conditions related to the generalised preferences scheme , especially with respect to the observance of human rights .
Finally , Commissioner , it was beneficial that Parliament 's opinion has been taken into account from the start of the legislative process .

( EL ) Mr President , the treatment which derives from the generalised system of preferences , as an exception to the WTO principle of most favoured nation , must be targeted ; in other words , it must be accepted by the developing countries , as they have the greater need .
The new list of beneficiary countries must reflect the real economic standing and competitiveness of developing countries .
Besides , the lack of differentiation between developing countries ultimately operates to the detriment of the least developed countries .
It is logical for the proposed review to be preceded by an evaluation of the impact which the system had on beneficiary countries during the previous period of application .
Trade policy , especially commercial conditionality , can , without doubt , contribute to more effective global governance through the exercising of mild power .
It can contribute , by providing incentives , to the promotion of the social dimension of globalisation in the broad sense : decent work , viable development and democratic accountability .
The European Parliament should have the facility for creative participation within the framework of the new , revised system and for effective monitoring of the application of contracts by beneficiary countries .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , we all know that GSP is a good system and that GSP + is a very good system .
We also need to ensure their extension and so we need your proposal so that we can have a proper debate in Parliament .
So , Commissioner , please speed things up .
Even for GSP + , we may be able to introduce a few improvements .
In this regard , there are five points that I would like to make concerning areas where we may be able to make further improvements .
Firstly , who determines how the 27 standards are actually implemented , not only recognised in practice , but formally implemented ?
Is that the task of the ILO alone , or do we not need an assessment committee to provide specific support during implementation ?
Secondly , how are we involving civil society ?
I would like to see the coordination of civil society in the country in question in the assessment of the implementation of GSP + , just as we have now agreed in the agreement with South Korea .
Thirdly , who actually initiates an investigation if any problems are detected ?
Parliament needs to be involved here , because I have the feeling that , in the Council , interests other than actually having an investigation carried out come into play .
Parliament should also initiate an investigation in this connection .
We surely also need clear structures for the next steps that we are to take as well as clearer structures for withdrawal , but perhaps we can talk about this in detail another time .
( DE ) Mr President , GSP mainly grants trade privileges to developing countries and emerging economies .
This modern kind of development aid from tariff reductions to tariff relief on the markets of the industrialised nations has achieved a great deal .
The GSP + special arrangement is intended to bring about the implementation of social and environmental standards .
It is also the reason for the increase in the signing of UN and ILO conventions .
However , Commissioner , how does the Commission control the implementation of these criteria ?
Is the withdrawal of privileges carried out consistently when goods are exported that have been produced by forced or slave labour , when dishonest trade practices are discovered and when no control of the originating products is guaranteed ?
Moreover , should the improvement in human rights that is intended to be achieved through GSP + not also ultimately include larger States ?
I am thinking of China , for example .
All of our resolutions , the demonstrations and the bilateral negotiations between the EU and China have brought no improvement in the human rights situation .
As a result , hundreds of thousands of people will take to the streets tomorrow , the International Tibet Memorial Day , and Tibetan flags will be hoisted in ten thousand cities and communities in the European Union .
We will express solidarity with the people who are fighting for their cultural , linguistic and religious autonomy .
Commissioner , do you share the view that human rights standards , social standards and environmental standards need to be removed from the special arrangements and incorporated in the list of GSP criteria ?
Cooperation with our trade partners must not be restricted to purely economic concerns .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is an important opportunity to reaffirm , above all , the importance of the Generalised System of Preferences .
Both the basic GSP system and the GSP + system , which are both linked to the ' Everything But Arms ' initiative , contribute to reducing poverty , in strict accordance with the primary obligation of ensuring respect for human rights .
It is the violation of these basic principles of coexistence that recently led the European Union to withdraw Sri Lanka 's preferential tariff benefits following a detailed investigation by the Commission .
The new institutional framework must , however , fully include Parliament in the legislative process aimed at modifying the legislation in force .
We therefore hope that it will include a complete review of the regulation , in accordance with the ordinary procedures , since it has several shortcomings , including on the very subject of investigations .
The next step will be the joint resolution .
The effectiveness of the regulation depends on its credibility , the objectiveness of the criteria upon which it is based and the strictness with which it is applied .
In a Europe in which the vast majority of citizens do not agree with exporting democracy at gunpoint , trade and traderelated aid are essential vehicles for disseminating principles of coexistence based on respect for fundamental human rights .
It is our duty not to lapse into indifference - which would be wrong - but also to avoid making hasty judgments about certain parties , judgments which sound like irrevocable sentences , as is the case with Colombia .
This is why I do not feel able to support what are almost one-sided inflexible attitudes to one country or another , but I do strongly support the need for enhanced monitoring of all of the problematic situations , in the spirit of the legislation in force and according to the principles of the rules on which we want to base the legislative review that we are demanding .
( SV ) Mr President , the Generalised System of Preferences that is being debated today is an extremely good and important instrument , because it makes it easier for some of what are perhaps the poorest countries of the world to export to and trade with Europe .
Many of the countries of Europe have built their wealth in this way , which is why it is important for us to try to extend this to other countries .
In a debate such as this and in the forthcoming work on reviewing the Generalised System of Preferences , we have to think about and focus on the basic task and the basic aim of the Generalised System of Preferences , which is to combat poverty .
Trade is , by far , the most effective way to combat poverty and create economic growth , and it is important that we remember this .
Of course , the Generalised System of Preferences is also a good way of putting pressure on countries to get them to abide by international agreements and conventions as well as commitments concerning human rights and so on .
We must not forget , however , that the aim is development .
Naturally , the EU must be able to refuse or remove this preferential treatment from countries that do not meet their commitments , but it is important to remember that we tread a fine line .
A country that is denied greater freedom to trade and new export opportunities will not find it any easier to meet the commitments and the demands that we make of it .
There is a connection : corruption , poor working conditions and poor respect for human rights contribute to poverty , but poverty also makes it harder to fight corruption , human rights problems and poor working conditions .
I would like to know the Commissioner 's view on paragraph 22 ; in other words , the risk that withdrawal of trade preferences will make it harder for countries to get away from situations such as poor working conditions .
Then I would also like to note that we are now demanding that a number of countries ratify 27 ILO and UN conventions and implement these in full .
I would like to see a genuine analysis of whether all the EU Member States have fully implemented and ratified all these UN and ILO conventions .
I think it is at least unlikely that all have been fully implemented , and it is important to bear that in mind when we start making demands of others .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , several questions have been asked on Sri Lanka and on Colombia , and on why , in one case , we decided to have an enquiry and take a decision and in the other case we did not .
In the case of Sri Lanka , the Commission 's attention was drawn to publicly available reports and statements from the United Nations as well as to other relevant sources , including non-governmental organisations , indicating that Sri Lanka was not effectively implementing various human rights conventions , in particular , the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel , Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment , and the Convention on the Rights of the Child .
However , unlike Colombia , Sri Lanka 's general approach was to deny the existence of any problems and not to cooperate with the Commission at any stage of the investigation .
In the case of Colombia , the United Nations and ILO monitoring results show that there are question marks on the degree of effective implementation of certain UN and ILO Conventions , but it is also clear that Colombia has engaged with the ILO and the United Nations bodies and has made substantial changes to its legal system , and that steps are being taken by the government to amend its legislation and improve its implementation on the ground .
There is an ongoing dialogue in cooperation with the United Nations and the ILO .
With regard to the question put by Mr Moreira , I would like to say that in the review of the GSP regulation , we are working to find a balance between the different requests that have been made here .
We have been asked to do that as soon as possible , and will do so .
We were asked to have an impact assessment and will receive the 2009 GSP data only in July this year , which will be followed , of course , by consultation of Parliament .
I would also like to recall the commitment I made to the Committee on International Trade at the time of my hearing and subsequently to provide a timetable for our legislative proposals that will be submitted to that committee in the coming months .
As you will know , we are scheduled to meet tomorrow .
We will try to work something out together that gives Parliament the maximum possibility to discuss in all openness the different dossiers , including the new GSP regulation and the roll-over system , which we should introduce as early as April .
I have received two motions for resolutionstabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 10 March 2010 .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
EU 2020 - Follow-up of the informal European Council of 11 February 2010 ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Implementation of Goldstone recommendations on Israel / Palestine ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Situation of civil society and national minorities in Belarus ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
2008 annual report on the CFSP - The implementation of the European Security Strategy and the Common Security and Defence Policy - Non-proliferation Treaty ( debate )
I welcome Baroness Ashton , and declare the session open .
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Gabriele Albertini , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the report from the Council to the European Parliament on the main aspects and the basic choices of the Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) in 2008 , presented to the European Parliament in application of Part II , Section G , paragraph 43 of the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 ,
the report by Arnaud Danjean , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the implementation of the European Security Strategy and the Common Security and Defence Policy ,
the oral question to the Council by Gabriele Albertini and Arnaud Danjean , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the Non-proliferation Treaty - B7-0009 / 2010 ) , and
the oral question to the Commission by Gabriele Albertini and Arnaud Danjean , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the Non-proliferation Treaty - B7-0010 / 2010 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the Union needs to adopt a new approach and make a joint effort when facing global challenges .
The powers recently obtained due to the entry into force of the treaty mean that Parliament engages in frequent , cooperative and effective discussions with our primary interlocutor , Baroness Ashton , who has the honour of acting as the new Vice-President / High Representative for the first time .
Her mandate was subject to our consensus vote in January and , on several occasions , the Parliamentary Assembly was promised that the Council and the Commission would be constantly involved in all the most important aspects of European security and defence .
As the report itself confirms , the High Representative is therefore called upon to appear before the European Parliament and to consult it frequently and regularly .
With the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Union 's external action takes on a new and important dimension , but actually achieving this goal also depends on the European Union having the necessary budgetary resources .
The European Parliament has a key role to play in its capacity as custodian of the democratic legitimacy of external action .
The creation of a European External Action Service will give a diplomatic body and system to the European Union which , until now , has only been able to rely on national representation .
The roles of the official representatives , whose appointment is the responsibility of the High Representative , assume great relevance and topicality .
Nonetheless , as stated in the report , Parliament is calling for greater powers of ballot and control over the roles and the mandates of individual representatives , upholding the principles of transparency and merit that must guide the High Representative when appointing candidates .
It is hoped that we will eventually achieve a situation of double hatting - except in the case of the special representative , whose range of action should be regional - and that we will therefore benefit from economies of scale , making the European Union 's external action more efficient and , at the same time , less costly .
After an initial introductory section on strategy , the report addresses the issue of European foreign policy by theme and geographical area .
The European Union must make its presence felt with the international organisations to which it is allied , especially the United Nations , the chief custodian of global security .
It must play an important role , not only from the viewpoint of its seat on the Security Council , but also in terms of staff and delegations connecting the two bodies .
We call on the Vice-President / High Representative to let Europe fulfil its ambition to become an active , strategic and independent partner of a great ally such as the United States in order to respond to the global challenges of terrorism , finance , and the often fraught relationships with industrial giants such as Russia , China and Japan .
The report continues with a geographical analysis of what we can hope to achieve .
In the Balkans , the theme of enlargement is introduced : the report praises the gradual achievement of the stabilisation process in Kosovo , where the European Union is present with the EULEX mission , but efforts must still be made to ensure that accession standards are respected for many countries close to candidacy for accession - Turkey and Bosnia and Herzegovina .
In the chapter concerning cooperation with the East and the Black Sea regions , the report deals with the issue of the European Union 's energy supply security and dependency .
In the section on Russia , it calls for a new partnership and cooperation agreement to be signed .
As far as the South Caucasus is concerned , the report calls for the territory of Georgia and its ethnic minorities to be left intact , and for conflicts in Nagorno-Karabakh and Transnistria to be resolved
Middle East : Israeli-Palestinian conflict , where the European Union must play a stronger political role in relaunching the peace process following the Council decision of 12 December 2009 .
Union for the Mediterranean : resolution of the Turkey-Cyprus conflict .
Asia : Afghanistan , critical period for the establishment of a new government after the elections ; Pakistan 's key role in the fight against terrorism ; concern over the violation of fundamental rights in Iran .
Africa : positive contribution of the Somali coast defence mission .
Latin America : need to create a stable and enduring partnership for relationships between the European Union and Latin America .
I will listen to my fellow Members ' comments with great interest and respond to them at the end .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , the report on the implementation of the European Security Strategy that we are presenting today is an annual document by Parliament that provides a kind of interim assessment of the European Security and Defence Policy and submits proposals aimed at improving the effectiveness and visibility of that policy .
This year , this report lies within a very specific context , and thus it should become a force for proposals .
This specific context is characterised by the combination of three major cycles .
The first concerns the 10 years of the European Security and Defence Policy , which we celebrated at the end of 2009 .
The last 10 years showed that Europe was able to conduct civil and military operations at the scene of more than 23 crises .
That fundamental achievement can be built on further .
It shows that there is a demand for Europe and that the Union has the institutionalpolitical and operational ability to rise to these challenges .
The second important cycle is , of course - and Mr Albertini mentioned it a moment ago - the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The change in terms of security and defence goes far beyond a strict semantic adjustment .
Indeed , the ESDP becomes the Common Security and Defence Policy , the CSDP , and it must take on a new dimension .
The Treaty has enriched the range of tools and the scope of security and defence policy , particularly with the inclusion of assistance clauses , of solidarity clauses , with permanent structured cooperation and , above all , with the creation of the European External Action Service and of your role as High Representative , Vice-President of the Commission .
Lastly , the third major event that characterises the context in which this report was drafted is that NATO which , for 21 of the 27 members of the Union , is still the main reference point where the collective security of the European continent is concerned , is currently revising its strategic concept and that this assessment by NATO should also lead us , the Union , to define more clearly the conditions of this partnership , which remains fundamental .
In this context , the report 's objective is less about persisting with a doctrine than about providing you with a necessarily evolving roadmap , for all the new institutions that are being established and that must learn to work together .
The aim is to make the Union more credible , more effective and more visible in security and defence terms .
In this regard , the European Parliament absolutely must be given a greater degree of responsibility in these sensitive areas if a policy of which the main aim is to guarantee the security of European citizens is to be fully legitimate .
With this report , we wanted to stress the following points .
Firstly , we wanted to point out that , above all , the European Security and Defence Strategy and the Common Security and Defence Policy are there to serve the people of Europe , to guarantee and improve their security .
This political ambition is not superfluous ; it is not for appearances ' sake .
It corresponds to a need for our continent to strive to ensure its own security but also to contribute to the stability of the world around us , to tackle the crises and the threats that are developing in our environment .
Beyond the traditional armed conflicts that continue to take place in our immediate environment , Europe must be able to express its interests and defend them in the face of the new threats - I am thinking in particular of piracy and cybercrime .
We also felt it important to stress just how unequalled Europe 's added value in crisis management is , thanks to the variety of solutions it provides and the balance that it strikes in each of its operations between the civil and military dimensions .
Moreover , in this regard , I reject the criticisms that some may direct at the Union 's security and defence policy , namely to suggest that it is all about militarisation .
I sincerely believe in the complementary nature of the civil and military instruments that the Union possesses , and the recent crisis in Haiti , where you went - and I believe that you were able to observe this good cooperation - testifies to the need to link our civil and military resources so that we can cope with natural disasters and major crises .
Precisely on the subject of these operations , we were anxious to review them all , to highlight what we feel are their strengths , but also , at times , their weaknesses - they have to be acknowledged so that things can improve .
We were also anxious to highlight several regions of strategic importance for the security of the Union and to encourage the Council and the Commission to speed up the implementation of global strategies , in particular , for the Horn of Africa and for the AfghanistanPakistan region .
In the area of capabilities - both civil and military - which is a crucial issue in terms of the credibility of our policy , the challenge is to improve the Union 's responsiveness .
We have to be able to mobilise more quickly and more effectively the material resources and the competent personnel that the Member States have at their disposal .
However , we also have to have the capability , by means of a security and defence industry that is efficient , that combines invaluable technological knowledge and that also accounts for hundreds of thousands of jobs in Europe , to provide ourselves with equipment programmes corresponding to these forecasted needs .
The Europe of industry and defence has begun to organise itself on our continent through the defence package .
Issues relating to industrial and trade cooperation with third countries should be addressed quickly , particularly in the light of the recent problems encountered by European industries trying to access the US market , for example .
This is a brief , inevitably overly brief , summary of the priorities that appear in this report and which represent all the challenges that you will have to take up .
Parliament is ready to play its full role , its full positive and constructive role , to help you realise this ambition , which is a common ambition .
Moreover , I wish to take advantage of this opportunity to thank all the political groups that have worked hard to enrich this report .
We have all cooperated very well together to maintain a high level of ambition , while taking account , of course , of the characteristics of each of our groups .
I would also take advantage of this opportunity , Baroness Ashton , to address with you today the issue of nonproliferation .
On the eve of the NonProliferation Treaty review conference , to be held in May , the European Parliament wished to review with you the Union 's commitment in relation to the fight against proliferation , and to the control of arms and disarmament ; this is the meaning behind the oral questions that have been put to you and which you will answer shortly .
The international context seems to offer new opportunities on the eve of this review conference .
Firstly , President Obama has strongly affirmed his ambition to have a world without nuclear weapons and his commitment to actively seek the ratification of the Comprehensive NuclearTestBan Treaty by the United States .
Secondly , the conclusion with Russia of a new agreement designed to supersede the START Agreement seems to be going well and , lastly , we have the launch of the negotiations on a new disarmament treaty that would prohibit the production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons .
With regard to the reduction in nuclear arsenals , the priority is obviously to reduce the two main arsenals , that is , those of Russia and the United States , which it is commonly believed still alone hold nearly 95 % of all the nuclear weapons that exist on the planet .
We therefore welcome the commitment made by Presidents Medvedev and Obama to conclude a new reduction agreement in the near future .
How does the Union , in this context , envisage supporting these efforts and cooperating with the United States and Russia ?
The Union must also rise to the challenges posed to the nonproliferation regime and , more specifically , to those with which we are confronted by the two major proliferation crises that are Iran and North Korea , which remain the main threats to international security .
Will the Union continue to commit itself effectively , completely , to resolving these crises , particularly in the case of Iran ?
We expect your guidance on this major issue , Baroness Ashton .
Moreover , the Union has a role to play in promoting cooperation relating to the peaceful use of nuclear energy .
You know that this is an important challenge .
What actions are being carried out in this context , and what is your strategy on the matter ?
Lastly , the European Parliament wants the Union to be a proactive force during the forthcoming NonProliferation Treaty review conference .
The adoption of a new ambitious and balanced common position by the Union is crucial if the latter is to defend its position .
Where do the Member States stand in this regard ?
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , thank you very much .
I am delighted to be with you to discuss the big questions on Europe 's international agenda .
I want to begin by thanking Mr Albertini and Mr Danjean for their excellent reports .
You have underlined , if I may say , the number , range and urgency of the challenges we face .
From strengthening the rule of law in Kosovo to working with the emerging powers to share responsibility for global governance , from promoting peace in the Middle East - and may I join Vice-President Biden in condemning the decision to build 1 600 new houses in East Jerusalem - to providing shelter to the surviving victims of Haiti 's earthquake , which I visited last week , from dealing with proliferation problems such as Iran , to devising effective answers to ' new ' challenges such as energy , climate change and cyber security .
Europe is going through a phase of building something new , where people have to adjust their mental maps and institutions have to find their new place .
Doing so is messy and complicated - but also exciting , for it is impossible to overstate how important this moment is .
Right now we have a chance to build what many across Europe - and many in this House - have long wanted : a stronger , more credible European foreign policy .
Of course , the European External Action Service will be key to delivering this .
We have to build a system that is robust , that will enable us to deal with the problems of today and the new problems that will arise tomorrow .
For years , we have been trying to frame and implement comprehensive strategies but the structures and the systems we had made this difficult .
With the Lisbon Treaty and the External Action Service , we should now be able to achieve this .
At the heart of everything we do lies a simple truth : to protect our interests and promote our values , we must be engaged abroad .
No one can hope to be an island of stability and prosperity in a sea of insecurity and injustice .
Ours is , if I may say , a world in flux .
To engage with it effectively , we need to frame it first .
To me , the most striking features of today 's world are twofold .
One , a deep interdependence in political , economic and security terms : technologies , ideas , diseases , money - everything moves .
We are connected in ways we have never been before .
Two , the fact that power is shifting , both within political systems - roughly from governments to markets , media and NGOs - and between political systems - roughly from the old ' West ' to both the east and the south .
Both are the outcome of globalisation which is not just an economic but also a political phenomenon , both in its manifestations and , of course , its consequences .
Think of the rise of China and others as major political players , or consider the political impact of the financial crisis .
The debts are in the West ; the surpluses are in the East .
This redistribution of financial power is also shaping our political discussions .
Or consider climate change , which is not just an environmental problem but also one with security and geopolitical ramifications .
So we have to deal with complex problems and we do so in a new geopolitical landscape .
We need to adapt .
This is not a time to fly on auto-pilot or to stick to the narrow defence of national ways of doing things .
It is a time to be smart and ambitious .
Let me give you some figures to illustrate the point .
Europe 's share of the world 's population is 7 % , down from 25 % a century ago .
In the last 60 years , our share of global GDP has shrunk from 28 % to 21 % .
The economies of China , India and others are racing ahead at 10 % per year .
Economic weight is translating into political clout and self-confidence .
You feel it everywhere : from negotiations on climate change to Iran , to big energy deals in Africa or central Asia .
If we pull together , we can safeguard our interests .
If not , others will make the decisions for us .
It is that simple , really that simple .
My preference is clear .
We should respond as Europeans .
Firstly , by pulling together , because unity is a pre-condition for influence and , secondly , by taking action , because the answer to a problem cannot be a paper or a meeting .
If you want results , you have to act and sometimes take risks .
And yes , there is a tendency in Europe to put process ahead of outcomes .
Thirdly , by being both principled and creative because we must be both : principled in the defence of our values and creative in how we forge bespoke solutions to complex problems .
As Mr Albertini 's report rightly points out , ' a new approach is needed if the EU is to act collectively and meet the global challenges in a coherent , consistent and efficient manner ' .
Out of that general picture come several core objectives : firstly , to ensure greater stability and security in our neighbourhood , by promoting political and economic reform .
This is important in itself for reasons which are very self-evident , but our wider international credibility also depends on getting our neighbourhood right .
Secondly , to address global security challenges , the challenges of our time .
For this , we need comprehensive strategies , strong international organisations and the rule of law both within countries and between them .
Thirdly , to build a network of strategic relationships with key countries and organisations because the problems we face cannot be solved by any single actor .
On top of all this comes the creation of the European External Action Service - a means to achieve the other three objectives and a way to deliver the promise of the Lisbon Treaty .
Those are the core tasks to which I have devoted my time since I took on this role .
I first went to Washington and New York , which was the right way to start our important relationships with the United States and the UN .
I have since been to Moscow , Kiev , the Balkans and Haiti .
I will go to the Middle East next week and again to New York at the end of the month .
In between , I have chaired the Foreign Affairs Council three times , attended the informal European Council and met with the College of Commissioners .
I have worked hard to build the necessary internal consensus , visiting various EU capitals : Berlin , Paris , London , Vienna and Ljubljana .
Naturally , I have spent a significant amount of time on the creation of the External Action Service and that will continue in the weeks ahead , including working with you .
That is also why , because of the interests of this House , I have ensured involvement from the European Parliament in the steering group that I set up .
I will also discuss it this afternoon at the Conference of Presidents .
When I come to the Foreign Affairs Committee on 23 March , we will have an opportunity for in-depth exchanges in the presence of all the relevant committees .
Any time you create something new , there will be resistance .
Some prefer to minimise perceived losses rather than maximise collective gains .
I see it differently , and I hope the Parliament does too .
This is a once-in-a-generation opportunity to build something new , something that finally brings together the instruments of our engagement in support of a single political strategy .
A huge chance for Europe .
We should not lower our ambitions but , rather , give ourselves the means to realise them .
A moment to see the big picture , to be creative and take collective responsibility .
If we get it right - and we must - then we will be able to shape a European foreign policy for the 21st century with an external service designed to achieve it : one where we mobilise all our levers of influence - political , economic , development and crisis management tools - in a coordinated way .
A service that represents the European Union in geographic and gender terms too .
I believe that is the only acceptable way to go .
Let me illustrate what I have in mind when I say ' comprehensive approach ' with a couple of examples .
The Western Balkans - I was pleased to travel to the region recently .
In a way , the Balkans is the birthplace of EU foreign policy .
More than anywhere else , it is where we cannot afford to fail .
My purpose was to establish good working relations with political leaders , engage with civil society about what belonging to Europe could mean , and ensure coordination among the different EU actors on the ground .
One conclusion I drew was that the region is making progress , even if it is uneven and incomplete .
The European perspective remains the overarching framework - both as our objective and as the main incentive for reform .
As I stressed everywhere , progress on the path to the EU depends on the commitment to reform at home .
On human rights , the rule of law and regional cooperation .
We are backing up our strategy with available foreign-policy tools .
In Kosovo , we have our biggest civilian mission and it is a success .
In Bosnia , we have adjusted ALTHEA as the situation has stabilised and developed a training programme .
We are pushing the European message hard in the run-up to the October elections .
Throughout the region , we are making progress on visa liberalisation and people-to-people contact .
So our Balkan Strategy is what it should be : strategic in its objectives , multi-faceted in terms of instruments and tailor-made in terms of implementation .
The second example is the Horn of Africa .
It highlights the interplay of state fragility , poverty , resource competition including water , with piracy , terrorism and organised crime .
The only possible answer is a comprehensive one , which is exactly what we are doing .
Our naval operation Atalanta has been widely hailed as a success .
Our next step is to further develop our options for the transfer of suspected pirates for prosecution in the region .
We are adding a training mission for the TFG in Somalia , with deployment expected in the spring .
Through our Stability Instrument , we are funding flanking measures to build capacity , to train the maritime authorities and moving ahead with long-term development work in Yemen and Somalia on poverty , literacy and health .
The way we are engaged in Georgia follows the same script .
When a frozen conflict erupted into open conflict in August 2008 , we responded immediately .
We took the international lead , we brokered a truce and deployed a 300-strong monitoring mission in record time .
Since then , we are engaged across the spectrum of Community and CSDP means of preventing a return to violence and building stability in Georgia and in the region .
With the UN and OSCE , we lead the Geneva talks , the only forum where all concerned meet .
We hosted a donors ' conference for reconstruction and economic support in Georgia and we included Georgia - together with Armenia and Azerbaijan - in the European Neighbourhood Policy .
We continue to promote those reforms and closer ties .
We work on trade and visa liberalisation and we support confidence building measures to rebuild ties with the breakaway republics .
There is more work to do in Georgia , and we have a full agenda when we discuss it with Russia , as I did only 10 days ago with Sergey Lavrov .
In this case , we demonstrated what the EU can do when we fully mobilise the resources we have .
Those who were involved in those incredibly hectic weeks have told me that what was done in this case was exceptional .
So we need stronger structures , more flexibility and better preparedness if we want Georgia to be the benchmark for our action in the future .
Let me turn to our common security and defence policy and say that I agree with the broad thrust of the Danjean report about how important our missions are .
They save lives , create the space for functioning politics to work and they mean that Europe can draw on all its instruments of power to meet its responsibilities .
It is striking to me how far we have come in the last ten years .
More than 70 000 men and women have been deployed in that period in more than 20 missions .
We do crisis management in a European way with a comprehensive approach in support of international law and agreements and in close cooperation with our key partners .
We work well with NATO together in Bosnia and Herzegovina and along the coast of Somalia .
In Kosovo and Afghanistan , it is more difficult because of the political issues .
We need to get this right so I am working with the NATO Secretary General to improve EU-NATO relations in practical areas and set a positive climate .
Let us see how we can develop our relations pragmatically .
The UN is another key partner .
There are many good examples of EU and UN cooperation on the ground - the Democratic Republic of Congo , Chad and indeed Kosovo .
In recent times , we have got to know each other better , but we can and should strengthen this by focusing on areas such as planning and the sharing of best practice .
In the Danjean report , and more widely , people raise the question of whether it is time for the EU to have its own permanent operations headquarters .
It is a serious issue that needs a serious debate .
No one contests that we need a headquarters able to plan and conduct military operations .
The question is whether the current system , relying on SHAPE or national headquarters , is the most efficient way or if something else is better .
We often find ourselves approaching this in terms of structures .
I think we first need to do the analysis of what functions we need to perform .
I see three main functions from which the decisions should flow : one , the ability to plan and conduct military operations , including advance planning , and to be able to react quickly when there is a need ; two , the ability to develop civil-military coordination in a more structured way to maximise our capacity ; and , three , the ability to establish links with others , to optimise the overall coordination and what we loosely call the ' international community ' .
If we use that analysis as the starting point for our discussions , we should be able to establish the necessary common ground and move forward to determine what we should do .
The report also calls for the establishment of a Defence Council , an idea that I know has been around for some time .
The next meeting in April will follow established practice , but at the informal Defence Ministers ' meeting , a consensus emerged based on my proposals to hold Foreign Affairs Councils in Ministry of Defence formation .
That would enable Defence Ministers to come together and take decisions , for instance , on capabilities development .
My last point on that relates to the suggestion of a civil protection force .
Let us start with the Haiti lessons learned exercise which is now under way .
Then let us apply the spirit of Lisbon and see what options we have to mobilise assets of Member States together with EU instruments to support either the UN , OCHA or to act as the EU itself .
The watchwords ought to be maximising synergies and avoiding ' hard ' or artificial splits between how we handle EU internal and external crises .
Let me , finally , turn to the question of non-proliferation , given the oral question that has been raised .
I want to mention briefly the two most significant items : first , the Non-proliferation Treaty review conference scheduled for May in New York .
I will be participating with the aim of ensuring that we do get a successful outcome .
We should make no mistake : the entire treaty-based non-proliferation system with the NPT as a cornerstone is under growing pressure .
To respond , we need to be ready to make our contribution : on access to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy , in particular , for developing countries , while avoiding proliferation risks , and that includes work on the multilateral nuclear fuel cycle approaches - I think 84 countries have benefited from EU assistance programmes ; with progress on nuclear disarmament - politically , this is fundamental to create a constructive atmosphere ; and by addressing regional proliferation crises , in particular with Iran , which has the potential to derail the conference .
As you know , the EU is leading the efforts to find diplomatic solutions .
We fully support the Security Council process on further restrictive measures if - as is certainly the case today - Iran continues to ignore its obligations .
Secondly , there is President Obama 's Nuclear Security summit .
We share the goal of the summit , namely , to strengthen the security of nuclear materials and prevent terrorists from getting access .
I think that the EU has been providing support to the IAEA since 2004 to assist countries in this area and we will continue to do so .
Finally , let me come back to where I started .
The demand for European global engagement is enormous .
We have to ensure that supply matches demand .
The Lisbon Treaty gives us that chance .
We should act in line with the letter and the spirit of the treaty , remembering why European leaders negotiated the treaty in the first place .
I think the reason was clear : to build a stronger , more assertive and self-confident European foreign policy at the service of the citizens of the European Union .
I know many in this House share that goal , and I count on your support to make sure it happens .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - Mr President , I want to congratulate Mrs Ashton on her encouraging statement .
At the same time , as the rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Budgets on the CFSP , I want also to underline that it is of core importance that she initiate an audit of past and present CFSP operations and CSDP civil missions in order to identify their strengths and weaknesses .
This way , the European Union will be more effective in providing security , will increase its autonomy and will most notably make wiser use of the relevant budget , which regrettably continues to be underfunded .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , it is frightening to imagine a nuclear device , small in size but potentially lethal for millions of people , falling into the hands of terrorists .
Some years back , we could say that this was highly unlikely .
We cannot say this any longer .
Countries like Iran and North Korea are in the process of acquiring , or have the capability to acquire , a nuclear weapon .
A scientist from Pakistan has allegedly sold know-how to Iran , and North Korea has traded in nuclear material .
Nobody is against Iran acquiring nuclear energy for peaceful purposes , but patience is running thin if Iran is buying time in the dialogue with the 5 + 1 , which we support .
The dual-track approach and the preparation of smart targeted sanctions by the UN Security Council are warranted .
Nuclear proliferation is at such a critical point that it has led personalities like Henry Kissinger to argue that only the move towards total elimination will ensure non-proliferation and global security .
So we support an international treaty for the progressive elimination of nuclear weapons , a halt to the production of fissile material , bringing forward the comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty , the reduction of nuclear warheads , START , etc . , bringing all treatment of nuclear fuel under the control of the IAEA and strengthening its mandate and its verification powers .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , I hope we are agreed that we need a proactive foreign policy guided by our European common goals and based on our common values .
This policy should recognise the indivisibility of security in the globalised world as it is a source of solidarity of interest both within the European Union and outside .
Such a policy requires and presupposes an adequate institutional instrument .
Thus , the priorities are clear and I am happy to see that these priorities I am going to mention are the same as those of Mrs Ashton .
An efficient External Action Service , a vibrant neighbourhood policy , a visionary enlargement policy , well-structured partnerships with the strategic players , both traditional and emerging , an effective strategy in coping with the global challenges , namely energy security , non-proliferation , migration , transnational organised crime , transnational expression of poverty , cultural conflicts and so on .
As far as the External Action Service is concerned , we need an institution which should be built not only on the principle of political and budgetary accountability but also on the principle of effectiveness .
We should not build a service which preserves the old national competition or the present bureaucratic structure .
The two-headed head of the European external actions must wear both hats at all times , thus assuring the unity of the service and the coherence of its action .
On external neighbourhood policy , we need an approach which does not exclude Russia and Turkey .
On the Black Sea , we have to move from synergy to strategy .
On frozen conflicts , we need regional initiatives and mechanisms of regional cooperation and security under international guarantees .
On global security , we need a new arrangement reflecting the post-bipolar-order realities .
We have to promote our values in the world but in a secular way and not as new crusaders .
I think that these and many others are our priorities which circumscribe a Herculean task .
Let us work together - Parliament , the Commission and the Council - to accomplish this task .
Mr President , High Representative / Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen .
Madam Ashton , first of all , allow me to welcome you and say that I very much hope that your excellent and powerful presentation today will indeed herald the end of a particularly difficult period for all of us , which began in November when the Commission ' previous term of office ended .
If we can agree on one thing , it is this : we cannot really afford such long periods dithering .
From the end of November until very recently , it seemed - and I am sorry to have to say this - as if the EU had disappeared from the world stage , or had come very close to it .
Let me reiterate that we cannot permit that to happen under any circumstances .
Because , obviously , the world will not wait for us .
You quoted some figures which clearly illustrate that .
However , we have also witnessed a series of events which have clearly illustrated it : the natural disasters that keep on happening , the horrific attacks that keep on happening , the fact that some governments in the Middle East , despite being democratic , have nonetheless taken decisions which have severely hampered the peace process , or the little that remains of it , and so forth .
We therefore need a high representative / vice-president of the Commission who will be in a position to be present on the ground and not only in the European decision-making centres , but also in those elsewhere in the world .
Both you and we knew that you were taking on a well-nigh impossible task .
I admire you for taking it on .
We have promised to support you in it .
We are pleased to have heard you speak today and to have been witness to your powerful statement about the European External Action Service , which we all need so desperately .
If there is anyone who still has the will to put an end to what the English call turf wars - one side fighting with gloves on and the other without - then I am sure that , if we all work together , we will be able to prepare ourselves well for what lies ahead . Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , Baroness Ashton , we listened attentively to what you had to say .
Unfortunately , we must observe that we will probably have to wait for some time yet before you develop plans for specific future projects from your essay on your principles , which we actually feel able to support .
Allow me to say a few words about the External Action Service , however , about which I really had expected to hear something much more tangible from you .
You repeatedly said that it is about coherence , which is the order of the day .
In many cases , we need joint plans and programmes from the External Action Service and the Commission .
Anyone who is in favour of leaving numerous policy areas to the Commission or the Council Secretariat should be honest and admit that he or she is in favour of the status quo , of the system under the Treaty of Nice .
For us , an important first point is to what extent we are able to achieve a majority on all the issues relating to civil crisis prevention , civil crisis management and reconstruction .
In our view , this is all about the things that are covered by the term peace-building , which is to say , conflict prevention , early warning , conflict mediation , reconciliation and short to medium-term stabilisation .
We need a corresponding organisational unit for that purpose and so we are proposing the creation of a ' crisis management and peace-building department ' .
I would therefore like to ask you your position on the creation of such a department .
At this point , I would also like to really emphasise that we support both the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) budget and the Instrument for Stability being incorporated into the External Action Service , yet not as part of , and subordinated to , the Crisis Management and Planning Directorate ( CMPD ) , but instead , in a new structure which I hope that you will create .
I would like to hear your position on this .
A second point that is important to us is the connection between the traditional foreign policy areas and new areas such as energy policy , climate policy , justice and internal affairs .
What structures are you planning in order to give the External Action Service systematic access to these global policy spheres of the EU and its Member States ?
There is one more point that is important to us : this must be a modern service with a balanced staffing policy .
This week , we celebrated 8 March .
It is thus absolutely clear that we believe the rights of women must be firmly anchored in this service and that women must participate in it .
Baroness Ashton , a number of female MEPs have written to you to ask that you ensure that , from the very beginning , UN Resolutions 1325 and 1820 are implemented in the institutional structures of the service .
So , my question in this connection , too , is : what are your plans in this regard ?
As I said , you have our support en route to a sound common External Action Service .
I look forward to your answers .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the Lisbon Treaty is now a legal reality in the international order , even if it lacks popular democratic legitimacy because most EU citizens , including Britain 's , were denied a vote in a referendum .
Nevertheless , the ECR Group and British Conservatives are committed to positive engagement and to moving on within the new institutional framework .
We would like to see a similar approach from the Member States and the Commission .
It is deeply ironic , in my view , that the first major institutional development under Lisbon , namely the creation of the European External Action Service , threatens to push the EU back towards the very introspection and bickering that Lisbon was supposed to have eradicated .
Undoubtedly , the creation of the EAS must be subject to debate and consensus about who does what and does it best , but the CFSP foreign policy elements must remain firmly within the Council .
But we also need strong leadership , in theory enabled by the Lisbon Treaty , to forge a lasting vision for Europe 's diplomacy in the world .
We look to you , High Representative Ashton , to seize the initiative and to assert the authority and leadership provided to you by the treaty , to knock heads together if necessary and to chart the way forward .
We will support you in your efforts if you can show that you are up to the daunting challenge .
The EU has had many years to think about this Service , so this muddling through and hesitation that we currently see does no credit to the EU 's ambitions to play a global role in foreign policy through the CFSP .
There are more general points .
The Albertini report , which I support strongly , sets out the Union 's foreign policy priorities and rightly endorses the EU membership aspirations for the Western Balkan countries , particularly Croatia , Macedonia and Montenegro , for which I am rapporteur .
But it also mentions the transatlantic alliance and NATO , which we believe are the cornerstones of the EU 's foreign security policy .
It rightly emphasises the EU 's responsibility for resolving the frozen conflicts , particularly in Transnistria and Nagorno-Karabakh in our immediate neighbourhood , and good relations with Ukraine .
But , finally , Taiwan is also mentioned as an important partner for the EU and it should also be enabled to participate actively and fully in international organisations , according to the EU 's policy and the ' One China ' policy .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , Mr Albertini already knows the reasons why my group is tabling a minority opinion on the report on foreign , security and defence policy .
We are basically doing so , Baroness Ashton , because we have reached a conclusion .
In the countries surrounding us , in the European Union , security and defence policies now have nothing to do with defending territory : security policy is now a projection of foreign policy .
We believe that the prime objective of foreign policy should be achieving disarmament at international level : zero armament , using pragmatic policies that respond to the current causes of insecurity in the world .
The main weapons of mass destruction in the world today are hunger and poverty .
These are weapons that we cannot fight using military force .
We therefore believe that , based on this consideration , we should commit to a transitional security system that will enable the gradual demilitarisation of all security in the world .
We obviously do not agree with the Union being linked to NATO , among other things , because NATO 's strategy has been to choose to give a military response to insecurities such as organised crime and terrorism , which have never been matters for a military response .
I believe that this growing militarisation requires the Member States to have increasingly powerful arms industries and to spend more on weapons .
We are at our highest level in terms of civilisation and in terms of weapons , more so than in the Cold War , which is a far cry from pragmatic policies moving towards demilitarisation .
No , neither terrorism nor organised crime should be military targets .
They should be targets for the police , for the international court services , for the intelligence services , for putting criminals in the hands of the courts , but they should not be the target of a military response .
Therefore , we do not agree with this military focus .
We do not agree with having United States military bases in the European Union .
We do not want this for any state , we do not want any powerful state to deploy military force in the world , and we therefore believe that respect for international law is very important .
We do not agree with the recognition of Kosovo - we do not believe in the recognition of any state that uses force outside of international law - because we believe in international law , and we therefore believe that the decolonisation process of the Western Sahara should be in this report .
We do , of course , also ask for the withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan , which as NATO itself acknowledges week after week , is causing innocent civilian deaths . We do not , therefore , agree with taking the path of militarisation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Baroness Ashton , Mr Albertini 's truly excellent report contains a passage that I consider to be of great political importance : the part connecting the phenomenon of immigration to the policy of cooperation with developing countries .
To control such enormous migratory flows by means of repressive measures and domestic policy alone would be unthinkable .
Distributing migrants throughout European Member States would not resolve the problem either .
On the contrary , it would encourage new arrivals .
A key response for controlling migratory phenomena is the development of a cooperation policy , preferably coordinated at European level and aimed not only at economic progress , but also at social and democratic progress .
Emigration must be a choice and not a necessity .
In order that this cooperation policy should be effective and reach those who really need it , it is crucial to promote good local governance , without which there would be inefficiency , corruption , wastage of resources and poor results .
Ensuring local governance and the collaboration of governments is the goal of foreign policy , and cooperation must become an important instrument of European foreign policy : this is my personal message to Baroness Ashton within a sector that I hold very dear , in other words , cooperation .
( DE ) Mr President , the fact that only very unspecific foreign policy goals were defined in the Treaty of Lisbon is coming back to haunt us now .
There will probably also be a price to pay for the fact that , in Baroness Ashton , we have a High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy without any real foreign policy experience who was foisted on the Union as the lowest common denominator that the Member States were able to find .
If we keep silent on all the important foreign policy issues , we , as Europeans , will be able to achieve just as little as a bunch of diplomats , who shake hands all over the world whilst professing different courses of foreign policy .
The disagreements about a European External Action Service , too , are something that we cannot really afford .
This undoubtedly important new service should not and must not be run down , over the heads of the Member States , into a sphere of activity for Eurocrats .
It is probably time that we chopped our way out of the undergrowth in the establishment of this European External Action Service and that the EU was heard again in the outside world .
It is also time that the new High Representative acted in a more sensitive way in respect of these matters , including , for example , in using all three working languages of the Union - thus including German - in the European External Action Service .
We must make the best use of the experience and good relations which individual Member States have with certain regions .
Think , for example , of Austria 's historical experience with the Western Balkans .
In so doing , it must be clear that Europe 's security is defended not in the Hindu Kush but on the external borders of the EU in the Balkans .
The EU must stop acting as the extended arm and the funder-in-chief of NATO and the United States .
European money is definitely better spent on FRONTEX than in the deserts of Afghanistan .
Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , if I might just give some comments directly on the issues and questions that have been raised .
To Mr Kasoulides , on the Non-proliferation Treaty review , it is vital that it succeeds above anything else .
We believe we have to take practical steps : a comprehensive test ban treaty should come into force ; the fissile material cut-off ; support for peaceful uses of nuclear energy to find safe ways of making sure that we avoid proliferation - for example , the contributions we make to the nuclear fuel bank - and support for a very strong and effective IAEA .
We must work of course especially , as we have said , in areas like the Middle East , which means that we have to continue to put pressure on Iran and address the issues that are raised there .
Mr Severin , on the External Action Service and the priorities that you gave , well , we are in the same place - exactly so .
It is very important to me that the Service has political and budgetary accountability , exactly as you have said , and it must be effected in this double-hatted way .
It is going to be essential too , as you have indicated , that we draw in and discuss these issues with other key partners .
I think you mentioned , for example , Russia and Turkey .
Well , Russia I have already visited .
I was spending part of the weekend with the Turkish Foreign Minister : a real opportunity to talk in much greater depth about that relationship for the future .
So I would agree wholeheartedly with the priorities that you set out and thank you for those .
Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck , thank you for your kind words .
I think it was not so much that the EU disappeared from the world stage .
It is that the inevitability of that hiatus , of having a Commission that was effective , has now been resolved .
And , for my own part , it has been extremely important because , until the Commission came into force , I did not even have a cabinet , never mind an External Action Service .
And we are now in a position where we can begin to put the resources together .
I think it is also absolutely right that you raise the importance of being visible on the ground .
My difficulty , as you know , is that I have not yet learned how to time travel . But I think it is absolutely essential that , as we look ahead , we look at the priorities that have been set out with which I think this House will largely agree and make sure that my actions are addressed to those priorities , one of which is setting up the Service , which does not yet exist .
It does not have a staffing structure .
It is not there yet .
But when it does have that , we will be able to demonstrate the force of Europe in the best sense of that word across the world .
Mrs Brantner , again your common theme to me of trying to get as much detail as possible : I think it is very important .
Some of the issues that you have raised are very critical .
We do not want duplication within the different institutions in terms of what we do .
We want the geographical desk approach to what we do , and I agree with you about peace-building : that it is a very important part of where the EU should act .
And in a sense , it comes into building the different elements of what we do well - the work we do on state-building , on justice , on the rule of law , the work we do on development programmes , the work we do on tackling the issues of climate change , the work that we do on providing support to governments and to people - all of that is engineered to make us more secure , stable and prosperous but actually , by doing so , we are creating a more secure , stable and prosperous world .
Those objectives are extremely important .
I agree with you completely about women .
We need to get more women , for example , into our policing missions , where there are very few that I have seen so far .
We need to make sure that women are firmly integrated into the service at all levels .
That is a challenge we need to make sure that we address .
But , most importantly , what I would say to you is that the External Action Service is at the service of the whole of the European Union .
So , what we do on justice and home affairs across the world , what do parliamentarians wish to do with other parliaments ?
We must use the Service as we build it to be able to be your servant in helping you address those issues on the ground .
I think on those issues , we are in exactly the same place .
Mr Tannock : assertive leadership that is up to the challenge .
Well , I hope that you will start to see what you would recognise as assertive leadership .
It is very important , as you say , that we address some of these critical issues : the Balkans and the transatlantic relationship are absolutely core and central to what we do .
It is why we spend a lot of time in discussion with the United States and why I personally spend a lot of time in discussion and dialogue with them and , of course , Ukraine .
I hope that you were pleased with my decision to go to the inauguration and then to invite President Yanukovich to come to Brussels where he spent one of his first days .
He was inaugurated on Thursday .
He was in Brussels on Monday in order to begin to further and deepen that relationship for the future .
Mr Meyer , you talked about the issues of foreign policy and disarmament and the issues of whether it is appropriate to think in military terms .
Let me just give you two very quick examples , one of which I have already described which was at Atalanta and the importance of having a comprehensive approach to what we do .
We have , off the coast of Somalia , ships which have been extremely successful this weekend , by the way , with the French navy in capturing pirates who were determined to create havoc in that part of the sea .
Linked to that is making sure that they are prosecuted and treated properly by reference to our own judicial standards in the countries of that region .
Linked to that is the development programme that the Commission is working on to try and support the economy in Somalia so that it improves .
Linked to that is the work that we are about to start on training people to be able to provide security in the region .
In other words , it is a joined-up approach and it is a comprehensive approach .
That means you use the tools that you need to be able to address the problems that people face .
Another example : having been in Haiti last week , I must pay tribute to the Italians that I saw working there .
People fresh from the tragedy of Aquila , but here we had the navy , we had the fire fighters , we had NGOs , we had civilians , we had doctors , we had psychiatrists , we had dentists , we had nurses , all working under the umbrella of the commander , actually , of the ship who had a hospital ship full of people who were being treated from the direct consequences of the earthquake .
Young people with amputations ; children who had terrible burns who were being treated ; teams out there to support them .
What I am trying to say is that I think you have to think about the comprehensive strategy and approach that we can offer that involves using the means that we have and using them to greatest effect .
Mr Provera , on development cooperation immigration , you make an important point , which is that , if people feel they have no other choices , then they will take risks , often with their lives , to leave the country where they live and were born and want to live .
Most people want to be able to live in the country in which they have grown up .
So the important thing about development , in my view , has always been to be able to support the economic livelihoods of people in order to enable them to be able to stay and live where they wish to live in order to be able to get the educational support , the health support and so on .
That is going to be a very big part of what we are doing on the ground , and that helps particularly in states where instability , because of climate change , could be very difficult .
Finally , Mr Mölzer , do not be so pessimistic , is what I want to say to you .
It is not about operating above the heads of Member States .
It is about building something uniquely European - not the same as what happens in Member States , whether it is Germany , Italy , France , the UK or wherever .
It is not the same .
We are building something different that is about long-term security and stability , economic growth on the ground that we can contribute to that is in our interest but that actually is also about the values that we hold dear .
And , as for my languages , oui , je peux parler français , mais je ne suis pas très bien en français .
Ich habe auch zwei Jahre in der Schule Deutsch gelernt , aber ich habe es jetzt vergessen .
So I can do the languages , and I will get better and better .
I look forward to getting to the point where I can have a real conversation with you in much better German than I can do today .
( DE ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , the Albertini and Danjean reports , as well as the motion for a resolution on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons , show that important decisions will soon have to be taken and that we need to prepare for that .
Allow me to single out a couple of further examples .
I believe that the European Union now has an important role to play in a crucial phase in which the aim must be to prevent Iran from building nuclear weapons and that there needs to be a real flurry of activity in the 5 + 1 group , specifically in connection with the preparation of a UN resolution and the possible extension of sanctions , in order to prevent the advent of a new nuclear State by non-military means .
The dramatic situation in the Middle East , and the resolution of the problems there , is connected to this , directly or indirectly .
Baroness Ashton , I would like to thank you for travelling to Kiev to talk to President Yanukovich .
It will be of crucial importance to succeed in bolstering such countries so that they do not make any wrong decisions and to be clear that a customs union with Russia and a free trade zone with the European Union are not compatible and for the advantages of making the right choice to be made clear .
I have one more comment to add .
In contrast to many foreign and defence ministers , we will exercise the necessary patience to build a sound External Action Service with you .
We want this External Action Service .
It must be successful .
It is a precondition for our ability to speak with one voice .
It would be wrong to take excessively quick and thus wrong decisions .
We are not under time pressure here - we need a sound result .
We do need to consider , however , that , in its history , the Union has been successful where the Community method was applied and that , where it has acted intergovernmentally , it has rarely or never succeeded .
It must therefore be clear that those things that are Community policy must not be stealthily transformed into intergovernmental policy via the External Action Service .
We need to build in safeguards to this effect so as to secure the efficiency of the unitary service but , at the same time , also the Community policy and the rights of the European Parliament that that involves - in respect of the budget , budgetary control and the granting of discharge - as well as political supervision rights on the part of the European Parliament .
We hope for positive collaboration .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , I address you , Baroness Ashton , as Vice-President of the Commission , but also as High Representative - as , in contrast to the foreign ministers , I assume that , as High Representative , you also have some degree of political responsibility to this House .
Today marks 100 days since the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force .
There are two imminent and significant decisions to be made in terms of our direction of travel .
One of them - as you , too , said at the beginning - is to expand foreign policy because the climate , energy and other matters are part of foreign policy , and the other is creating a dynamic and effective External Action Service .
Speaking of energy policy , Copenhagen showed that , if we are not united , if we are fragmented , if every Head of Government believes that he or she has to produce something specific , we will achieve less than we would otherwise have done .
Not that we would have achieved something amazing , given the position of China and of the United States , but the terrible soap opera that was Copenhagen really should not be allowed to happen again .
Therefore - and I agree with Mr Brok in this regard - we need to obtain a sturdy External Action Service .
I , like many of us , am not surprised , but am nonetheless appalled , to see how many of the foreign ministers are making problems for you out of petty jealousy .
We are saying this very plainly .
Many do give you their support , but many are making problems .
They simply cannot tolerate the fact that they no longer have the lead role to play and are instead foreign ministers again .
At the end of the day , being a foreign minister is not a bad job , and it does not need to mean that you should decide every detail of what goes on in the European Union .
For that reason , we also say clearly from here that we will use our parliamentary capabilities to the full not to prevent something , but to build something constructive .
An External Action Service is constructive - as it says in the Treaty of Lisbon - when it is clearly subordinate to you , Baroness Ashton , and also , of course , when it collaborates closely with the Commission .
Similarly , we will not tolerate any legal activity that has hitherto been conducted using the Community method and that is to continue in that way under the Treaty of Lisbon suddenly becoming intergovernmental .
That , you see , is exactly what many ministers and perhaps even many Heads of Government want , not only in order to undermine the Commission a little , but also to undermine Community law .
That is not acceptable .
A clear line must be drawn .
How that will play out in relation to the External Action Service is something there will be discussions about over the coming weeks - as before .
I will thus also finish on something that has already been said .
It is not a question of timing , even if we do want a solution quickly , but one of content-based presentation .
It needs to be said once again , specifically to the Council of Foreign Ministers , that this Parliament will exercise its rights - no more , but also no less - in connection with the budget and the Staff Regulations because we have a goal , which is an effective and efficient External Action Service .
( Applause )
Mr President , I think we all expected that there were going to be teething troubles in bringing the treaty into force and we might apologise for failing to include a clause on time travel in the treaty , but the thing we failed to expect and cannot accept is a breakdown of trust between the Commission and Council in setting up the External Service .
The solution is found in the treaty , which ought to be appreciated and respected scrupulously .
Article 40 protects the respective functions of the Commission and the Council .
Both of them should apply pragmatism to ensure that a strong , effective , coherent diplomacy can be created across the breadth of policy .
Catherine Ashton gives us a graphic description of the EU as a rising power from a declining continent .
It is quite clear that the Afghan campaign is a problem that commands our attention ; a profound reform of strategy and tactics is required .
Our task should be to reassess the purpose , cost and duration of our engagement there .
The ALDE Group is anxious to press the accelerator on defence .
We must find the common security interests of the 27 states and draw on comparable exercises in these states and a frank appraisal of the strengths of the ESDP missions , creating circumstances for bringing forward permanent structured cooperation in defence .

( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , I would like to thank Mr Danjean for his excellent report , in which he explains where we now are in relation to the common security and defence policy .
He also explains which points we do not have agreement on .
If Parliament adopts this report , it will have come further than the Commission and the Council , in a few specific points , as this report , for example , once again makes express and positive reference to the Barnier report on European civil protection .
It is regrettable that Baroness Ashton has just rejected that idea once more .
Lady Ashton , I regret that one of the few points in your presentation where you said ' no ' was to this idea of Mr Barnier 's , whereas on most topics , you seem to be at the same place as everybody else .
( DE ) The new report , like the Albertini report , supports a Union training mission in Somalia .
We in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance reject that idea .
We are stumbling into a mission , there , where it is clear neither what its added value is in relation to what has already been done in the region nor within what broader political framework it is based , or whether it actually makes any contribution at all to national reconstruction in Somalia .
The likelihood is extremely high that we are paying over the odds in order to train foot soldiers who will then move on to the next warlord willing to pay the most .
Allow me to make a third comment .
This report talks of the goal of achieving Europe 's strategic autonomy in the field of security and defence policy .
For me , that is excessive - we are biting off more than we can chew here .
I do not believe that any of the Member States is in a position to come up with the mammoth military expenditure that we would need if we were taking that wording of achieving ' strategic autonomy ' seriously .
As it happens , I also think that this would be a strategic mistake in any case .
Europe must find its role in a meshwork of European and global security , and such a role cannot be that of a strategic stand-alone .
It would therefore be better for us to agree , very rationally and realistically , to enhance those capacities and structures that give us the capability of acting more autonomously .
( PL ) Mrs Ashton , Mr President , an influential Russian military officer has stated that if Russia had possessed Mistral-class amphibious assault ships , the invasion of Georgia would have lasted about half an hour .
Meanwhile , France is selling Mistrals to Russia , despite the fact that the Sarkozy plan has not been implemented , and , at the same time , France is giving its support to the North European Gas Pipeline .
It is difficult to talk about security in Europe if we run away from discussion about the situation on the European Union 's eastern border , but this is what happened throughout the work on the report , and I am speaking now , with great regret , to the Chair of the Subcommittee on Security and Defence .
Efforts were made , at all costs , not to speak about matters such as the ' Zapad 2009 ' manoeuvres .
Pains were taken not to speak about this , as if policy on security and defence - a common policy for the European Union , which it is our role to create - were the policy of only a few large countries .
A great deal was said about what is happening a long way away on the other side of the world , and about what is happening in almost every part of the globe , but at all costs - this approach was also adopted by many Members - attempts were made to run away from substantial problems on the eastern border of the Union .
It was an exceptional muddle of a kind of European megalomania and a disregard for the interests of some Member States .
This is the reason why we are not going to endorse this report , but it is also a request I would like to make to Mrs Ashton .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Excuse me Mr Kowal , but you have spoken for one minute and 44 seconds instead of your allotted minute .
( DE ) Mr President , on behalf of my group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , I would like to make clear at this point that we are deeply concerned about the development of EU foreign policy towards militarisation and an increasingly interventionist policy .
That is a dangerous development .
I want to say , in all clarity , that we believe that a military approach to conflict resolution or to the supposed stabilisation of countries or regions is absolutely the wrong way to go to achieve greater security for the EU and the world .
Military interventions - and Afghanistan , unfortunately , is a very current example of this - bring suffering , death and prolonged devastation , but no peace and no improvement in the situation as far as the resident population is concerned .
The Danjean report lists what are referred to as key threats that constitute a challenge for the EU 's future security policy .
One of these is climate change - something that has been overwhelmingly caused by the industrialised nations of the West .
If people in the countries of the South have to take flight because they no longer have any water and food becomes scarcer and scarcer , they will represent a security problem for Europe .
Such a view is cynical and inhuman .
If States collapse as a result of neoliberal economic policy , they will constitute a security problem .
What we need is not more military , it is a change , an end to the European Union 's neoliberal orientation .
The European External Action Service , the European Defence Agency , the creation of a crisis management and planning directorate and the planned start-up fund to fund military operations are designed to make the EU a global player in military terms .
We believe that moves towards centralisation in the European External Action Service are a dangerous and undemocratic development .
The EU should assume a leading role in relation to demilitarisation and disarmament , especially in the field of nuclear disarmament .
There needs to be a push for the obligation incumbent upon nuclear States under Article 6 of the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty , which is to say , complete nuclear disarmament , to be honoured at long last .
This was a key promise that constituted the basis on which many States signed the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty and have , as a result , durably refrained from acquiring nuclear weapons .
Reliable guarantees of non-aggression are the best means of preventing proliferation as , otherwise , countries threatened with intervention will attempt to deter such an attack by means of acquiring nuclear weapons .
If nothing else , I would like , in this context , and in particular with regard to Iran , to point out and to warn that military operations or military activities of any kind to prevent proliferation are completely counter-productive and highly dangerous .
We will be rejecting the Danjean report and have tabled our own resolution on the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty .
( NL ) Mr President , ' Chinese billions for the Balkans ' is a recent newspaper headline which certainly calls for a European response in this debate since , at the end of the day , the new Chinese investment initiatives are targeting countries which have already become members of the EU or those which aspire to that status .
Council and Commission , how do you view China 's role in the Balkans ?
After all , it embraces a range of economic activities : from financing and carrying out major public works , to providing investment for industry and agriculture and buying up ports .
The crucial point here is that the Chinese approach is definitely incompatible with Western standards .
The big question now is : has this Chinese agenda on occasions thrown a spanner in the works of the EU 's laborious enlargement agenda for this region ?
Whatever your answer may be , the Chinese clock is ticking faster and more productively than the Western one , in this region , as well .
Finally , Madam High Representative , you will be making a trip to the Middle East .
Noam Shalit , the father of Gilad Shalit , an Israeli soldier who was abducted nearly four years ago , is counting on your full support to obtain Gilad 's release .
I am , too .
( DE ) Mr President , let me briefly address two issues .
First of all , the duty to provide assistance is clearly not compatible with Austria 's neutrality , and for that reason , it would be important to include the following points in this report .
It must be stated , firstly , that the duty to provide assistance is not legally binding , secondly , that the use of military means is not necessarily required and , thirdly , that the individual Member States retain the freedom to decide what the assistance they provide actually comprises .
The committee did not accept this , primarily from a content point of view .
In my opinion , the very way in which this was rejected also demonstrates a serious lack of respect .
I ask for more respect from you , Baroness Ashton , for us Austrians in this very sensitive area .
My second point concerns the minority report .
The quality of democracies and societies , of course , is demonstrated time and again by their treatment of minorities .
For me , it is a very , very good thing that we have this option of a minority report .
I do not agree with all the points in it , but I am very pleased that Mrs Lösing did make use of this option .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to take advantage of the excellent reports by my fellow Members , Messrs Danjean and Albertini , to speak up again in support of the key role of the High Representative .

For the good of all , it is to be hoped that she , Baroness Ashton , realises how important her role is , that she defends it , and that she is determined to assert this role when giving substance to the requirements of the treaty , for example in strengthening the European Union 's relationships with its strategic partners , and in consolidating its own leadership in multilateral forums .
In short , we urgently need a strategy that ultimately identifies the real interests that we intend to pursue , and it is important that we involve Member States in significant objectives .
It is also important not to let ourselves be conditioned by any interinstitutional disputes over the division of responsibilities - I am referring particularly to the future European External Action Service .
Essentially , Baroness Ashton , we want you to play a key role .
We want you to play a key role without being bureaucratic .
Allow me , then , to make this observation : I am truly sorry that you have decided not to participate in today 's discussion on Cuba .
I know that you have every good reason for this and that you will be the first to participate in the discussion on the Arctic , which is also of great importance .
But Cuba libre is not only the name of a cocktail : it is the rallying cry of democracy that so many people in this Parliament carry in their hearts .
I therefore hope that you will find the time to attend , contribute to and back Parliament 's decision with your strength and with the strength of your role .
You are participating in the debate on the Arctic , and you will see that Cuba libre goes down better with a bit of ice .
( BG ) The report by the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the Council 's annual report was drafted in a spirit of cooperation and dialogue , which is indicative of our approach to all strategic issues .
A substantial part of the report is devoted to the ramifications of the Treaty of Lisbon .
On this point , I would like to focus attention on one important aspect of our joint cooperation .
The success of the common foreign policy and the actual results from the institutional reforms implemented are becoming a fundamental factor which will determine the attitude of European citizens towards the European Union 's ability to defend their interests , to change and to develop .
Justified or not , expectations are high for a sharp rise in the European Union 's role on the world stage , and we have no right to disappoint Europe 's citizens .
Unfortunately , in recent weeks , the European press has , not without justification , been casting foreign policy in an extremely negative light , portraying it as a contest between Member States for posts in the new External Action Service , as a competition between the institutions in terms of which hat Baroness Ashton will wear more often - that of the Commission or the Council - and as an unfair struggle by the European Parliament to achieve greater influence .
You realise that this is harming us internally .
Furthermore , it is also particularly damaging as a message to our external partners .
Division makes us weak in their eyes .
This is why I am taking the opportunity in this debate to make an appeal .
All of us who have a stance on devising and developing the Common Foreign and Security Policy must concentrate on the important strategic issues and endeavour to show , as quickly as possible , tangible results through more dialogue and a constructive approach .
We owe it to Europe 's citizens to make them feel that they are part of a single European Union whose voice is heard and has clout in global politics .
Mr President , the joint motion for a resolution on the Non-proliferation Treaty is a very important one , and the ALDE Group and I are very proud to have contributed to its elaboration .
The resolution is holistic because it encompasses all the disarmament matters , from the NPT review conference to the issue of nuclear weapon-free zones .
This resolution calls for a Middle East free of nuclear weapons and for the withdrawal of all tactical warheads from European soil , in the context of a brotherly dialogue with Russia .
This resolution also frequently refers to a nuclear weapon-free world , a target to be achieved through a special convention and within an ' ambitious ' timeframe - this means a short one .
Our resolution is the European answer to President Obama 's proposal of the abolition of nuclear weapons .
This document should be considered , therefore , as a step on the road to the total ban of atomic weapons .
It means to end the paradox of the possession of nuclear devices by some countries , which is legal on the one side , and the complete prohibition of chemical and biological arsenals for all countries , on the other side .
Atomic bombs must be made illegal and their possession should one day be considered a criminal act .
I am confident this Parliament will continue in this direction with even more drive and more vision .
( DE ) Mr President , Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative , as this Parliament 's rapporteur on Kosovo , I am very pleased to have heard you say that you consider the Western Balkans to be a focus of European foreign policy and that the European Union cannot afford to fail .
You also said , however , that Bosnia has stabilised .
Baroness Ashton , in the current state in which Bosnia finds itself , stability and stabilisation are actually dangerous .
Not everyone is able to take part in the democratic process .
The constitution , as it currently exists - the Dayton constitution - was a sign of stability in the 1990s , but it is no longer that today .
What kind of strategy do you , do we , as the EU , have to change that ?
You said that you have a strategy for Bosnia .
That is handling by the Office of the High Representative - but where is the EU 's strategy ?
I would like you to tell me that .
I think that the EU still needs to develop a strategy in this regard .
When it comes to Kosovo , you described EULEX as a success .
That is only partially true .
There is still much to be done here , for example , visa liberalisation for the citizens .
Baroness Ashton , I call on you to ensure that the Commission immediately starts work on a roadmap in order to make it clear to the citizens of Kosovo that they will not be left on their own .
Unfortunately , you did not answer a question posed by Mrs Brantner .
A dedicated department , a dedicated Directorate-General for peace-building within the External Action Service , would be the order of the day .
You agree with us that peace-building is important , but will you anchor it in the External Action Service ?
Will you set up a dedicated Directorate-General for peace-building ?
That would be necessary to make it clear where the European Union is heading .
When it comes to Mr Danjean 's report , I am very pleased that the committee accepted that further developments in the European security and defence policy fully respect the neutrality and the non-aligned status of some Member States .
This means that they themselves decide where , when and how they participate and provide assistance .
Mr President , where the EU can add value , and when it does not undermine our sovereign interests or compete with organisations such as NATO , we can support it .
For the most part , this will mean adopting common positions on certain key issues and civil tasks in the field of humanitarian assistance or post-conflict reconstruction and development , although I have to say that the track record of EUPOL in Afghanistan does not inspire much confidence .
The simple truth is that your role as EU foreign minister is to act as handmaiden for EU political integration .
The effect of the External Action Service , the chain of EU embassies around the world , will be to undermine national representation in many capitals , armed perversely with cash that has come from our nations in order to take forward someone else 's foreign policy .
The report before us on EU security and defence policy is a manifesto for EU military integration , deliberately confusing military and civil crisis management in order to justify an EU role .
It relies on a bogus narrative concerning EU operations and increasingly seeks to involve the Commission in areas which are properly the responsibility of our nations and of the Council .
Virtually every paragraph of this report advocates ratcheting up military EU integration at the expense of NATO and the sovereign integrity of individual European countries .
I recall one of the great red lines of the British Labour Government 's negotiating stance when it said it would resist the idea of a separate and permanent EU operations centre responsible for operational planning and conduct of military operations as this would be the clearest example of duplication of NATO , whose SHAPE headquarters performs precisely this role .
Baroness Ashton , when I asked you about this on 11 January , you said you agreed with the position I took then .
Now you seem to have changed your mind . I would be very interested to know what you really think now .
( EL ) Mr President , the report by Mr Albertini is indeed outstanding and I congratulate him on it .
He is a serious person and always delivers serious reports .
The presentation by Lady Ashton was equally important and outstanding .
I believe that numerous foreign policy issues are covered , but I consider that everything referred to in the two reports in terms of the proper exercising of foreign policy and security policy is inextricably linked to two things : firstly , a clear definition of the borders of the European Union , so that the European Union is treated with uniform respect and , secondly : resources , in other words money ; I have read nothing about resources in either report , even though they are the most basic requirement for an effective foreign policy .

I believe that the new order has brought with it a new global economic disorder .
There is social and political disorder and monetary disorder is knocking at the door .
What I want , therefore , is for Lady Ashton to coordinate the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , so that we can discuss the resources to support the policy adopted .
( NL ) Mr President , Madam High Representative , I fear that what you have brought us today is a catalogue of areas for consideration or a catalogue of commonplaces .
Unfortunately , your presentation contains very little in the way of strategic vision .
For example , what action do you propose to ensure that we build a greater rapprochement with Russia , instead of allowing Russia to drift further towards cooperation with rogue regimes , such as those of Iran and North Korea ?
What are your proposals as regards Iran 's attempts to develop nuclear weapons ?
What position are you going to adopt concerning the growing anti-Western and anti-European trends in the Islamic world ?
A trend that can also be observed in candidate countries like Turkey .
Madam Ashton , are you prepared to defend European achievements , such as freedom of expression and the separation of church and state , in a clear and uncompromising manner , in the face of growing political Islam ?
In my view , there can be no repetition of the weak attitude which the EU adopted a few years ago with regard to the Danish cartoons crisis .
Like Mr Provera , I , too , would like to ask whether you are prepared to bring our Common Foreign and Security Policy into play in order to bring the flood of mass immigration into Europe under control ?
I refer here to both illegal and legal immigration .
You have not answered that question .
Mr President , I welcome the High Representative , Vice-President , and Chair of the Foreign Affairs Council under those three hats .
She has three hats .
Our reports refer to the old times .
Your office , Baroness Ashton , was meant to be a new era , so I will refer to the new era .
You are representing a newborn office , an institution just born , which is having a difficult childhood .
It is a hybrid with an electric engine of Community method and a diesel engine of intergovernmental method .
It is an orphan , whose supposed parents , Member States , Council , Commission , look at it with a certain suspicion and distance .
Parliament is ready to fill the gap of parenthood .
At this early stage , there are risks of this Service being torn apart by diverging institutional rivalries and interests .
Our Parliament was and is the strong proponent of strong EU foreign policy .
You can count on us .
Please look at Parliament as your ally , maybe also as an honest broker among those who would be tempted to see only one hat on your head and not all three of them .
Parliament would expect the new institution , like others , to be linked with us by an interinstitutional agreement clearly setting out the rules of cooperation .
We intend to codecide , as the treaty provides for , on financial and staff regulations in the spirit of the integral EEAS , not torn-apart EAS .
Please consider strengthening your office in terms of competence and political weight by installing deputies to your office - kind of ' vice-ministers ' , including parliamentary ones .
That would solve the problem that the day only has 24 hours , the problem which cannot be otherwise solved .
You are needed everywhere and we would like you to multiply your possibilities to act on our behalf and on behalf of the Union .
( EL ) Mr President , Lady Ashton , we socialists and democrats believe in a European Union with a strong presence on the international stage , a Union with a common foreign policy which can speak with one voice in what is becoming a more and more complex world , a Union with a separate defence identity , which gives it independence of choice and action and a particular role in the international sphere .
I shall refer , in particular , to the excellent report by Mr Danjean , whom I should like to thank for his productive cooperation .
I wish to raise four points :
Firstly , especially after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the reference made to the central role of the UN system and the call on it to strengthen multilateral cooperation are important .
Secondly , we support close cooperation with NATO .
However , we would emphasise that this cooperation should not obstruct the independent development of the defence capability of the European Union .
On the contrary , full account must be taken of the differences between the two organisations and their independence must be left intact , especially as regards decision taking .
Thirdly , I think that we need a paragraph on the need for enhanced cooperation with Russia , which is a strategic partner for the Union in sectors such as energy security , crisis management and others .
To close , I should like to express my satisfaction at the fact that the report now includes references to the need for general disarmament , with the emphasis on light weapons , anti-personnel mines and cluster munitions .
At the same time , however , I consider that the European Parliament should take a clearer stand and ask the Member States to provide real support for the Obama initiative for a world without nuclear weapons .
Disarmament and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons can be achieved if each and every one of us takes a step towards attaining this ultimate objective .
Mr President , please allow me to speak frankly as one Lancastrian to another , because this is not going very well , is it ?
It really is not .
Earlier on , Baroness Ashton , you said that Europe needs a credible foreign policy .
How can we have a credible foreign policy when it has an incredible High Representative ?
You seem as if you are stumbling from one crisis to another , so much so that the British Foreign Secretary had to write you a letter this week asking you to buck up , to get on your game .
But we in UKIP were on to this from the start .
We opposed your appointment because we said you would be clearly out of your depth - and we are being proved right .
It was said that your appointment , made by the Commission , would stop the traffic in Tokyo and Washington .
But you have not even been able to appoint the Ambassador to Washington because old Barroso did you up like a kipper !
It is also claimed in the British press that you do not turn your phone on after 8 p.m. at night .
But , Baroness Ashton , you are the highest-paid female politician in the world .
You are paid more than Frau Merkel , you are paid more than Hillary Clinton : it is a 24-hour job .
To top it all , yesterday it was reported that you are being provided with a Learjet .
You are expected to do 300 000 miles per year .
That would get you to the moon , and most people now would like you to stay there .


Mr President , the reports drawn up by Mr Albertini and Mr Danjean are very important documents coming at a crucial moment : the Lisbon Treaty has just entered into force , the EU has a new Parliament and transatlantic cooperation looks more promising .
Mr Danjean 's report addresses the new security challenges facing EU members .
To that effect , it calls for a White Paper which would trigger a public debate and raise the profile of the CSDP , establishing a clearer relationship between objectives and interests , on the one hand , and the means and resources to attain them , on the other .
The report also comes up with - and this is a very good thing - concrete proposals , and points to the areas which need further effort in the military domain .
At the same time , some of the proposals , such as the introduction of a European preference principle for defence acquisition and a call for the obligatory participation of the European defence industry in the coming US missile defence system , look pretty impossible to reconcile , while answering every need with a new institution is not always practical .
In general , with Europe constantly diminishing its military expenditure since the end of the Cold War and a public disinclined to support military action in general , the approach to CSDP should not only be mechanical but equally political .
Restoring political will in this respect is thus indispensable for a successful CSDP .
Finally , the report is important because it addresses the very topical issue of the role of the European Parliament with respect to CSDP .
I want to thank Mr Danjean and my colleagues for their contributions .
( PL ) Mr President , the motion which has been submitted for a resolution of Parliament on the Common Foreign and Security Policy is intended , among other things , to establish military structures as part of the European Union .
I appeal for the establishment of a special European Union defence council and military operations centre .
These instruments will serve to give the Union the status of a world player in military affairs .
It should be remembered that out of 27 EU Member States , as many as 21 are members of NATO .
Only six EU countries do not belong to NATO , and most of these have declared neutrality .
This gives rise , therefore , to a fundamental question - does the motion which has been submitted have as an objective the development of a number of EU countries , or is it also a serious step on the road to building a separate military bloc in competition with NATO ?
Even in the mid-term perspective , it will not be possible to maintain membership in both organisations at the same time .
Therefore , voting in favour of this report , today , will , in reality , destroy the civil nature of the Union , will show the red card to NATO and will be the beginning of building an alternative military bloc .
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by warmly congratulating my two fellow Members on their reports , which have formed the basis for a very good debate with excellent results .
There are a few guiding principles that I would like to mention .
Firstly , on the common foreign policy : unfortunately , we currently have a many-voiced image of the European Union .
High Representative , I would like to ask and call on you to make sure that we help achieve and indeed ensure that Europe speaks with one voice .
That is highly necessary if we are to achieve a pan-European alignment .
Secondly , it is right that transatlantic relations have been mentioned .
In the diplomatic field , in the economic field , in security policy and in defence policy , we do need a close partnership with our colleagues in the United States , but as equal partners on an equal footing .
It must also be the case that citizens ' rights and security issues be dealt with on equal terms , as Parliament ultimately impressively demanded in relation to the SWIFT Agreement .
My third point is that it is right that the Western Balkans are an absolutely crucial factor in the European security and foreign policy of the future .
We need to give these States European perspectives .
That means politically stable relations , personal safety and economic development .
A European External Action Service should and must - and Parliament is on your side in this regard - help to achieve all of this .
We perceive this European External Action Service to be a service for Europe and not for the Member States , for the institutions , European thinking and working , not for other interests .
Parliament will be on your side on this issue .
Of course , I also support the German Foreign Minister , who is demanding that German should be one of the working languages of the European External Action Service .
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , yes , we need a common foreign , security and defence policy , but let us use it to obtain a world free of nuclear weapons .
We know that that will not happen overnight ; we have been fighting for this for too long to think that .
However , perhaps we can succeed , together with Presidents Obama and Medvedev , in bringing this goal a crucial step closer .
I also welcome the fact that , according to its coalition agreement , Germany 's Federal Government intends to ask for the withdrawal of US nuclear weapons from Germany .
That would represent a clear and unambiguous signal .
We also welcome the fact that the Secretary General of NATO is to hold a comprehensive debate about bringing the overarching goal of a world free of nuclear weapons closer without having to neglect security interests .
That , too , would be a crucial step forward .
Baroness Ashton , I believe that , together with a well-structured External Action Service , there is much that you will be able to achieve .
I am therefore full of hope in this regard and I have to say that , in many commentaries that we have to sit through in this Chamber - in particular from a so-called parliamentary group from the United Kingdom - the quality in this House has really suffered terribly .


( SK ) The excellent reports from my fellow Members , Albertini and Danjean , include many inspiring ideas about how to streamline the main aspects and key opportunities in implementing the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
I would like to stress that right now , when the concept for creating the European External Action Service and operating it in the future is being processed , it is extremely important that this service is set up on a maximally rational basis right from the start .
That is , to serve the European Union 's primary objectives and the efforts to strengthen its position in the world .
As we can see today , this is not a simple or easy task .
In developing the concept of service , we are already seeing that the often conflicting interests of the various European institutions and their individual components are clashing , and sometimes even with groups and individuals within them .
To this we can also add the national interests of individual Member States .
In this situation , it is necessary for all the players and participants in this process to be responsible , broad-minded and objective in order to be able to rise above their own egos and keep in mind mainly the common objective : the establishment of a diplomatic service that will be operating as a homogenous element , serving exclusively the needs of the European Union and its Member States .
Here is the very important leadership role - yours , Baroness Ashton .
It would be a mistake if special interests and the desire to impose own opinion at the expense of another at all costs , with the aim of demonstrating own importance and status , were to overcome the need for a broader perspective .
The outcome of this effort will bear witness to whether we are really concerned about a stronger European Union or whether it is just another demonstration and contest about whose position within the European Union 's structures is the strongest .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Madam High Representative / Vice-President , I would like to emphasise the fact that we are discussing three excellent documents drawn up by Parliament : ambitious documents that express clear stances , make clear-cut choices and are subject to broad consensus between the groups within this Parliament who care about Europe and its future .
It is an important fact , demonstrating Parliament 's will and ability to offer itself as a candidate to play a central role in CFSP / CSDP on the basis of what I would call a dynamic reading of the Treaty of Lisbon .
We intend to exercise this role in the process of constructing the External Action Service , not only to guarantee Parliament 's prerogatives , but also to contribute to making the service an organisation capable of ensuring that EU external action is consistent and efficient while , at the same time , strengthening and gradually extending the community method .
As regards the Danjean report , I would like to highlight that the concept of strategic autonomy is presented in the context of a multilateral approach , and that it is a condition for strengthening the strategic partnership with the United States .
I would also like to highlight the fact that Parliament is united in requesting an Operations Centre , and I am glad that you , High Representative , have declared yourself open to a more exhaustive discussion of this idea .
Concerning the non-proliferation resolution , I would like to underline the importance of envisaging a world free from nuclear weapons , the clear judgment on the anachronism of tactical nuclear weapons and the value of the positions recently adopted by some European governments on this front .
Thus , Parliament 's message is clear , realistic and ambitious , and we hope that the High Representative is able to grasp and endorse it .


Mr President , may I congratulate colleagues Albertini and Danjean on their comprehensive and creative reports on foreign and security policy .
The EU is bound to be a global player , as you said , High Representative , but with seven per cent of the world 's population and one fifth of GDP , it will be possible only on the basis of strengthened transatlantic cooperation based on common values .
First of all , the EU should show a determined will to develop coherent strategies in five crucial areas : common strategies for China , Russia , peace in the Middle East , Afghanistan , and energy security .
It is still a major handicap for our credibility and efficiency in the world that often we have not been able to form a unified position in these areas .
The principal challenge for you will be to carry into practice your excellent statement about building a single political strategy and taking collective responsibility .
I welcomed paragraph 10 in colleague Danjean 's report which urges the Council and the Commission to analyse cyber threats and to coordinate an efficient response to such challenges based on the best practices .
Cyber warfare is not a challenge of the future : it has become an everyday practice .
Therefore , it is an immediate task for the EU to work out a European cyber security strategy .
Finally , on the European External Action Service : I think the forming of the EEAS should be based on a fair geographical balance and equal opportunities for representatives of all Member States , new and old , with application of the quota system .
Only this will guarantee the efficiency and transparency and , finally , the credibility of the new diplomatic service .
Good luck to you , High Representative , and thank you .
Mr President , High Representative Ashton has asked us this morning to change mental maps , to challenge resistance to institutional change and to avoid narrow defence of national interests .
If Parliament means what it says on the CFSP , we have to send a clear message that we will support a strong , comprehensive and inclusive External Action Service and , in observing our own prerogatives , we will not be part of any vested interests seeking to limit the capacity , and therefore the effectiveness , of that service .
That should mean appointments on merit and merit alone , appointments from Member State foreign ministries from day one and from across all of the European Union ; it means incorporation of strategic advice on issues like energy supply and environmental policy ; it means organisational structures which reflect global reach and give due weight to Africa and to transatlantic relations as well as to Asia , Latin America and our neighbourhood ; it means sufficient financial margin , not just for rapid reaction or humanitarian response , but to move monies to reflect new political priorities ; it means endorsing Cathy Ashton 's decision to put disaster response above disaster tourism and for her to provide key direction to financial programming and it means this Parliament supporting new arrangements with deputising which reflect international practice rather than necessarily sticking to our past rules .
Finally , I am delighted to see the Commission seat empty this morning and , for all those who campaigned for the Lisbon Treaty , we should not restrict their or our support for its full implementation .

( ES ) Mr President , the Union 's foreign policy is entering a new phase , as Baroness Ashton and Mr Albertini have said this morning .
Article 21 of the treaty establishes objective principles .
New positions are also created by the treaty , with a High Representative , a Vice-President of the Commission , a permanent President of the European Council , a European External Action Service , and a new Security and Defence Policy , which is the subject of the report by my colleague Mr Danjean , etc .
These innovations aim to ensure that the European Union has a much more effective influence in the world , and I think that summits with third countries continue to be an ideal instrument for achieving this .
The European Union does not hold many summits with individual countries , so we should take care with them .
The summit held last week with Morocco was the first summit with an Arab country , and also symbolised advanced status being granted to Morocco .
I would have liked you to have attended , Baroness Ashton .
I also regret that the King of Morocco was not present .
His absence meant that a summit that should have been historic lost political influence , significance and effectiveness .
I hope that the Union for the Mediterranean Summit in Barcelona will also be successful in terms of the level of the delegations .
I also regret the fact that the summit with President Obama planned for the spring is not going to take place .
As the Albertini report states , the Treaty of Lisbon sets the stage for strengthening our mechanisms for dialogue with the United States .
This and other subjects could have been dealt with at the summit .
The European Union and the United States should not miss the opportunity to deal at a high level with the bilateral matters , conflicts and global challenges that are now mounting up on the world 's agenda .
It would be paradoxical - and I will finish now - if now that we have the Treaty of Lisbon , we ran the risk of becoming irrelevant in this world that some are now calling ' post-Western ' or ' post-American ' .
( CS ) Madam High Representative , ladies and gentlemen , in my speech , I would like to point out the need to create a partnership with Russia .
The EU States and Russia face many common challenges and threats .
I could mention the fight against terrorism , the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , regional conflicts in the Middle East and Afghanistan , climate change , energy security including nuclear security , and so on .
Neither the European Union nor Russia can solve these problems alone .
Cooperation is necessary and cooperation should be the basis for a new comprehensive agreement between the EU and Russia .
I would therefore like to call on the High Representative to make use of her new powers and to speed up the negotiations with Russia .
I would also like to ask you , Baroness , to make use of your new powers to coordinate more effectively the positions of individual Member States , as well as of the individual parties involved within out common foreign and security policy , because that is the only way we will be able to secure a unified approach and to promote values such as human rights , democracy , the legal state , equality and even-handedness in mutual relations .
Mr President , I welcome and support both reports and I congratulate both rapporteurs on those documents .
Now for two points .
Firstly , on the Danjean report , I would like to bring up an issue that has raised a lot of eyebrows in a number of EU Member States .
I am talking specifically about the exclusive talks between Paris and Moscow over the possible sale of four Mistral warships to Russia .
The Mistral warship is clearly offensive in nature and it is indeed very alarming that some EU Member States are engaging in arms sales to third countries which might have very negative consequences for the security of other EU Member States or the EU 's neighbours .
The Treaty of Lisbon outlines common defence aspirations and includes a clause about solidarity in the area of security and defence .
Therefore , what do you reckon Parliament and other EU institutions should push for ?
A common set of rules inside the EU addressing arms sales from EU Member States to third countries .
As regards Mr Albertini 's report , I would like to stress the importance of stability and security in East Asia .
We welcome the efforts undertaken by both Taipei and Beijing to improve cross-state relations and to enhance dialogue and practical cooperation .
In this context , the EU should strongly back Taiwan 's participation in the International Civil Aviation Organisation and in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change , as Taiwan 's participation in these organisations is important to the EU and global interests .
( SL ) Madam High Representative , I very much agree with you when you say that your key objective is a better and a more credible European foreign policy .
That greater stability and security in the Balkans , our part of the world , is your key objective .
We really cannot afford any failure in this regard .
I therefore recommend that you commit to two issues : firstly , to resolving urgently the relations between Greece and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , so that our Member State Greece can finally begin to breathe easy with regard to its northern borders ; and secondly , to making efforts to ensure that Serbia , in the artificial dilemma of having to choose between the European Union and Kosovo , opts for the European Union , i.e. that it does not isolate itself .
Perhaps it might be a good idea to remind our friends in Serbia of one important fact , which is that Serbia and Kosovo will be together again once they both become members of the European Union .
( DE ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President , today you are sitting on the other side .
If you switch round every month , that will be fine by me .
As this debate draws to a close , a number of primary evaluations have become clear .
We want you to be at the head of an External Action Service in which you - as a fellow Member said earlier - wear both hats at the same time .
These two hats should be the only duplication , though - duplication in the structures is not something that we need .
The retention of the Community method must be ensured , not only in relation to the budget and EP supervision .
To be quite clear about this , the new service must not be the exclusive toy of the Foreign Ministers , who feel insulted that they will no longer be included in the European Council .
The same applies to the appointment of the staff and the filling of important positions within the service .
When it comes to the Danjean report , I would like to give my full support to the line taken by the rapporteur .
When it comes to the permanent operations centre , like Mr Van Orden , I have noticed that Baroness Ashton has moved on this issue since her hearing and , I must say , in the right direction , too , as I see it .
You have moved from rejection to a test phase .
I still believe that , if we are to operate civilian and military mission planning in a fully integrated way in the External Action Service , it makes sense to also run that service from its own operational headquarters .
With regard to the proposal from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance to establish a Directorate-General for peace-building , I would say that , in contrast to my fellow Members who sit at the left-most edge of this Chamber , I believe the entire EU project , and specifically also our foreign policy , is a unique peace-building project .
On that basis , I am not sure that we should be restricting this to a single department .
( ES ) Mr President , we believe that the new institutions need some time to establish themselves , but we also believe that we should not take our eye off the ball .
What is important is not , as some are asking , for the High Representative to be present wherever the European foreign policy is involved .
What is important is for the European Union to be present on the international stage with the capacity to speak out in defence of its positions .
This is what the reports are saying that we are debating today .
We therefore advocate a broad European Union policy on cooperation relations with all the countries with which we have interests , especially in terms of human rights , from Belarus to Cuba .
We should have this policy for all countries in which we have an interest in terms of human rights , security and global challenges , because the European Union can make the difference , as has been shown with the joint position of the majority of the Member States achieved under the Spanish Presidency in the Human Rights Council in Geneva , and as must be achieved on the Middle East and on Cuba .
This is a proactive and reformist step forward in terms of the external action of the European Union .
We want a strong , genuine European External Action Service that supports the work of the High Representative and also responds to Parliament 's aspirations .
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Ashton , I would like to express satisfaction at the fact that we can , today , discuss the Common Foreign and Security Policy and the Common Security and Defence Policy with you .
In spite of several voices to the contrary , I would like to say that I am certain that the majority of this House wish you well and would like to see construction of the Common Foreign and Security Policy and a professional External Action Service , a service in which you will be able to make use of the best diplomats from all Member States of the European Union .
Our discussion , today , about the Common Security and Defence Policy , is based on the excellent report of my boss on the Subcommittee on Security and Defence , Mr Danjean .
The Union must , of course , build the framework of the Common Security and Defence Policy .
There are many challenges ahead of us , not only conflicts , but also natural disasters , the threat of terrorism and so on .
We must , therefore , strengthen our operational capabilities .
The Union must take care of its own security , but must also be active in the face of global challenges .
This cannot be done without good cooperation with our allies from across the Atlantic .
I think that , not just because most EU Member States belong to NATO , but because of those challenges , in fact , everyone expects that you will manage to initiate a good dialogue and build coherent cooperation between the European Union and NATO .
Baroness Ashton , ending on a humorous note , I would like to express the hope that you have already sent your telephone number not only to Henry Kissinger , but also to Hilary Clinton .
Mr President , I want to congratulate Vice-President Ashton on a speech with vision and substance .
The problem that some people have with you , Vice-President Ashton , is that you are not a macho general or , indeed , a narrow nationalist .
I welcome , in particular , your emphasis on the rule of law between countries and urge you actively to insist that this is the case in the Middle East .
Also , your commitment to the important principle of collective gains as against minimal Member State losses .
The Middle East is perhaps the most volatile region capable at the moment of stumbling into a widespread conflagration .
You must work closely with the United States and press for the Council statement of 8 December to be central as a framework for progress there .
Finally , I want to recommend strongly that you support the idea of a policy that the Middle East be a nuclear-free zone .


( BG ) I believe that the reports by Mr Danjean and Mr Albertini mark a step towards our much needed common vision for the European Union as a global player in safeguarding peace and security , and I congratulate them on this .
Dwindling defence budgets and the current economic crisis make it patently clear that if we want Europe to speak with a single voice in the world and send out strong signals commanding respect , we must use the available resources more prudently and efficiently .
The role of the European Defence Agency , which has been strengthened by the Treaty of Lisbon , is vitally important for maximising our potential through collective procurement , pooling resources and joint training .
The interaction between the civilian and military aspects of the Common Foreign and Security Policy must be used to improve our Union 's capabilities and effectiveness .
I expect to see Mrs Ashton , as Head of the European Defence Agency and High Representative , taking on an active role in this direction .
Finally , Mrs Ashton , I wish you every success in setting up the common External Action Service .
I expect the principle of geographical balance to be observed when appointing the service 's staff so that it can truly represent the whole European Union .
Europe needs you to be successful .

( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , First of all , I wish to congratulate Mr Arnaud Danjean on this report , which is comprehensive and , at the same time , thoughtful on each individual question ; for my part , I wish to speak on one point only .
There are many countries among the Member States of the European Union , including my homeland , Hungary , which would like to play an active role , as full and equal members , in cooperating on European security and defence policy .
At the same time , for well-known historical reasons , neither their material resources nor their capacity or even knowledge base allows them , for now , to be on the same footing as the largest countries .
I therefore voted for those proposed amendments that seek to facilitate this sort of participation and catching up .
On the one hand , this concerns ongoing structural cooperation , which may be and could perhaps have been formulated in such a way that it does not turn into an elite club of the strongest and the largest Member States , in other words , that it does not make unified and uniform demands on each participant , because in this case , certain countries will be left out , but instead , enables the smaller countries to take part according to their specialised abilities .
On the other hand , the training networks need to be developed in this regard .
I would like to thank the President for including these points in the report .
( SL ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , today I would like to congratulate both rapporteurs who have so brilliantly led this debate , a debate which has resulted in this document , or rather , the documents of both Mr Albertini and Mr Danjean , being approved .


I would say that these documents have been approved at the right time , at the start of Baroness Ashton 's term of office , and that we have demonstrated in a detailed way what we want from the European Union 's foreign policy .
Baroness Ashton , you have used this opportunity very well in translating these two very specific documents into your own vision of the world and I congratulate you for that .
Obviously , I will not always congratulate you , unless you make it clear where you stand on specific problems , dilemmas and crises .
Today , I wish to congratulate you , in particular , for making that critical remark about the Israeli Government 's action with regard to the construction of illegal settlements .
To conclude , allow me just to add that I think that , on future occasions , we should pay more attention to Japan , our old and trusted friend , and not be so fascinated with China and other fast-growing countries .
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Ashton , I speak , probably , for everyone present in this Chamber , when I say that foreign policy is one of the most important challenges before the European Union , and we would hope that , under your leadership , Mrs Ashton , the European Union will be a genuine regulator of foreign policy at world level .
I will concentrate on two areas .
The first is the political situation in the Middle East .
We expect a clear position from you on strategy relating to the fight against terrorism .
We expect , chiefly , that the situation , especially in Afghanistan , will be a situation from which it will be possible to withdraw .
I would like , here , to suggest the use of all means , including , mainly civilian operations , as part of efforts to modernise a country which is , today , in ruins after 30 years of permanent war .
I think , too , that political involvement in the rebuilding of Afghanistan is a key factor for stabilisation in the country .
The second area is Iran which , today , is playing a key role in foreign policy in the region .
I think that engagement in the fight to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons is a crucial task which also falls to you .
We wish you great success here and trust that you will be able to coordinate your work well with American policy .
I think the political situation in Afghanistan , Pakistan , India and Iran is crucial from the point of view of world security policy .
Therefore , Mrs Ashton , your role in this is invaluable .
( ES ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , you have described Operation Atalanta in the Horn of Africa to combat piracy as a success .
However , last week , there was a massive pirate attack on Basque , Spanish and French fishing boats , which forced the fishing fleet to leave the area and withdraw to places where they can be protected , but where there are no fish , not forgetting the hundreds of people who are still held hostage on various boats .
I ask you to apply the resolution that Parliament adopted in December for this Operation to protect fishing boats and to extend that protection .
I also call for the strategies to be reconsidered , and for the techniques used by this Operation in the Indian Ocean to be reviewed urgently , along with how it is present there .
Mr President , 58 people lost their lives on Sunday trying to exercise their right to vote in the Iraqi elections , and 140 were seriously injured .
However , violence , intimidation , threats of attack and blackmail did not deter millions of courageous Iraqis from going to the polls .
There have been repeated attempts to manipulate and distort the outcome of the election .
The banning of more than 500 secular non-sectarian candidates by the bogus Accountability and Justice Commission , the repeated bomb attacks on polling day , and the deeply sinister delay in announcing the results , are all disturbing signs of dirty tricks .
The ominous interference of Iran has been a constant feature of this election , and we must today send it this stark warning : do not try to install a puppet prime minister in Iraq , do not try to defraud the Iraqi people of their democratic rights and do not plunge Iraq back into sectarian chaos , because the West is watching you , and you are under the spotlight .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton 's role is described in Article 18 of the Treaty on European Union as contributing to the development of a common foreign and security policy , as mandated by the Council , which , of course , contains the representatives of nation states .
However , the same article states that she must be a Vice-President of the Commission , from which she operates .
Furthermore , I understand that former Commission staff will be given preference over the staff of diplomatic and foreign ministries when staff are appointed to the External Action Service .
Baroness Ashton , it is clear that your role was designed to undermine continually the influence over foreign policy by Member States , not only individually , but also collectively on the Council .
You and your successors will be mandated by the Council only on paper .
The real driving force behind the EU 's foreign policy will be the Commission ; Member States and the Council will be continually marginalised .
( PL ) A coherent and effective policy is the main message of Mr Albertini 's report .
I congratulate him on this report , as I do Mr Danjean .
I would like to point out that there is also the personnel aspect to carrying out this work .
The European External Action Service appears in the report , and despite the fact that this concerns the year 2008 - it is a pity that it is not , already , about 2009 - it is , here , a kind of marker which will be a measure of how , in fact , we carry out the work which now falls to the service headed by Mrs Ashton .
I think the geographical balance we are demanding , as well as roles in this process for the European Parliament and national parliaments , seem to me to be extremely important , here .
Clear recruitment criteria and a role for the European Parliament in developing the service are matters which are going to be the subject of careful evaluation in this Chamber .
We would like to appeal for this process to be clear and plain , so that it will be understandable to us as the representatives of the individual voters who , after all , make up the European Union .
( SL ) I wish to pay my sincere compliments to both rapporteurs , Mr Albertini and Mr Danjean .


I would remind you of a tragic event which took place in Belgrade on 12 March seven years ago .
I am referring to the murder of Zoran Đinđić , former Prime Minister of Serbia .
They killed him in order to stop the normalisation , democratisation and Europeanisation of Serbia .
However , they have not stopped it .
All they did was delay it .
This event has also had a negative impact on the neighbouring countries and the region as a whole .
Mrs Ashton , I would ask you to help and encourage pro-European forces everywhere in our immediate vicinity .
You will need to act in a timely and preventative manner .
You have chosen for yourself a new institution and a new role , which are essentially two roles in two institutions , and you are becoming a double figurehead , as it were .
There is no going back , either for you or for us .
As you can only go forwards , I ask that you justify the confidence we have placed in you .
( DE ) Mr President , comprehensive reports usually require differentiated evaluations , and this is true in this case , too .
Thus , I am in favour of a common foreign and security policy that deals with illegal immigration , visa fraud , criminal tourism and bogus asylum claims .
I am also in favour of a common foreign and security policy that deals with securing the borders of the Schengen area and clearly taking the bit between the teeth in the fight against organised crime .
However , I am critical of , and opposed to , a common foreign and security policy that is designed to give the EU an active role in military issues , where the UN and NATO are already in place .
This duplication should be rejected - and , of course , I speak from the special position of being a representative of a neutral State .
I also reject the lifting of the visa requirement , an ill-considered lifting of the requirement for Balkan States whereby already , after a few months , around 150 000 Macedonians are en route to central Europe , two thirds of whom have already disappeared into illegality .
This is certainly no way to further the security needs of European citizens - it makes no contribution to security and it also , of course , does nothing to increase our citizens ' desire for more Europe .
( SK ) I am concerned that the previous conferences have not produced tangible results in the area of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons .
Such weapons and technologies have been proliferating .
There is a growing risk of nuclear technology falling into the hands of criminal and terrorist organisations .
The Union should act jointly in this area and take a stand on the issue as a world player , to strengthen all three pillars of the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty and to achieve universal application and enforcement of the rules and instruments for non-proliferation .
I consider it necessary to include the issue of nuclear non-proliferation among the European Union 's priorities and to start a constructive dialogue with all the nuclear powers , not just the USA and Russia .
The number of countries which have nuclear weapons is not just the five members of the United Nations Security Council .
The Union should , therefore , in the interests of global security , make a political and diplomatic effort to ensure that countries such as Israel , India , Pakistan and North Korea become signatories to the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I should like first of all to express my thanks for the contributions that have been made and say how much I thought this was an important and valuable debate in terms of our strategic direction .
I want to say at the beginning that I agree completely with all honourable Members who spoke of the value and importance of the scrutiny of this House and the role of this House , not only in terms of that scrutiny , but also in terms of the expertise that I know exists within it .
It is my intention to call upon that expertise and to hope to have as many occasions as possible where we are able to debate and discuss many if not all the important issues that have been raised today .
I will be relatively brief at this point but I will just try to talk about a few of the key areas that I think honourable Members are most concerned about .
I shall begin by saying that I did not say ' no ' to the Barnier report .
What I said was , on the basis of lessons learnt from Haiti and now the support we are offering in Chile , we wanted to look at how much more we could do , how we could operate more effectively , what we should have on standby and whether we should have something on standby .
That requires us to consider strategically what we should be doing , and the Barnier report provides the backdrop to do that .
I am very grateful to Michel for the contribution that he has made on that - it is the backdrop .
On the Non-proliferation Treaty : a number of honourable Members have raised the importance of the conference that is coming up in May , all of which I agree with .
It is very important that we move forward now in terms of what the opportunity of May will afford us .
I also agree that security begins with strong political relations .
We have to consistently view our approach in the wider world as being about developing those strong political relationships in order to promote security , not only for ourselves but also for third states , for states with whom we are seeking to have that relationship or with whom we are in dialogue because of the concerns that we have .
A number of honourable Members quite rightly raised the importance of the Balkans .
I have indicated in my priorities that this is an incredibly important area of work .
It is very important in the period building up to the elections in Bosnia that we promote the importance of the European Union and make sure that national politicians describe to their people the path that they plan to take to get closer ties with Europe and ultimately to become part of Europe .
I agree on the importance of Valentin Inzko and the work he is doing in the Office of the High Representative .
He and I are working together to think about the strategic approach - again for a future that takes us way beyond the elections to where we need to be in the coming months and years in order to retain the security .
I take the point about the importance of stability : not only do we have to have it there , but we need to keep it there .
There is concern in the region that we are seen to be moving forward and , on occasions , I feel we have got a bit stuck in what we need to do next .
We need to take that forward .
That is particularly true , as a number of honourable Members have said , in Kosovo , where I have met the government .
I have had conversations with the government and with the Prime Minister in particular , to look at what we would do with them in the future .
Then there is Serbia , which is pushing very hard to become a part of the European Union .
When I met President Tadić and the government members , it was very clear there , too , that this is something they see as being their future , and they too understand the issues that we are concerned about on that journey .
Concerning the debate on Cuba , I would have been there .
It is simply that we have a clash .
There is the Council of Presidents meeting to discuss the External Action Service and I cannot be in two places at once .
That is what the European Parliament decided in terms of timing .
I must obey and be present at that .
However , I think Cuba is an important issue and I have no doubt that we will return to that subject .
Concerning the separate department for peace-building , my response is that it should be in everything we do and I am always nervous about separating out something , as if somehow it is separate from every bit of work we are doing .
If you look at how we are going to operate the External Action Service , it is like an umbrella organisation that takes in clearly the responsibilities under the treaty but which is also your servant and the Commission 's servant .
So when the Commission is looking to do things on trade , on climate change , on energy security across the world , the External Action Service can be its tool as well , directly linking the work of the Commission to what happens on the ground .
All of that , I would maintain , is about a more secure , more stable world .
So for me , it is all about how we build in the idea that we are there to support efforts to ensure that we have peace and that we keep peace .
On Atalanta : I think the points made there are very positive .
It is a very important mission , but it is a mission that has to be connected to all the other things we are doing in that region .
I also take the point that we need to think about fishing and the strategy on that .
That is very much understood .
Working groups : I think it is a very good idea for Parliament to have them .
I think senior officials are linking with them well at the moment and we need to continue to do that .
On the operational headquarters : it is not that I have changed my position .
What I said in January was that I remain to be convinced .
We have now been looking at this , because , as I have been in the job a little bit longer , I am more engaged in the work that we are doing in terms of our missions abroad , whether in Kosovo , whether in Bosnia or whether in discussing what we are doing in Atalanta or indeed , what we have just been doing in Haiti , and so forth .
In my speech , I said that we need to look at what is necessary and then decide how best to achieve it .
There are different views , but those views , I believe , will converge around a common theme , and that is what we ought to do .
So it is about being convinced one way or the other as to how we do it .
On human rights : I want to describe that as a silver thread .
The projection of our values and human rights is essential to everything that we do in the European Union and in the wider world .
It is about how we make sure that it is a thread that runs all the way through all our actions in terms of support for the work that we are doing across the world to promote the values of the European Union .
I want to look very carefully at how we do that , so it is not something that just becomes an add-on extra to a dialogue .
It becomes an integral part of everything that we do .
I agree as well about the strong relationship transatlantically with the United States .
They are a strong partner with us on a whole range of things , particularly on crisis management , and it is very important that we build on that .
I am also very keen to build on the work that we do with the US in areas of development , for example , particularly in Africa , where there is a potential - I believe , anyway - to do a lot more , certainly in the light of my experience with Aid for Trade as the Trade Commissioner .
We also need to think about other big partnerships .
I have been talking to the Brazilian Foreign Minister about the potential of again working together on development where the economies of scale and the ability to collaborate enable us to release resources in a much more effective way to certain parts of the world which are in real need .
I agree too on the cyber threats .
This is a very important issue .
It is here now .
It is an issue we are going to have to keep looking at because inevitably , the threats change all the time .
Just a little bit on the External Action Service .
The geographical breadth of the European Union has to be represented within the External Action Service .
I agree with that completely , but it will take me time to do it .
One of the things that I have said to all the foreign ministers and I say to Parliament is : please resist the temptation to assume that , because the first four or five appointments I make are not from a Member State that you might know best , it does not mean that I will not make appointments in the future from those Member States .
We simply have to build it stage by stage .
Remember , as honourable Members know , it does not exist at all at the moment .
I do not have a team or a staff for the External Action Service because , until the legal basis is done , we do not have anything .
We simply have what we had before , trying to bring it together in a more coherent way .
I will appoint on merit and nothing else .
There are no favourites here .
It is on merit .
I want the brightest and the best and that is what I have said to Member States and the institutions .
I want the delegations on the ground to be an umbrella , able to support the work of the European Union in all its different elements , as it is represented to third countries , as it works with third countries .
It is essential that it does that as otherwise , we will end up fragmented again .
The question is how to do it , and that is why we are in dialogue with the Council and the Commission at the moment .
If it were very simple , we would have done it by now .
We just have to make sure that we do it properly and effectively .
We will work that out in the next few weeks .
In terms of resources , I am going to argue for flexibility .
I am going to argue that , if you have a crisis in a particular country or if you realise that you need to be able to move resources , we should deal with it , but deal with it within the context of parliamentary scrutiny .
And again , we need to think about how to make that work , not just now but in the future .
We absolutely must avoid duplication ; otherwise we will have gained nothing except more bureaucracy , which is not what we want to do .
We have to make sure that this is a cohesive service that runs well , operating as an entity within the European Union , supporting and being supported by the other institutions .
And , as I have said , we must remember that it does not exist yet .
Let us hope that we can get the work done in the next few weeks .
With Parliament supporting me , I am sure we will , so we can get this into being .
We can lay the foundation stones but it will take time to build it , and that is so important that I hope that every honourable Member will understand .
A couple of final points .
On summits : we have lots of different summits .
The question that we always have to keep in mind is the value and importance of them .
I cannot go to all of them .
There are simply too many .
I will be at some .
We were well represented at the Morocco Summit because both Presidents were there .
I honestly believe that if the Presidents of the Council and the Commission are there , we have to start saying that is a strong EU representation at the summit .
It does not always require me to be there as well , and they would agree with that .
Finally , honourable Members talked about relationships with countries like Japan , with countries important to us in strategic partnership like Russia , the importance and value of the Middle East , where I will be travelling from Sunday onwards , and the importance and value of the Quartet , because I will travel through the Middle East .
I think I visit five countries and then I will end up in Moscow for the Quartet meeting in order to discuss and debate what we do next .
Finally , honourable Members , thank you for noticing I am on the Council side and there is no Commission .
I will change sides .
Until there is a seat in the middle , I will keep moving across .
It will be your responsibility to remember which side I should be on as I come in .

And , finally can I again thank Mr Albertini and Mr Danjean very much for excellent reports which have given me the opportunity to put forward my views today .
( Applause )
I thank my fellow Members , so many of whom have spoken , especially those who approved the key parts of the report , praising and endorsing its content , but also those who expressed criticisms and who , above all , did so in a desire to overcome the regrettably tragic instances where force has been used , and to dream of a peaceful world .
A great Greek philosopher , Plato , said that only the dead will see an end to war .
However , despite our refusal to bow to this philosophy and our attempts to prevent this happening , reality compels us to use force even on peace missions .
I congratulate High Representative / Vice-President Ashton , and thank her for having mentioned my report : one aspect of her approach that I particularly like is its dual nature , the way it seeks synergy between the tasks of the Council and the Commission .
Her very physical location - which will alternate between the benches of the Council , here , and the Commission - exemplifies her wish to wear two hats .
As Parliament , I believe that we must support and promote this synergistic commitment .
The European Commission pursues policies for development , neighbourhood , and for stability and the promotion of human rights and democracy ; the Council undertakes peace missions and missions to implement the rule of law .
This set of themes must find its ultimate expression in the European foreign diplomatic service , which must be efficient , effective , and equipped with the necessary skills and resources to be able to carry out its role as it should , and we will work hard to achieve this .
I also thank the High Representative - and we will discuss this further on 23 April - for agreeing to be present at the hearing of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the subject of the external service , which we will have the chance to discuss in greater depth .
Today marks the beginning of our collaboration , but certainly not the end .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for all the speeches which , once again , have helped to enrich the debate , to enrich this report .
I would like to reassure those who have voiced their doubts and , at times , their suspicions , about the fact that this report might open the door to more competition , with NATO in particular , and even to isolation .
This is by no means the case ; I absolutely do not believe that , and I would add that this does not appear in the treaty , quite the opposite .
You can believe a French MEP who has fought tirelessly to have his country reinstated within the integrated structures of NATO .
When we talk about strategic autonomy , what idea are we developing , what policy have we been developing , for 10 years ?
The answer is the ability of the European Union to intervene via civil and military missions in areas in which other organisations , including NATO , cannot .
NATO could not have intervened to put a stop to the conflict in Georgia , where there is no UN or OSCE presence .
NATO intervened no earlier than we did in the Horn of Africa to put a stop to events threatening our security interests .
Strategic autonomy also means the ability to intervene with a range of instruments that we alone possess : civil and military instruments , legal instruments , financial instruments , development instruments .
The European Union is best placed to develop this global approach in crisis areas .
Our strategic autonomy also refers to our ability , where necessary , not to intervene , either in unilateral military campaigns , or - and this has been pointed out by several Austrian Members - because there are neutral countries among us and because we respect their status .
This is what is meant by European defence and security .
This is what is meant by the strategic autonomy that we are developing by means of this policy .
Never forget the origins of this European Security and Defence Policy .
It originates in a tragic , bloody failure : that of the Balkans in the 1990s , where the European Union was incapable of coping with a major security challenge on its own continent .
Let us not forget that .
Our European citizens have not forgotten it , and they would not forgive us if we abandoned the ambition to see Europe play a role on the international stage .
( Applause )
That concludes this item .
The debate is closed .
I have received six motions for resolutionstabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure to wind up the debate .
The vote will take place today .
I would first of all like to congratulate Mr Albertini for drafting this report .
I am pleased that the amendments which I suggested have been adopted .
Last week , the European Commission announced funding for 43 major energy projects , including four involving Romania .
In the future , the Commission must give due importance to the pan-European Constanţa-Trieste oil pipeline , as well as to the development of relations with the countries in the Eastern Partnership .
Efforts must also be stepped up in implementing projects as part of the Black Sea Synergy in order to ensure more effective cooperation in this area .
The Republic of Moldova can play an important role in both the Eastern Partnership and Black Sea Synergy .
The European Union must focus particular attention on relations with this country and support it on its journey to EU accession .
The EU must have greater involvement in settling unresolved conflicts in the Black Sea region , including the conflict in Transnistria .
The development of the transatlantic partnership must be a priority in the European Union 's foreign and security policy .
Relations with the United States are extremely important in helping consolidate global security and stability .
Installation of part of the US anti-missile system on Romanian territory is proof of the confidence placed in my country .
It is regrettable that the process of multilateral disarmament has been interrupted and that there has been no political will to resume it for several years .
For this reason , the coming 2010 review conference between the parties to the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty is of particular importance .
As the motion for a resolution which we have signed states , we are deeply worried by the danger presented by a new nuclear arms race .
Therefore , the immediate cessation of the development , production and storage of nuclear arms is necessary .
It is necessary for the US to put an end to the development of new generations of tactical nuclear weapons and , moving in quite the opposite direction , to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty .
We are also arguing for a peaceful solution to the dispute over Iran 's nuclear programmes and calling for the recommencement of negotiations , reiterating our opposition to any military action or threat of the use of force .
As well , we warn that any military action could lead to an even deeper crisis in the region .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty review conference will be held in April-May 2010 .
It is important that the Member States of the European Union present a unified standpoint at that meeting and that they reaffirm all three pillars of the Treaty : non-proliferation of nuclear weapons , disarmament and cooperation on the civilian uses of nuclear energy .
Member States must express their commitment to eliminating trade in nuclear weapons , progressively reducing the existing nuclear weapons stockpile and strictly monitoring the manufacture of materials needed for the production of nuclear weapons and the possession of products required for their production .
Member States must take a leading role in applying United Nations Security Council Resolution 1887 , adopted in autumn 2009 ( on 24 September ) .
Within the meaning of this resolution , Member States must place great emphasis on developing a comprehensive international agreement regulating the elimination of nuclear weapons under strict international supervision .
In addition , they need to strive to introduce two concrete measures in the aforementioned areas , in order to set an example for the rest of the world .
The EU Member States must promote the comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and the renewal of the START Agreement between the United States and Russia .
The EU must treat endeavours relating to nuclear fuel as a priority area and focus on harmonising , tightening and rendering transparent the regulations concerning their storage , transport and trade .
Ladies and gentlemen , I must say that I suspect the annual report on the Common Foreign and Security Policy for 2008 will not arouse such emotion as will our debate on the subject next year .
For I hope that in a year 's time , we will know what the European External Action Service looks like , and this new service is , in turn , going to have a huge influence on the development of European foreign policy .
The European Union has ambitions of being a global player .
This is good , but those ambitions are not going to be easy to achieve .
We have some hard work ahead of us .
The European institutions must come to an understanding on the EEAS .
This will not be easy , but without it we will not be able to improve foreign policy .
We should go back to the fundamental values of the European Union , and use them as a basis on which to build our foreign policy .
We must always remember about solidarity , equality , uniform standards and human and civil rights .
We must remember to maintain internal balance , and that we should defend those interests of all EU Member States which are not mutually exclusive .
A key matter is , definitely , the need to improve coordination between Community institutions and Member States .
Particular national interests should not conflict with our coherence or our community .
Paradoxically , even those countries which want to be seen as a driving force for European integration sometimes act against the collective interests of the Union .
Let us change this .
Mr President , some previous speakers have pointed out problems relating to the composition of the European External Action Service , which has begun work following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I consider it extremely important to adhere to the principle of geographic equality in making up the EEAS and , as with other European Union bodies , to implement positive discrimination in relation to representatives from the new Member States , which is reflected in the transition period and which makes it possible to speed up career development .
Representatives from the new Member States lack the necessary decades-long work experience in the institutions of the European Union , which is a prerequisite for filling the highest offices .
It would be unfair if all the most important positions were filled by officials from the old Member States , and if officials from the new Member States had to stand on the sidelines for many years .
This would obviously be a waste of resources because , for example , the representative from Malta might have much more know-how with respect to the countries of North Africa , Cyprus with respect to the Middle East , Bulgaria with respect to Turkey , Poland with respect to Belarus and Ukraine , the Baltic States with respect to Russia , and so on .
I hope that the European Union will not make the mistake of only allowing the old Member States to make up the face of the EEAS , and I hope that instead , it finds an optimal solution which satisfies all the Member States .
The situation in the world is creating new challenges for EU foreign policy and requires a broader understanding of security problems .
New powers have arisen and are becoming actively involved in global policy in various areas .
Therefore , what is needed is dialogue at world level and the establishment of new principles for cooperation and for the division of roles .
We must supplement the enormous role in world security played by NATO and the USA by establishing special mobile forces , as part of the EU , which will be able to tackle all kinds of natural disasters and catastrophes .
The Union will not only be perceived as an institution which fights for democracy and human rights , but also as an institution which comes to people 's aid in times of difficulty .
The danger from other threats is clearly growing , and so energy and food security are becoming important .
I think it is necessary to develop a new conception regarding the functioning of the EU 's external service in which the areas of the Community 's operation and the principles of establishing the service are defined , as well as principles for the division of roles and for cooperation with Member States ' diplomatic services , to make clear what roles are played by individual EU institutions .
Failure to elaborate the division of roles and competences at the outset could be the cause of misunderstandings between different institutions and leaders in the Union , as well as between the EU and Member States .
Initial experiences with the function of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security , and the general expectation that she should be active and present in different places , demand that we think about appointing deputies , or involving other Commissioners in areas of her work to a greater degree , since we have so many of them .
I welcome the Albertini report outlining the main aspects of the Common Security and Foreign Policy , especially the paragraphs concerning the development of the Eastern Partnership and European policy in the Black Sea region .
The Eastern Partnership and the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly provide a suitable framework for bringing the EU 's eastern neighbours closer to European standards , as well as for clarifying certain states ' prospects for joining the EU , such as the Republic of Moldova .
I wish to emphasise , in particular , the importance of the rapid , specific assistance which should be given to the Republic of Moldova 's pro-European government .
In this regard , two European measures need to be speeded up : the process for granting EU macro-financial assistance and the visa waiver for journeys made to the EU by citizens from the Republic of Moldova .
In the Black Sea region , it is vital to continue the European objective of guaranteeing the EU 's energy security .
I support paragraph 21 of the report which calls on the EU to implement the Nabucco project fully and as quickly as possible .
Another issue during this debate , which is just as important , is a suitable assessment of the development of the US anti-missile defence project and its importance to European security .
Romania 's involvement in this project shows that Romania has become a net European supplier of security and has the full capacity to honour its security commitments to allies .
I would like to make several remarks on the European Security Strategy and the Common Security and Defence Policy .
In the European Parliament 's motion for a resolution , the main threats and challenges which Europe faces have been correctly defined .
The problem is that we are not able to respond to them sufficiently , at least not always quickly enough .
There are three main weaknesses , and if we could overcome them , we would radically improve the effectiveness of the Common Security and Defence Policy .
The first weakness is a lack of determination of all the EU Member States to have a common policy and not just a verbal declaration of its necessity .
Secondly - weak coordination of the work of numerous European institutions .
There is still no reaction centre at Union level for critical situations .
Thirdly , and finally , the military and civil potential which is really at the Union 's disposal , and not just at the disposal of individual Member States , is too small .
Problems with air transport , for example , are now proverbial , and this is of fundamental significance for a rapid reaction in crisis situations .
Only progress in these three areas would make the Common Security and Defence Policy more effective .
1 .
Annual accounts of certain types of companies as regards micro-entities (
Mr President , I would just like the House to recognise the presence in the gallery of Noam Shalit , the father of Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit , a dual Israeli-EU citizen cruelly held in detention for more than three years incommunicado by Hamas in Gaza .
We in this House all hope that Noam 's campaign for his son will be successful and that he will be released shortly .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Tannock .
2 .
EU 2020 - Follow-up of the informal European Council of 11 February 2010 (
3 .
Implementation of Goldstone recommendations on Israel / Palestine (
4 .
Situation of civil society and national minorities in Belarus (
5 .
Taxation of financial transactions ( vote )
6 .
Single Euro Payments Area ( vote )
7 .
Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) ( vote )
Mr President , I shall read out the oral amendment : ' calls on the Commission to continue the negotiations on ACTA and limit them to the existing European intellectual property rights enforcement system against counterfeiting ' .
8 .
Regulation applying a scheme of generalised tariff preferences ( vote )
Mr President , I should like to table an oral amendment to this amendment , deleting two parts of the amendment , namely the words ' by the Colombian army ' and ' on Colombia ' .
Therefore , the amendment reads as follows : ' considers that the alarming news concerning the killings of trade unionists in Colombia , as well as the news recently received and now confirmed by Colombia 's public prosecutor that mass graves containing the bodies of hundreds of people killed in recent years have been discovered in the region of La Macarena , are sufficient evidence to enable the Commission to open an investigation in accordance with the regulation . '
9 .
2008 annual report on the CFSP (
Mr President , this report deals with the common foreign and security policy in 2008 .
However , it does not mention what happened on 10 March 2008 when Tibetans raised a peaceful protest against the repression of their culture and religion .
Today , we have a guest from Tibet , Mrs Namdrol Lhamo , a nun who was confined to Drapchi Prison for 12 years because she had taken part in a peaceful demonstration and then recorded songs in prison .
We should pay tribute to her and to the other courageous Tibetans living under the occupation .
I met with the Dalai Lama quite recently , and we came to the conclusion that there is an urgent need for an independent international investigation into what happened in that uprising in Lhasa on and around 10 March 2008 , because for as long as there is no such investigation , China will keep accusing the Tibetan Government in exile , and the Dalai Lama , of instigating that uprising and its violent aftermath .
According to the Tibetan administration in exile , at least 220 Tibetans died , many as a result of indiscriminate firing by the police , ill-treatment or torture in prisons .
Many more are missing .
( Sustained applause )
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , we have an amendment here .
Normally , our group would vote against but , in order to let us vote in favour , we would like to delete the words : ' that entails an end to the Israeli blockade ' .
This is because the Israeli blockade is too complex an issue , and I believe there is no clear link between the preceding lines and these words .
If we can delete these words , I think we could be comfortable with the rest of the amendment , and we could vote in favour .
It is a small change , but it would allow us to vote in favour .
10 .
The implementation of the European Security Strategy and the Common Security and Defence Policy (
Mr President , I would like to propose a vote on an amendment to this motion , which I will now read out .
' Calls on the High Representative / Vice-President of the Commission , the Council and the Member States to overcome the imbalance between civilian and military planning capabilities ' , and delete the rest , because the rest has already been included in the text .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , colleagues have introduced an amendment which we could agree with if we combine it with the original amendment .
I understand the colleagues and we share the view that our strategic decision should not depend on Russia , but , on the other hand , Russia is an important partner .
If the colleagues could agree that we take their amendment and say ' including Russia ' - Russia is one of the members of the continental dialogue - we could agree and we could vote for this amendment .
11 .
Non-proliferation Treaty ( vote )
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )


Mr President , on a point of order , I think you would find that if you took the first vote at 12.00 , people would then sit down and participate , rather than waiting for them to sit down and participate and then taking the vote .
( Applause )
I am very considerate .
( IT ) Mr President , I apologise for this intervention but as an MEP elected in Italy , I consider it my duty to offer , from this Chamber , a respectful and deferential greeting to my country 's President , Giorgio Napolitano , custodian of Italy 's constitutional values and national unity .
In this Chamber , the Italian President should only ever be referred to with respect and deference .
( Applause )
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( LT ) Mr President , I would like to announce that I support this decision , although my card was not working to begin with and that is why I want to announce this .
Now to the matter in hand .
Ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on a change to the annual accounting responsibilities of micro-entities .
This project caused stormy debate at almost all levels , both in European Union and Member State institutions .
I am convinced that we must prepare common European Union rules .
However , I would like to underline that by reducing the administrative burden on micro-entities , we must not infringe conditions for fair competition in either the internal markets of Member States or the European Union market .
I think that a single tax should be created for micro-entities , which already exists in some states .
If it could be calculated , it could be calculated either on the basis of the number of employees or turnover or territory , depending on the type of business .
As a result , those companies would no longer be tempted to engage in illegal activities .
( DE ) Mr President , with the option of relieving micro-enterprises of the obligation to produce annual balance sheets , the European Parliament is clearly coming out in favour of the abolition of superfluous bureaucracy .
With an EU-wide relief of approximately EUR 6.3 billion , we are also providing a tangible stimulus towards growth in Europe 's small and medium-sized enterprise sector .
Since the Member States are able to decide individually about this exemption from the obligation to produce annual balance sheets , I expect that as many countries as possible , especially Germany , will make use of this option .
This arrangement will not only enable the enterprises in question to save time and costs amounting to around EUR 2 000 per company ; it is also a very good example of how Europe is more citizen-friendly than many people believe it to be .
It would be nice if this example in this Chamber could be followed by many further examples .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I did not back the Lehne resolution .
I regret this , because it concerned micro-enterprises , which are the backbone of the economy , but above all , I believe that the resolution , as it stood , created competitive differences between enterprises of the various States , and this is not what we want , especially in this time of crisis .
Keeping accounts is actually effective and necessary , for the very reason that it allows enterprises to compete on the market and also obtain bank credit , because the quality of management is measured on the basis of accounts for enterprises and micro-enterprises alike .
I believe that we should work instead to help micro-enterprises obtain incentives to cut taxes , enabling young entrepreneurs and family businesses to be truly competitive on the market , and ultimately allowing them to obtain credit from institution , which , until now , have been chiefly concerned with large enterprises as far as I can see .
Mr President , I am very happy to support the Lehne report , which will help to reduce the administrative burden on micro-enterprises .
One of the things that comes up again and again when you speak with small businesses is the issue of over-regulation and red tape and of being smothered under a deluge of paperwork .
They do have a sound argument when they say that it is reasonable , as micro-enterprises , that they should not be subject to the same rules and regulations as bigger business .
The decision we took today is a sensible one and a well-founded response to the concerns of struggling small businesses in Europe .
Most of the time , we are proposing new legislation in this House , but today we modified a piece of legislation .
This will lead to a better business environment and increased competitiveness for small businesses and was well worth doing .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Lehne for his report .
The European Union looks closely at the world of business - as today has demonstrated - and , in particular , my group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has always included the backing of small and medium-sized enterprises among its own priorities .
For these reasons , I think that the action we have undertaken , aimed at reducing bureaucracy and reducing costs for micro-enterprises , is very timely .
This measure represents a tangible helping hand for small enterprises at this difficult time .
Finally , I agree with the flexibility of the measure , which offers Member States the chance to adopt the directive at the most opportune time .
The purpose of this is to avoid any kind of illegality which might arise from a sudden and excessive reduction of controls .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the vote we have taken is remarkable in two respects .
Firstly , because the three large groups decided to produce a joint resolution , which they submitted six minutes before the deadline , thus preventing the other groups from tabling any amendments to it .
This closed attitude is unworthy of this House .
Secondly , if only a text had been produced that made sense !
At a time when the Commission , with the same political families , is capable of coming here with five objectives , with six policies to support these objectives , this House comes up with a resolution that says absolutely nothing at all , with the support of the three large political families .
I believe that the resolution does much to ridicule this House which , in such an important debate as Europe 2020 , is capable of doing nothing other than stating the obvious .
( RO ) As is well known , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe was among the first to call for a more specific approach to the economic growth strategy .
This is exactly why I would like to welcome the amendments which the EU 2020 strategy is introducing from this perspective .
However , I feel that progress on certain aspects has not gone far enough .
Therefore , I would like to draw attention to the fact that the 2020 strategy does not make it very clear what the relationship will be between the Cohesion Policy and this strategy .
I think , Mr President , that the Cohesion Policy , as a financial instrument principally for regional development , must remain targeted at regions .
In addition , the Commission 's proposal assigns the Council and Member States the main task of implementing and managing the policies arising from this strategy , while overlooking , however , the important role played by local authorities in achieving concrete results at regional and local level .
I believe that the strategy 's success will mainly depend on the way in which it is implemented at national , local and regional level .
( RO ) A declaration was adopted by the Heads of State or Government during the informal meeting of the European Council held on 11 February to support Greece 's efforts to remedy its economic and financial situation .
In addition , the topic of what the European Union will stand for in 2020 , following on from the Lisbon Strategy , was also discussed .
I believe that this vote is a vote for solidarity because , looking ahead to EU 2020 , the established priorities must be pursued in a much more rigorous way , which allows , however , the specific features of each region to be utilised and the problems that each of them are facing to be resolved .
Economic competitiveness must continue to grow in order to create new jobs , while investments are needed in various areas , including education and research .
I firmly believe that the problems specific to each region and each European Union Member State will be analysed and dealt with appropriately , based on the principle of solidarity , so that we can meet the targets which we are going to set for 2020 .
Investment in education must be backed up by the existence of an infrastructure which supports the practical application of knowledge , social cohesion and the global growth of Europe 's economic competitiveness .
( EL ) Mr President , it is clear from the Council conclusions and from the debate which followed in Parliament in Brussels and from the stand subsequently taken by the competent Commissioner and the heads of several Member States that , in times of crisis and when certain Member States are facing serious economic problems , we need , among other things , and within the framework of existing monetary union , European solidarity and new policies to address speculative attacks against certain Member States .
As such , the stands being taken at this time in connection with the creation of European institutions and structures to address such problems , such as , for example , a European monetary fund , are very important .
We expect a great deal of the Council in days to come and look forward to effective action to address the problems in this critical period .
( LT ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to talk about the EU 2020 strategy .
In principle , we support any initiative that improves the situation in the European Union , but this does not mean that there is no room for criticism and improvement .
In my opinion , this can also be said of the European Union 's 2020 strategy .
Whether we want it or not , we must erase boundaries a little between the economic rules of national states .
Of course , in this case , I am by no means talking about such areas as culture , tradition or national heritage .
Nevertheless , we must underline that , in economic terms , the European Union market is a common market .
Otherwise , it would be the same as if one state had started to apply different conditions to different regions .
Therefore , no matter how much large and small EU Member States might resist it , an end date for common economic conditions must be implemented in the European Union .
I also welcome the attention to the development of the hi-tech , knowledge economy and science .
However , we must recognise that each European Union ...
I am sorry but I think we have heard enough .
Thank you so much , Mr Uspaskich .
I have cut you off .
( PL ) The European Union undoubtedly needs a new strategy which will help and allow us to construct our response to the economic and financial crisis .
An important element of the strategy should be a strengthening of the free movement of people , and that of all groups : workers , business people , scientists , students and even pensioners , and that is contained in our resolution .
Another good feature is the greater emphasis on support for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Without the development of such firms , an improvement of the situation in the Union will not be possible .
Some people think the strategy says too little about cohesion policy .
I do not know if this is so , because , actually , there is a part about the fundamental significance of cohesion policy for the future of the Union .
However , I know that if this is not put into effect , no strategy will improve the situation .
( IT ) Mr President , the time has come for us to come of age politically .
The crisis has shown that greater coordination and guidance is required from important and authoritative Community agencies , more resources are required for infrastructure projects and more focus on providing genuine support for small and medium-sized enterprises .
We need to organise a major effort to fully implement the internal market , and we urgently need to attempt a common fiscal policy .
In the past , many turned a blind eye to the rubbish that the American banks dumped on the global market , falling back on pointless formalities , even within the Union .
It is time for responsibility and courage .
The resolution that my group and I voted for contains some of these things , but I think that President Barroso , the Council and Parliament should be more courageous .
( PL ) The new EU strategy is , in fact , the younger brother of the Lisbon Strategy .
If it follows its elder brother 's example , it will not pass its exams or qualify for anything .
At the same time as the leaders of the European Union were talking about the necessity of adopting the Lisbon Strategy , the Member States were , in fact , restricting the free movement of workers , and also of services .
The new strategy is , of course , a little better than the version of a few months ago , where nothing at all was said about cohesion .
At the moment , however , it is more like a wish list .
We are going to verify the strategy in the European Union 's seven-year budget from 2014 .
I hope it will be a strategy which will not contribute to domination of the new European Union by the countries of the old Union .
( HU ) I voted against the EU 2020 strategy .
I voted against it because it clearly professes faith in neoliberal economic policy .
It clearly states that it condemns protectionist economic policy , in other words , the State playing a role in the economy .
Yet the financial and economic world crisis has shown that we cannot leave everything up to the markets .
Moreover , its imperial conception is clearly evident .
It stipulates that rules will enter into force automatically if Member States do not transpose them in time .
It seeks to set up a European supervisory authority and , in certain places , it is also clear that it seeks to use binding legal acts to achieve results rather than allowing for autonomous decisions .
This is why we voted against .
( ES ) Mr President , as a member of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I would like to say that I , of course , voted in favour of the EU 2020 strategy , because I felt it was important for Parliament to give its opinion .
I do , however , have a reservation , which I would like to explain to the House , which is that the wording of paragraph 18 raises doubts about something that is false .
That is , something that is not true .
It says that the Court of Auditors has criticised the Commission and the Member States when , in fact , the opposite is true .
This is because the management of 80 % of the Union 's budget has not been criticised ; instead , this year , for the first time in 11 years , the Court of Auditors congratulated us and gave us a positive statement of assurance for the slightly more than 33 % of the budget managed by the Member States , which is agricultural spending , and because the monitoring system has been improved and now works better .
I therefore think that the wording of paragraph 18 will create a misunderstanding in the public mind that 80 % of the budget is poorly managed and that we have been criticised for it .
I would like to clarify this for you , ladies and gentlemen , and for the benefit of the European public .
( RO ) I voted against the Goldstone report even though , initially , this report seemed to be a well-intentioned initiative to analyse closely the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and identify the best solutions for remedying the situation in the region .
However , I would have liked this report to be more objective , in keeping with the provisions of international and humanitarian law .
In fact , I was very unpleasantly surprised to note that in this report , the Israeli Government is measured by the same yardstick as used for Hamas , which is , as we know , an organisation featuring on the European Union 's list of terrorist organisations .
Therefore , I do not believe that this report will help in any way to ease the Israeli-Palestinian conflict , along with the tensions and general situation in the region .
This is the reason why I voted against the report .
( HU ) The authors of the report drawn up by Justice Richard Goldstone 's team are , in my opinion , internationally recognised experts whose insight and objectivity we have no reason to doubt .
The report is non-partisan and balanced and therefore , we must create the conditions necessary for implementing its recommendations .
I voted in favour of the report , although I do not agree with it on every point , but it is a good thing that we have taken the position adopted in Parliament today .
Hopefully , it will help limit the excesses of the opposing parties and will , in the long run , contribute to achieving the much desired and lasting peace in the Middle East .
( HU ) In December 2008 , Israel launched a brutal attack on the Gaza Strip , as a result of which more than 1400 people died , for the most part civilians , including 450 children .
Using objective methods and a wide-ranging gathering of testimonies , the Goldstone report exposed these atrocities and itemised which rules of international law Israel contravened by this brutal action .
Naturally , the delegation to the European Parliament of the Jobbik Movement for a Better Hungary voted in support of the European Parliament 's resolution on the acceptance and implementation of the Goldstone recommendations and , at the same time , we apologise to the Palestinian victims because the Hungarian Government , shamefully and in diametrical opposition to Hungarian popular opinion , continually adopts a position contrary to the Goldstone report in international fora .
( NL ) Mr President , the Goldstone report is too one-sided .
Too many things have been laid at the door of Israel , and yet it was Hamas that was misusing civilian targets and civilians as shelters , arms depots and human shields .
Unfortunately , Goldstone makes no mention of that whatsoever .
Presumably , this one-sidedness is due to the fact that countries such as Saudi Arabia , Libya and Pakistan presided over the preparation of this report by the competent committee of the United Nations .
These countries are not exactly world-famous for their brilliant track record on democracy and freedom of expression .
If you have truck with countries of this sort , then what they do is infect you .
Unfortunately , that is what swayed Goldstone as well and , for this reason , I voted against the joint EP resolution .
As a matter of fact , the resolution is just as one-sided as the Goldstone report itself .
( FI ) Mr President , I voted against the Goldstone report .
I think it is a disgrace that the European Parliament adopted this report , albeit by a narrow majority , because this was a very biased move , and it has to be said that there was a considerable amount of internal disagreement in this House .
I would like to comment on one point .
More than 600 Members of the European Parliament quite rightly voted in favour of considering Hamas a terrorist organisation .
Despite the fact that we almost unanimously agreed that Hamas is a terrorist organisation , we , or at least the majority , in this House , voted in favour of this report and appeared to approve of the measures contained in it , and of all the 8 000 rockets which Hamas has fired at Israeli civilian centres .
I believe that Israel is under threat , and that is why the country had to defend its civilian population .
Given this , it really is a sorry state of affairs that this very biased report went through , albeit by a tiny majority .
I hope that such a serious blot on our record will not reoccur , but that as Europeans , we will really fight hard for democracy , human rights and freedom of opinion and do more to bring democracy to the Middle East .
( PL ) Justice Goldstone certainly cannot be considered a paragon of objectivity .
I voted against this report , because I have the impression that the report attempts to present the situation in the Middle East in black and white , showing Israel as the ' Schwarz ' character - the villain .
Actually , the situation is much more complicated .
It seems to me that we should avoid such one-sided , unequivocal judgments .
I , personally , have been to a place called Sderot - and I think you have been there , too , Mr President - which has been the target of several hundred missiles fired by Hamas fighters , as Mr Takkula said recently .
I think , therefore , that this report is not something which the European Parliament should specially boast about in the future .
Mr President , we have heard a great deal about proportionality in this debate , and I wonder what opponents of Israel would consider to be proportionate .
I wonder whether they would have preferred it if the Jewish state had simply taken an equivalent amount of ordnance and rained it randomly on Gaza .
Would that have been a proportionate response ?
I would like also to examine the proportionality , or lack of proportionality , in this report .
One has the eerie feeling , reading the Goldstone report , that one is reading about a violent assault in which the author has neglected to mention that the events took place during a boxing match .
They have been stripped of all context .
I am not saying that Israel should be beyond criticism , nor am I saying that Cast Lead is beyond criticism .
Mistakes were made .
Israel wants to get to a position where there is a stable Palestinian entity to be a good neighbour , but this policy of degrading infrastructure has retarded that goal .
Equally , the partiality and tone of this report have pushed further away the idea of a two-state solution in which an Israeli entity and a Palestinian one live side by side as peaceable neighbours .
( DE ) Mr President , the German Free Democratic Party ( FDP ) delegation in the European Parliament today voted against the resolution from several groups to implement the recommendations of the Goldstone report .
You cannot vote in favour of a report for which the very mandate was highly controversial - not one single Member State of the European Union had given its backing .
A report that equates democratic Israel with a group officially listed by the EU as a terrorist organisation and a report that fails to give reasonable consideration to the deeper causes of the conflict is not one that we can vote in favour of .
Our voting choice does not mean , however , that we would reject an investigation into the events connected with Operation Cast Lead .
The opposite is the case , in fact .
Israel should indeed thoroughly investigate all aspects of the operation , and if violations of the law did take place , they must be punished .
Our voting choice likewise does not mean that we would endorse the policy of the government of the State of Israel in the peace process .
We have been very pleased to see signs that talks are again taking place between Israel and the Palestinians , albeit indirectly for the time being .
US Vice-President Biden 's visit also shows that the Obama administration is serious in its efforts to achieve a lasting peace in the region .
It has our support in those efforts .
That makes it even harder to understand Israel 's snubbing of the Vice-President , with the building of further settlements in the West Bank being approved while his visit was still going on - a measure that drew thoroughly just criticism , and not only from the Palestinians .
( SK ) I am convinced that the European Union has to send a clear signal to Belarus that it is prepared to reconsider mutual relations if Belarus does not refrain from violating human rights and democratic principles and does not take corrective action .
At the same time , I would like to express outrage over the decree from the President of Belarus regarding control of the Internet which , in many points , is a clear denial of freedom of speech and of the press .
Such legal action curtails freedom and democracy in Belarus and deepens the distrust of citizens and other countries , including the European Union , in its state authorities and their representatives .
In the context of the recent arrests of civil society and democratic opposition representatives , it is impossible not to see the short time period between when the decree enters into force in July of this year and the upcoming presidential elections at the beginning of next year .
( PL ) I would like to thank fellow Members for drawing up this resolution and for its adoption by the European Parliament .
By endorsing this resolution , we have expressed support for the defence of the fundamental rights and freedoms of citizens , including national minorities .
It is , at the same time , an initiative to defend the fundamental principles of democracy and tolerance , which are the foundation of Europe .
I am pleased by the official position of Parliament on this matter , which supports the Polish minority in Belarus .
I would like to take this opportunity to point out that Member States of the European Union should set an example to other countries and to our neighbours , and should take care that the rights of national minorities in our Member States are fully respected .
( PL ) I voted in favour of adopting the Belarus resolution .
In the resolution , we demand legalisation of the Association of Poles in Belarus , which is led by Angelika Borys , and we express our solidarity with all the citizens of Belarus , who cannot take full advantage of civil rights .
Yesterday , I received a letter from the Belarusian Ambassador to Poland .
He expresses concern in connection with the intentions of Members of the European Parliament who wanted the resolution to be adopted .
In his opinion , those intentions arose as a result of unobjective coverage of the situation in Polish media .
This is not true .
The intentions which are behind the resolution are much more profound .
It is about respecting the fundamental rights of citizens , respecting the rights of minorities and ensuring minimum standards and , as a consequence , it is about the good of Belarus and the good of Belarusians .
Mr President , I supported the resolution on the situation of civil society and national minorities in Belarus and today I would like to express once again my great concern at the recent human rights violations in Belarus against members of civil society and against members of the national minorities and their organisations .
I would like to declare my full solidarity with citizens unable to enjoy their full civil rights .
I would also like to strongly condemn the arrest of Angelika Borys , the chairperson of the Union of Poles in Belarus , and also Anatoly Lebedko , the leader of the opposition United Civil Party and the leader of the United Democratic Forces in Belarus , who has been the guest of this House on several occasions .
Regrettably , the people of Belarus are not able to benefit from many projects and proposals the European Union is financing as part of our eastern neighbourhood policy .
( FI ) Mr President , as regards the situation in Belarus , I regard it as very important that , as Europeans , we remember what our values are .
I want to bring this to your attention because of the recent regrettable outcome of the vote on the Goldstone report and because in all matters , be they in connection with Belarus , the Middle East , the Far East or Africa , we need to remember the fundamental principles that guide us .
They are democracy , human rights and freedom of opinion .
This is the right of the entire European Union : the values that unite us and which endeavour to promote these goals .
We have to bring this message home in Belarus .
We need to ensure that the rights of minorities are taken into account there , and also that religious minorities , who have suffered persecution there in various ways , are recognised , along with their human rights and their freedom to practise a religion .
It is very important that we , as Europeans , ensure that we also take the European message to Belarus , thereby offering a prospect of hope there .
Mr President , although I support much of the wording of this resolution , I wonder whether we are best placed to lecture Belarus about the inadequacies of its democracy .
We complain that Belarus has a weak rubber-stamp parliament , but look around you .
Here we are meekly rubber-stamping the decisions of our 27-member politburo .
We complain about the fact that , although they have elections , they rig them ; we , on the other hand , have referendums , hold them honestly but then disregard the result .
We complain about the survival of the apparatus of the Soviet Union there and yet we maintain our common agricultural policy , our social chapter , our 48-hour week and the rest of the apparatus of euro-corporatism .
It is a small wonder that the old systemic communist parties of the COMECON states were leading the ' yes ' campaigns when their countries applied to join the Evropeyskiy soyuz .
For some of them , in fact , it felt like coming home ; I am reminded of the eerie closing pages of Animal Farm , where the animals look from man to pig and from pig to man and already find that they cannot tell which is which .
( FR ) Mr President , aside from questioning the actual content of this resolution , I would also like to question its principle .
French , Flemish , Hungarian , German and Austrian patriots are the subject of constant legal , professional and political persecution , and this amid the indifference , indeed with the support , of this House , which claims to set an example to practically the whole world and especially to those beyond its borders .
For example , last week we adopted a resolution on Ukraine , which included a provision that many Ukrainian patriots rightly find insulting to their national hero , Stepan Bandera .
Admittedly , he endeavoured , under extraordinarily difficult circumstances , to tread a path between two forms of totalitarianism : that of Hitler and that of the Soviets .
This does not make him any less of a hero for many Ukrainians , who rightly feel humiliated by the majority of this House .
It is the case that national heroes have generally fought against their neighbours .
Does my friend , Nick Griffin , a true British patriot , take offence at the fact that , for us , Joan of Arc is a national heroine ?
Certainly not !
Personally , I would like our Parliament to express the same reservations about the heroes of other foreign countries .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the ECR recognises that the financial services industry cannot expect to escape from the crisis scot free .
Enormous damage has been done through reckless behaviour , and the cost of sorting out the mess must be borne by those involved .
Furthermore , new systems must be put in place to ensure that this never happens again , and that funds are available for emergency purposes to stabilise systemic failures .
It is possible that in the context of international agreement , the time has come for some financial transaction tax .
Whatever the doubts about the practicalities of putting such a system into place , no measure should be ruled out as long as it has the backing of the whole international community and as long as safeguards are there to ensure that it works and cannot be avoided .
Most of today 's resolution has our backing , but we take exception to paragraph 7 for two reasons .
First of all , we oppose new tax-raising powers for the European Union .
This paragraph - carefully worded though it may be - suggests that this is a desired outcome .
Secondly , the whole point of a financial transaction tax should not be to raise money for pet projects , no matter how worthy .
Instead , it must be to ensure future financial stability and to protect against the kind of events that have caused the recent economic chaos .
This resolution , as it stands , is too focused on a transaction-tax solution , implies EU , not Member State , tax-raising powers , suggests utilising the money raised for funding development and climate-change projects instead of stabilising the financial sector and , finally , suggests that an EU tax might be feasible without global participation .
For these reasons , we have voted against this specific motion for a resolution .
Mr President , I abstained on the financial transaction taxes resolution because it is hopelessly inadequate for tackling the obscene antisocial speculation around the world by giant hedge funds and so-called ' prestigious ' banks like Goldman Sachs .

The Wall Street Journal recently reported on a private dinner in New York on 8 February , involving 18 major hedge funds , where speculation against the euro was discussed .
For months now , these financial sharks , known as hedge funds , which control over EUR 2 000 billion , have been deliberately speculating against the euro , and against Greece in particular , in order to reap billions in private profit .
Incredibly , the EU Commission not only fails to raise a finger to stop them , but actually conspires with these financial criminals by bullying the workers and poor of Greece , demanding that their living standards be savaged to pay the ransom demanded by these parasites .
We do not need a financial tax .
What we need is to take public ownership and democratic control of these hedge funds and major banks in order to use their massive resources for investment that will end poverty and benefit society , rather than destroying society for private greed .
( IT ) Mr President , we abstained , but my main aim was to take a stance against the clear intention of the European Union and the Commission to introduce a tax , as demonstrated by Commissioner Šemeta 's recent statements to European Voice about the supposed imminent introduction of a minimum tax on emissions .
We are against the idea of granting the European Union the power to levy direct taxes , an unconstitutional prerogative in almost all Member States , because it violates the principle of no taxation without representation .
We will oppose in every possible way any attempt to introduce a direct tax , drawing strength also from the German constitutional court ruling of June 2009 .
I wish to remind you that President Van Rompuy hinted at this when , in a mysterious meeting held a week before his appointment to the Bilderberg group , which is not exactly the most transparent group in the world , he announced - and even committed himself to - the proposal of a European direct tax on CO2 , which would cause an immediate increase in fuel prices , services , etc . , and would therefore be detrimental to European citizens .
This EU tax proposal is unconstitutional .
Mr President , I am unconvinced of the case for a tax on financial transactions but I accept the sincere motives of the supporters of the proposal .
It is an issue on which people of goodwill can come to different conclusions .
What there is no case for whatsoever is the imposition of such a tax exclusively in the European Union .
A Tobin Tax applied only regionally will result in a flight of capital to those jurisdictions where no such tax pertains , so why has this House just voted in such large numbers for a system which will disadvantage the European Union ?
The answer is that it ticks all the boxes of a certain kind of Member of this House .
It attacks the bankers , it attacks the City of London and , above all , it furnishes the European Union with an independent stream of revenue , which means that it does not have to go to the Member States .
Taken together with the various other proposals that we see coming for the harmonisation of financial supervision , the alternative investment fund managers directive and so on , we see an epical threat to the City of London and we see the European Union being consigned to poverty and irrelevance .
Mr President , anyone who looks at the recent financial crisis will wonder how we allowed regulation and supervision to lead to a situation where we ended up with banks being deemed too big to fail and billions in taxpayers ' money being used to prop up these banks .
So , when one thinks about this idea of a global financial transaction tax , it may seem reasonable if we want to help the victims of the financial crisis and also help those in poorer countries .
But if we think about how this would actually be imposed , and the real impact , and we follow it through the chain within the financial markets , in reality , you would find banks passing these costs on to their customers .
It would also impact heavily on those of us who want to trade with developing countries or entrepreneurs in developing countries who want to trade with the rest of the world , and hit the cost of insurance , which is such a vital part of international trade .
If we really want to tackle this problem , we should not be handing billions in taxpayers ' money to corrupt or incompetent governments .
We should be making sure that we lift tariff barriers in both the EU and poor countries , to help entrepreneurs in poorer countries to create wealth and take people out of poverty .
( SK ) I appreciate the efforts of the European Union regarding the introduction of a single regime for bank transactions within the euro area .
On the other hand , I can see the introduction of these new rules being abused by the banks in order to raise fees they charge their clients .
If , on the one hand , our banks , under pressure from the European Union , adjust payments for cross-border SEPA transfers within the euro area so that they are at the same level as internal transfers , the fees for depositing and withdrawing money at branches would concurrently rise .
It is clear to all of us that the costs to banks for handling cash at branches in connection with the new rules have not changed in the least .
And , therefore , we have to say loudly that the exploitation by the banks of the new rules which have been introduced in the euro area in order to increase their profits at the expense of our citizens is blatant doltishness .
Therefore , it should be our duty to monitor carefully how the new regulations on financial institutions are being applied .
( PL ) I voted in favour of adoption of the resolution because , as a representative of my electorate , I cannot accept that anything should be agreed behind their backs and against their will .
The Treaty of Lisbon has given the European Parliament new competences , which is also why the European Parliament should be able to stand guard over the rights of citizens .
I agree with the authors of the resolution , who criticise the way the Commission 's negotiations on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement are being kept secret as well as the lack of cooperation with the European Parliament on this matter .
This action is directed against prevailing EU law on universal access to information about the activities of public authorities , and it is also action which restricts the right to privacy .
It is good , therefore , that the European Parliament has taken up the matter of the transparency of the European Commission 's negotiations , as well as the matter of counterfeiting and its prevention .
Mr President , with regard to the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) , the current negotiations completely lack transparency .
To use the current negotiating formula to generate a global agreement is totally contrary to the transparent and democratic processes that we should expect from our lawmakers .
Regardless of the content of the agreement , it is unacceptable to avoid public scrutiny when generating policies that will directly affect so many European citizens .
On the issue of content , we need to pay full attention to the European Data Protection Supervisor , who has issued a very strongly worded opinion on these negotiations .
He strongly encourages the European Commission to establish a public and transparent dialogue on ACTA .
He also states that , while intellectual property is important to society and must be protected , it should not be placed above individuals ' fundamental rights to privacy , data protection and other rights such as presumption of innocence , effective judicial protection and freedom of expression .
Finally , he states that a ' three strikes ' Internet disconnection policy would profoundly restrict the fundamental rights and freedoms of EU citizens .
This is a very important issue for all EU citizens , and how the Commission and Parliament deal with it will say a great deal about accountability and transparency .
Mr President , one of the important things about this motion for a resolution was the fact that we managed to achieve an alliance right across the House .
One area of common agreement was the fact that , in the absence of any meaningful information surrounding these negotiations , what you saw on the blogosphere and elsewhere were rumours suggesting proposals such as the confiscation of laptops and MP3 players at borders .
What was quite clear across the House was that we wanted information and more transparency on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement negotiations .
The Commissioner last night heard that message loud and clear , and I am very pleased that he has promised to give us more information .
If the Commission is negotiating on behalf of 27 Member States and on behalf of the EU , then it is essential that we know what the negotiating position is , and also that there is a full impact assessment on what is being proposed to show how it will impact on EU industry .
I welcome the comments made last night by the Commissioner and look forward to more transparency .
( SK ) What worries me is the European Commission 's practice and procedure to negotiate the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) .
Negotiations are taking place in secret , behind closed doors , without properly informing the European Parliament and Members , who should , in the end , approve this document .
I think we should change the procedures regarding when the European Commission expects Parliament to assume responsibility for any agreements that are submitted to it .
And it will not be a good signal to either the European public or the outside world if we repeatedly have to return international treaties to the European Commission for overhaul .
Such conduct is not indicative of good communication between the most important institutions of the European Union .
Mr President , as many of us know , the GSP system is up for review and the current system is coming to an end .
One of the things that is very important when we look at GSP and GSP + is that , during the negotiations on the economic partnership agreements , there were many individual states in the proposed regions that were against signing a deal with the EU .
One of the things I have always criticised in the economic partnership agreements is that they take a one-size-fits-all approach to trade .
What was also alarming , during the debate with the Commission , was that one of the officials announced that the economic partnership agreements were not only about trade but also about exporting the EU 's model of regional integration .
There are individual countries that want to have agreements with the EU and want to be able to export their goods and services to us on a preferential basis .
Therefore , what we should propose is to offer those countries that want a trade agreement , but do not fit the criteria of the economic partnership agreements , GSP + as an alternative , and we should look to be more flexible .
Hopefully , we shall then help entrepreneurs to create wealth and take poor people out of poverty in many of these countries .
Mr President , barely noticed , South America and Central America are sliding into a form of autocracy - a kind of neo-caudillismo .
In Nicaragua , Venezuela , Ecuador and Bolivia , we have seen the rise of regimes which , if not exactly dictatorial , are certainly not supportive of parliamentary democracy - people who , although legitimately elected , then set about dismantling every check on their power : the Electoral Commission , the Supreme Court , the Chambers of their Parliament and , in many cases , dissolving their constitutions and rewriting - ' refounding ' , as they call it - their states along socialist principles .
With all this going on , whom do the Left choose to criticise in that part of the world ?
One of the few regimes that genuinely enjoys popular support - that of Álvaru Uribe in Colombia , who has the support of more than three quarters of his population because he has restored order to that unhappy country and has cracked down on the paramilitaries of both Left and Right .
It shows an extraordinary set of priorities that he should be the person that some in this Chamber have chosen to pick on .
Shame on them .
( ES ) It is wrong to make things easy for the paramilitaries , how shameful !

( IT ) Mr President , I thank my colleague , Mr Albertini , for the excellent work he has carried out on this central theme in European politics .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the Union has shouldered greater responsibility for foreign affairs and common security policies , and I believe that many of us here hope that the institution to which we belong will take on greater responsibility and become more involved in foreign affairs .
I especially agree that the High Representative of the CFSP should consult the European Parliament committee responsible when making appointments to managerial posts within the European External Action Service , which is currently being created , and that she should ensure that the European Parliament , as well as the Council , have access to confidential information .
I therefore believe that the corner we have turned with this report is a first , important step towards creating a strong European foreign policy , determined to assert its own role and its own political weight on the international scene .
Mr President , I voted against Amendments 17D and 19 , which attacked NATO and called for the removal of NATO bases here in the European Union .
Well , one of the last arguments of those who believe in this European project is that the EU has kept the peace in Europe for the last 50 or 60 years .
Well , I would actually say that is a lie and that is was actually NATO which kept the peace in Europe with its forces .
I think it is a shame for this House to have allowed such an amendment to be voted on .
I noticed that the group which actually proposed this amendment are the remnants of a failed ideology that kept their people behind walls and breached their fundamental human rights .
It was NATO forces that protected the rest of Europe from this nightmare .
I wish to place on record my gratitude to the US and Canada and the other nations of NATO for sparing us that nightmare .
I believe that it is in the UK 's interest to cooperate with all of these countries against a new form of totalitarianism that is the European Union .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted in favour because I wanted to emphasise that the hope of increasing civil and military synergy and collaboration between the European Union and its Member States , even whilst respecting some non-aligned or neutral positions , is a position that we can all broadly share .
I also consider it important to set up an institution for coordinating mechanisms , such as a permanent European Union Operations Centre , under the authority of the High Representative of the CFSP , which would allow the joint planning of civil and military operations to be efficiently coordinated .
The purpose of this would be to eliminate problems , disorders and delays which , unfortunately , continue to arise under the current system .
( EL ) Mr President , thank you for your patience .
I voted against this report , because it repeats the dangerous guidelines contained in the Treaty of Lisbon for the European defence and security strategy .
In other words , it calls for the militarisation of the European Union , legitimises military intervention , recognises the primacy of NATO and the close relationship between it and even promotes - at a time of crisis and major social needs - an increase in military force .
In my opinion , the European Union should , more than ever now that the architecture of the world is under scrutiny , adopt a peaceful policy and a different political perception of security , should follow an independent foreign and defence policy , emancipated from the United States , should seek to settle international differences by political means and should lead the way in respect for international law and the enhanced role of the UN .
I think that such a policy better expresses the views of European citizens .
Written explanations of vote
The adoption of this report by a large majority indicates the concern we need to have for small and medium-sized enterprises .
At the moment , 5.4 million micro-enterprises are obliged to compile annual reports , even though their area of activity is limited to a particular local area or region .
If these companies are not involved in cross-border activities or do not even operate at national level , this reporting obligation only serves to create a pointless administrative burden , thereby incurring costs for these commercial companies ( approximately EUR 1 170 ) .
This is why this report is recommending that Member States waive the annual reporting obligations for commercial companies which meet two of the following criteria for consideration as micro-enterprises : total assets must be less than EUR 500 000 , the net turnover amount must be less than EUR 1 million and / or they must have an average of 10 employees throughout the financial year .
Micro-enterprises will obviously continue to keep accounting records , in accordance with the national laws of each Member State .
During the current crisis which Europe is going through , the private sector made up of small and medium-sized companies ( including , therefore , micro-enterprises ) must be encouraged , while also being regarded , in this difficult climate , as an area for absorbing the workforce made redundant by the state or private corporate sector .
I am voting in favour of the Lehne report regarding the accounts of micro-enterprises because I support active measures for de-bureaucratisation and those that support small and medium enterprises , which , in Portugal and in Europe , are responsible for the greatest amount of job creation .
I raise the issue of the creation of future inequalities in the internal market .
As Member States will be allowed to choose whether to apply for this measure or not , we will have countries with different rules for the same firms .
Care will have to be taken to ensure that there are no negative consequences of the way these rules are transposed in relation to the ongoing efforts to combat fraud and tax evasion and also the fight against economic and financial crime ( whether at national , European or international level ) .
Care will also have to be taken to protect shareholders and creditors .
The last two rounds of enlargement of the European Union have brought numerous benefits to old and new Member States alike , while also posing a number of challenges .
I think that the decision to grant certain facilities to micro-entities should be regulated at European level and not come under the remit of each Member State .
This is the only way to successfully cut bureaucracy for micro-enterprises and create a balance .
Particular attention must be focused on removing all those difficulties that hamper the activity of micro-enterprises and discourage people from obtaining EU financial support .
On Wednesday , the European Parliament approved a proposal aimed at abolishing the obligation for small and mediumsized enterprises to publish their annual accounts .
In an effort to reduce the administrative burden , the European Commission proposed that countries that so wish can exempt their SMEs from this annual obligation to publish their accounts imposed by the current European legislation .
I was against this repeal because , as a result of the Commission proposal , the European regulatory and harmonised framework will disappear for more than 70 % of European businesses .
The option to exempt microentities from the obligation to draw up and publish their annual accounts will not serve to reduce the administrative burden .
My fear now is that if the Member States are inconsistent in applying the option to exempt microentities , it will result in the single market being divided up .
That is also why the Belgian MEPs and the Belgian Government are fiercely opposed to the European proposal ( Belgium has also rallied together a blocking minority in the Council of Ministers , where the proposal still has to be voted on ) .
The report on the proposal for a directive on the annual accounts of companies resolves the framework and broadens the obligation to submit accounts in the case of micro-entities .
The aim of this measure is to reduce the administrative burden and thereby to help boost the competitiveness and economic growth of micro-entities .
I welcome the proposal of the rapporteur , who gives Member States a free choice and allows them to exempt micro-entities from the obligation to submit annual accounts , i.e. to exempt them outside the scope of this directive .
If it is a matter of entities limited to a regional and local market without having a cross-border field of action , they should not be burdened with further obligations arising from European legislation that is valid for the European market .
For the reasons mentioned above , I agree with the wording of the report .
I voted against the Lehne report because abolishing the accounting obligations for these microentities will not reduce the real costs of businesses and will create great legal uncertainty .
Such an exemption will undermine the confidence required for relations between very small enterprises and third parties ( customers , suppliers , banks ) .
Reliable information must be maintained in order to obtain credit .
Without an accounting framework , bankers and other interested parties , who will still require information , are liable to find an excuse to reduce their lending .
This situation will be detrimental to very small enterprises .
Today , I voted against the Lehne report , as I believe that the reduction in administrative expenditure for small and medium-sized enterprises must take place as part of a uniform and comprehensive approach for the whole of the European Union .
Were this proposal implemented , more than 70 % of European companies - indeed more than 90 % in Luxembourg - would be exempted from the requirement to produce standardised annual accounts .
As a result , an important decision-making tool for the responsible management of the affected enterprises would be lost .
If the Member States did not implement this exemption for micro-enterprises in a uniform way - which is highly likely - this would lead to a fragmentation of the common market .
This measure is thus inappropriate .
Those companies that carry out cross-border trade , in particular , would be put at a disadvantage .
The only sensible solution is to simplify the rules for all micro-enterprises in Europe on an EU-wide basis .
Especially at a time when the economic crisis has hit small businesses hard , it is our duty to endeavour to provide them with all the facilities which might help them recover and offer support again to the European economy .
Cutting red tape is important in this context .
I welcome the decision adopted today .
I hope that as many Member States as possible will implement it in an ideal and efficient way , for the benefit of small entrepreneurs and the economy in general .
I voted in favour of the Lehne report , because it grants Member States the discretion to take account of the various repercussions which the application of the directive may have on their internal affairs , especially as regards the number of companies which come within its scope .
The activities of micro-entities are of negligible cross-border significance .
Moreover , the publication of annual accounts safeguards transparency and is the sine qua non for access by micro-entities to the credit market and to public procurement contracts and to their inter-company relations .
I voted against the Lehne report and the Commission proposal .
They represent a step backwards in terms of the internal market and pose an obvious risk of distortion of competition between small European SMEs .
Let us be clear , the consequences of this proposal have been woefully underestimated .
Moreover , they have not taken account of the fact that , in the absence of a European directive , each Member State will impose its own rules on the matter .
It is therefore no surprise to see all the SME organisations , European organisations - and Belgian ones too in my case : the Union of the Middle Classes and the Federation for Enterprises in Belgium - overwhelmingly oppose this proposal .
Yes , a thousand times yes to a reduction in administrative burdens for businesses , and particularly for SMEs , but a consistent reduction , achieved by means of a proposal for a general review of the fourth and seventh Company Law Directives .
The proposal submitted to us entails allowing the Member States to exempt certain enterprises ( microentities ) from the obligation to draw up and publish their annual accounts .
I am , of course , hugely in favour of reducing the administrative burdens for businesses , in particular , for SMEs and very small enterprises .
However , the Commission proposal cruelly misses the mark : firstly , it is not clear whether the proposed system would really reduce the administrative burden on these businesses ( the statistical data currently compiled will have to be gathered by other means ) and , secondly , this text , which leaves it up to each Member State to decide whether or not to apply the exemption , is in danger of fragmenting the internal market ( in the highly likely event that some Member States will apply the exemption and others will not ) .
This proposal should have been withdrawn and consideration given to the issue of simplifying the administrative burdens on these small enterprises ( company law , simplifying the requirements of financial reports , accounting , auditing and so on ) as part of the overall review of the fourth and seventh Company Law Directives , planned for the near future .
I therefore voted against Mr Lehne 's report on the annual accounts of certain types of companies as regards microentities .
The objective of the present proposal relates to the simplification of the business environment and , in particular , the requirements for the provision of financial information by micro-enterprises , with the aim of strengthening their competitiveness and potential for growth .
In this context , I welcome the changes included in the report regarding the reduction in the administrative burden on micro-enterprises , as I believe that it constitutes an important measure in stimulating the European economy and in combating the crisis .
This is because the activities of micro-enterprises are confined to single local or regional markets in which the production of annual accounts becomes an onerous and complex undertaking .
However , I do not support the idea of exempting micro-enterprises from the duty to submit annual accounts .
That decision , in fact , falls to each Member State to adopt , as it could have direct implications relating to the combating of fraud and tax evasion and the fight against economic and financial crime , as well as for the protection of shareholders and creditors .
I therefore argue for the finding of balanced solutions with a view to adapting the way this measure is applied , rather than having a specific obligation in the document to maintain accounts regarding commercial operations and the financial position .
It is , therefore , with some reservations that I am voting in favour of the present report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament 's adoption of the Small Business Act in March 2009 kick-started a series of policy proposals geared towards making the business environment in Europe more SME-friendly , through administrative simplification , among other means .
The abolition of the accounting system for what have been termed ' micro-entities ' appears , at first glance , to be a major act of administrative simplification , but , given the importance of financial information to all stakeholders , including lenders , tax administrations and trading partners , this will , on the contrary , actually open the door to more red tape and higher costs .
In addition , companies will be denied a useful tool for internal business succession .
However , I support the Committee on Economic Affairs ' request that the impact of the meaning of any exemption granted to micro-entities be thoroughly assessed and placed in the framework of an overall review of the fourth and seventh directives .
In my opinion , this proposal does not contain the instruments needed to tackle the issue of red tape effectively .
For these reasons , I voted to reject the Commission 's proposal .
Given that the report of my esteemed colleague , Mr Lehne , rests on the same principles as the Commission 's proposal , nor was I in a position to support his report , either .
I look forward to the Council making a wise and well-considered decision .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the proposal to exempt micro-entities ( small firms ) from EU law on accounting standards .
This is an extremely important proposal as it will reduce the unnecessary burden of red tape on small businesses and help over five million firms to make a saving of approximately GBP 1 000 each .
The EU has made a commitment to reduce burdens on small and medium enterprises by 25 % by 2012 and this law is a vitally important step along the path to achieving this objective .
These small firms are often the first step on the ladder to successful employers of the future , and they need to be nurtured , especially during times of recession .
I voted in favour of Mr Lehne 's report on the annual accounts of microentities because , although the European Commission 's impact assessment is , in my view , incomplete and insufficient , I wanted to adopt a position that was clearly in favour of simplifying the accounting obligations imposed on very small enterprises .
Economically and socially speaking , it does not make sense for a very small enterprise to be subject to the same administrative constraints as much larger enterprises .
Very small enterprises account for more than 85 % of European businesses ; in other words , they are the backbone of our economy , which urgently needs a boost .
I therefore believe that a harmonised reduction in their obligations is along the right lines , albeit with an assurance that this will not hinder their access to credit .
The assessment should therefore be carried out across the board , with account taken of the whole economic environment that surrounds very small enterprises , their relations with banks , with management centres - in the case of French enterprises - and , of course , with their customers .
Let us not always think in terms of obligations but let us have faith in our entrepreneurs and our craftspeople who need us to reduce their administrative burdens .
I voted against this proposal because it is liable , in the long run , to backfire on SMEs and , by reducing their access to credit , to deprive them of the conditions of transparency and of confidence that are indispensable to their management and to the dynamism of their activity .
I do not believe that one can , on the one hand , request greater transparency from the banks by criticising them for the non-transparency of the financial markets , which led to the current crisis , and , on the other , seek to abolish the tools of transparency that are crucial to economic operators themselves and to the economic regulatory policies that we want to conduct at European level .
Simplifying the accounting obligations for SMEs , and particularly for the smallest ones , remains an urgent requirement .
The European Commission must urgently review the fourth and seventh Company Law Directives , which alone can provide a comprehensive , fair and consistent solution .
I welcome the adoption of the Lehne report that will certainly contribute to the reduction of the managerial burdens of micro-enterprises .
Small enterprises frequently complain about the excessive regulation , burdens and bureaucracy that often endanger their financial survival .
Micro-enterprises are right to argue that they should not be subject to the same rules and regulations as bigger businesses .
Let us hope that the rules proposed in this report will lead to higher turnover and greater competitiveness for micro-enterprises .
This report still gives Member States the flexibility to transpose the directive at the most appropriate time so as to avoid any difficulty that may arise from the reduction of regulation .
However , micro-enterprises will be able to continue to draw up annual accounts on a voluntary basis , submit them to auditing and send them to the national register .
In any case , micro-enterprises will continue to maintain their sales and transactions registers for the purposes of administration and tax information .
The Commission forecasts total savings of between EUR 5.9 and EUR 6.9 billion for the 5 941 844 micro-enterprises if all Member States adopt this exemption .
In Portugal , 356 140 Portuguese enterprises would be covered under this exemption if it were adopted by the Portuguese Government .
I voted against the proposal for a directive on the annual accounts of certain types of companies adopted on Wednesday , 10 March 2010 .
While I am in favour of a significant reduction in the regulatory burden borne by SMEs , I do nonetheless believe that accounting requirements also constitute crucial management instruments for their external partners ( bankers , clients , suppliers and so on ) .
By reducing their access to credit , this proposal is liable , in the long run , to deprive SMEs of the conditions of transparency and confidence that are indispensable to their management and to the dynamism of their activity .
It is paradoxical , on the one hand , to request greater transparency from the banks by criticising them for the non-transparency of the financial markets , which led to the current crisis , and , on the other , to seek to abolish the tools of transparency that are crucial to economic operators themselves and to the economic regulatory policies that I support at European level .
The European Parliament , like the European Economic and Social Committee , is supporting the objective pursued by the Commission by presenting this initiative , which entails exempting micro-entities from administrative and accounting requirements , which are costly and completely disproportionate to the needs and internal structures of micro-entities and of the principal users of financial information , in order to enable them to rise to the numerous structural challenges inherent in a complex company , thanks to the full implementation of the European Charter for Small Enterprises and in accordance with a process integrated into the Lisbon Strategy .
I regard the Commission 's proposal for simplification as positive .
Its aim is to ensure that the regulatory framework helps to stimulate the spirit of enterprise and innovation among micro- and small enterprises so that they become more competitive and turn the potential of the internal market to best account .
However , micro-entities must still be subject to the obligation to keep records showing their business transactions and financial situation as a minimum standard to which Member States remain free to add further obligations .
When all is said and done , I believe that we are helping small and medium-sized enterprises by reducing bureaucracy , and I welcome that .
I voted in favour of this resolution because it promotes the strengthening of economic coordination between the European countries , greater coherence between the Stability and Growth Pact and other European strategies , the implementation of an ambitious social agenda in the fight against unemployment , greater flexibility regarding retirement age and the promotion of SMEs .
I emphasise furthermore the fact that the reform asks the Commission to develop new incentives for the Member States that implement the EU 2020 strategy , penalising in future those that do not comply .
This is crucial to making the strategy a success , given that the problems which we are facing are common ones and require a solution at European level .
I also welcome the decision of the European Council for its greater strategic realism , which provides it with greater clarity and fewer but quantified objectives .
Finally , I cannot omit to mention the inclusion of agriculture in this strategy because this was not envisaged in the initial proposal and it is , without doubt , an essential objective if Europe is to achieve its aims , whether from the point of view of economics , foodstuffs and the environment , or in terms of a greater quality of life for its rural zones , which will generate employment .
The EU 2020 strategy must resolve the problems caused by the economic and financial crisis through measures aimed directly at the sensitive points in Member States ' economies .
If the Lisbon Strategy was not wholly successful because too many targets were set , a strategy for exiting the crisis must be focused on a few clear , quantifiable objectives such as : providing solutions to combat unemployment effectively , especially among young people , the promotion and provision of support to small and medium-sized enterprises , which generate the most jobs and innovations , as well as an increase in the percentage allocated to research and development from the EU and national budgets up to 3 % .
We must be aware that the room for manoeuvre for social policies in Europe will decrease in the future due to the ageing of the population , while the increase in productivity will only be able to come from greater investment in technology and education .
If we want a more competitive labour market , we must restructure the social security systems and support more flexible working practices .
At the same time , such a strategy must support the development of production methods which respect the environment and people 's health .
On 3 March , the European Commission presented its EU 2020 strategy : ' A strategy for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth ' .
It is a proposal which agrees on five quantifiable objectives for the European Union ( EU ) through to 2020 , which will provide a framework for the process and which must be translated into national objectives : employment , research and innovation , climate change and energy , education and the fight against poverty .
It is a strategy which focuses on concrete , realistic and appropriately quantified objectives : an increase in employment from 69 % to at least 75 % , an increase in Research and Development ( R & D ) spending to 3 % of GDP , a reduction in poverty by 25 % , a reduction in the rate of truancy from the current rate of 15 % to 10 % , and an increase from 31 % to 40 % in terms of young people aged 30 who have a higher education qualification .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the EU 2020 strategy on the grounds that the objectives which it announces map out the path which Europe should follow and that it responds in a clear and objective manner to the problems created by the economic and financial crisis , in terms of unemployment , financial regulation and the fight against poverty .
These problems will provide a reference point , allowing us to evaluate the progress which is achieved .
I voted for this resolution .
Since we will be unable to solve the current social and economic problems at national level , we therefore need to solve them at European and international level .
The EU 2020 strategy should , above all , be an effective measure to overcome the economic and financial crisis , since the goal of this strategy is the creation of jobs and economic growth .
Huge unemployment in Europe is the most important issue in current discussions , as Member States face ever rising unemployment with more than 23 million men and women without work and , as a result , there are great social and living difficulties .
Therefore , most attention in this European Parliament resolution is paid to the creation of new jobs and to combating social isolation .
Moreover , Parliament calls on the Commission to not just take into account unemployment and social problems , but to show effective means of solving these , so that this new strategy has a genuine impact on people 's real lives .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that Europe has already learnt from its mistakes , having been unable to fully implement the goals set out in the Lisbon Strategy earlier .
Therefore , the new strategy for the coming decade must be based on a strong management system and it must ensure responsibility .
Consequently , by voting for this resolution today , I am calling on the Commission and the European Council to concentrate on Europe 's main social problems and to set out fewer , but clearer and more realistic goals , which it would then be possible to realise .
I welcome the recent debates held during the Informal Council of 11 February on the guidelines for EUROPE 2020 , the new strategy for Europe .
I congratulate the Commission on its initiative and call for greater cooperation with Parliament on such an important matter for the future of Europe .
It is essential to invest in knowledge and in reforms that foster technological progress , innovation , education and training to promote prosperity , growth and employment in the medium and long term .
I would also like to highlight the importance of concrete ideas for this strategy such as the digital agenda .
It is essential to make the most of this potential so that Europe may recover from the economic crisis in a sustainable way .
The cohesion policy is equally important in supporting growth and employment .
EUROPE 2020 , in its regional dimension should , therefore , include this priority as one of the pillars for a richer , more prosperous and fairer society .
I appeal to the need to develop mechanisms of financing and governing with practical effects for the accomplishment of this strategy .
There were high hopes for the Lisbon Strategy , the economic , social and environmental objectives of which were as necessary as they were ambitious .
The strategy that succeeds it , the socalled EU 2020 strategy , which we voted on today , seems to me to be far less ambitious .
Although it does retain some objectives to be achieved , such as the 3 % of GDP to be devoted to research , and the preservation of the Stability and Growth Pact ( 3 % ) , it is still regrettable that employment and the environmental dimension ( which is much reduced ) do not occupy a horizontal place in it .
We are still a very long way away from a true , global sustainable development strategy .
Nevertheless , I supported this proposal because it is very clear that , in the face of the crisis and its many consequences , especially for employment , we cannot continue to stand idly by .
I welcome the adoption of the paragraphs relating to an ambitious social agenda and to improving support for SMEs .
In short , a new lease of life is needed .
Let us hope that the EU 2020 strategy will provide it .
Above all , let us hope that the 27 Member States will do their utmost to implement this strategy .
The 2020 strategy is supposed to replace the Lisbon Strategy .
It is , above all , in danger of prolonging the shortcomings , of ending in the same lack of results and of causing the same disappointment .
It is neither a true recovery strategy nor a new perspective for the economic , social , budgetary and fiscal policies of the Union .
The myriad good intentions are matched only by the absence of new instruments with which to implement them .
Europe needs a different ambition ; the citizens expect more convincing responses .
Since the start of the crisis , the unemployment rate has increased by seven million .
The banks are speculating again , hedge funds have not been regulated , the citizens are being asked to tighten their belts , drastic cuts are being made in public services and social protection is being cut back .
The Greek crisis serves to reveal our lack of solidarity .
That is why Europe must debate a different view of its future , one that is based on true economic coordination , a recovery characterised by solidarity , a green growth strategy , an energy community , a cohesion budget , own resources , investment in education , research , fiscal and social harmonisation , the fight against tax havens and the taxation of international financial transactions .
I voted in favour of the motion for a joint resolution on the continuation of the informal European Council of 11 February 2010 .
To achieve a social market economy which is sustainable , more intelligent and greener , Europe must define its priorities , agreeing on these together .
No Member State can provide responses to these challenges by acting alone .
EU policy cannot be merely the sum of 27 national policies .
By working together for a common objective , the result will be superior to the sum of its parts .
This will allow the EU to develop a role as a world leader , showing that it is possible to combine economic dynamism with social and environmental concerns .
It will allow the EU to create new jobs in areas such as renewable energy , sustainable transport and energy efficiency .
For this purpose , appropriate financial resources must be made available which will allow opportunities to be taken and new sources of global competitiveness to be exploited by the EU .
The European Commission has made public the Europe 2020 strategy , which replaces the unsuccessful Lisbon Strategy and which provides important and ambitious challenges for Europe .
These challenges relate , essentially , to five areas considered to be strategic by the Commission : ( i ) employment ; ( ii ) research and innovation ; ( iii ) climate change and energy ; ( iv ) education and ( v ) the fight against poverty .
These are , in fact , areas which are fundamental if Europe is to overcome the crisis and reaffirm its role as an important player in the global market , with a high level of development and a competitive economy which is capable of generating wealth , employment and innovation .
The European Union does indeed require ambition to defeat the challenges presented by the crisis , but that ambition must not cause problems for the effort at budgetary consolidation which is being demanded of Member States , in view of the weakness of their public accounts and their excessive deficits .
For this same reason , I consider it vital that the objectives of the EU 2020 strategy be strengthened .
The principle of solidarity should be the basis for the EU 2020 strategy ; solidarity among citizens , generations , regions and governments .
This way , we will be able to combat poverty and ensure economic , social and territorial cohesion , by means of sustainable economic growth .
This principle of solidarity must constitute the guarantee of the European social model .
We must deliberate on the restructuring of social security systems and on ensuring minimum social rights at the European level that will facilitate the free circulation of workers , specialised personnel , businessmen , researchers , students and retired people .
The efficient use of resources becomes a necessity owing to this principle and deriving from the need for sustainability .
This strategy must generate the creation of jobs .
We cannot accept that the EU has approximately 23 million unemployed men and women .
Therefore , it is fundamental to support entrepreneurship and bureaucratic and fiscal relief for small and medium-sized enterprises .
This does not mean forgetting about industry or agriculture .
We must resume the re-industrialisation of Europe .
Sustainable agriculture with quality produce must also be our goal .
To achieve this , we must advance the sustainable development of our primary sector and take the lead in the fields of scientific research , knowledge and innovation .
The Europe 2020 strategy , the recognised successor of the so-called Lisbon Strategy , must start by making an appropriate assessment of the methods of its predecessor .
If this were done , it would find that the approaches which it implemented - namely , the liberalisation of important economic sectors and the deregulation and increased flexibility of labour laws - have been the causes of its results in practice : increased unemployment , insecurity , poverty and social exclusion and economic stagnation and recession .
The Commission and Parliament now seek to follow the same approaches .
The proposed path is clear and neither the social or environmental rhetoric which it tries to set out are enough to disguise the following : total emphasis on the Single Market , pursuit of liberalisation , commercialisation of more and more aspects of social life , lack of job security , and structural unemployment .
The consensus which exists between the Right and Social Democrats regarding these approaches has been made quite clear .
In the final analysis , they have together been its faithful protagonists in recent years .
This strategy , essentially , is nothing more than the response of two tendencies within a single system to the structural crisis of that system .
In following this approach , the strategy will itself be the origin of new and deeper crises .
In following this approach , the strategy will inevitably face resistance and be fought by the workers and the people .
The rejection of our motion for a resolution is regrettable .
In it , we not only proposed a broad process of discussion on the proposals which have already been presented by the European Commission and a complete evaluation of the results of the Lisbon Strategy , with the aim of extracting conclusions for the new Europe 2020 strategy , but we also presented a set of new proposals giving priority to increased productivity and the creation of employment with rights , the resolution of the unemployment problem and poverty , and guaranteeing equality in social progress .
The new proposals would have created a new macro-economic framework to promote sustainable development , strengthen internal demand and respect the environment , based on improvements in pay , full employment with rights , and economic and social cohesion .
We voted against the joint resolution which was adopted because it does not get to the root of the problem , does not propose measures which are an alternative to the Stability Pact , and nor does it propose an end to the liberalisation or labour market flexibility which have led to an increase in the insecurity of work and low pay .
In this way , you allow the European Commission to continue to argue for more or less the same approach , one which has already led to unemployment for more than 23 million people and has left more than 85 million people in poverty .
Mr President , for the last two decades , the European Union has been successful in many areas , from three ambitious enlargements to the introduction of the common currency , the euro .
European Union citizens work less than the Americans or the Japanese ( 10 % fewer hours per year ) and retire earlier .
Maintaining these gains at the current level is not easy during a crisis , so I am pleased to hear of the decisive measures on the part of the European Council and the European Commission , which aim to establish a comprehensive economic strategy - Europe 2020 .
At the same time , before the European Councils in March and June this year which will give the strategy its final form , there are a number of doubts relating to the European Commission document which was presented on 3 March this year .
Firstly , what kind of data will be used as the basis for setting national targets for the 27 different European Union Member States ?
What penalties or rewards await those Member States which , respectively , do or do not comply with the objectives imposed by the strategy ?
Finally , what role in the whole process has been reserved for the European Parliament since , until now , the Europe 2020 strategy has been a project piloted exclusively by the Council and the Commission ?
We must find answers to these questions before the European Council in June .
Otherwise , to quote Mr Barroso , the Union will miss its ' moment of truth ' .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after the bitter failure of the Lisbon Strategy , which was meant to make Europe the world 's most competitive knowledgebased economy in 2010 , here we have the EU 2020 strategy , which is precisely an extension of that strategy .
For flexibility of the labour market , read job insecurity for workers , increased competition at European and international level , the liberal reform of national social protection systems , and absolute respect for the stupid Stability and Growth Pact ...
All the ingredients are there to make this strategy one of national and social disintegration , like the Lisbon Strategy before it .
The only innovations are those inspired by your new whims : making European economic governance mandatory and binding , even though the Europe of Brussels has shown itself to be completely ineffective in the face of the global crisis , and tending towards global governance in the name of so-called global warming , which increasingly appears to be an ideological pretext .
We shall vote against this text .
I voted against this resolution because it does not place enough emphasis on the objective of full employment .
Secondly , our priorities should be more focused on the fight against poverty and on sustainable growth .
The European Parliament also lets slip the opportunity to emphasise the need to combat all forms of insecure employment , by means of a directive on part-time work , the introduction of a set of social rights that are guaranteed regardless of the type of employment contract , and measures to combat abuses in relation to subcontracting , and even unpaid work experience .
Lastly , this resolution chooses to overlook the need to harmonise the tax base , which is of vital importance to the creation of a European social model .
There is no doubt that the European Parliament has missed a great opportunity here as regards the construction of a social and sustainable Europe .
The reality which we have all realised is that the 2020 strategy does not even have enough green or social policies .
Another relevant observation is that the objectives are vague and the economic crisis is not being handled in a manner commensurate with its severity .
This is why I feel that the role of the resolution voted on in the European Parliament plenary is to make important contributions to the European vision for the next 10 years .
Although our role as MEPs is limited to the letter of the treaty , we can still make a substantial contribution .
However , we must expect Member States to demonstrate political will and reflect on our position in a constructive way .
Objectives such as ' a social market economy ' and ' a budget reflecting smart , inclusive and sustainable growth ' are vital to overcoming the effects triggered by the economic crisis .
Investment in education , encouraging student mobility and training in new skills which meet the labour market 's demands are courses of action which we must devise realistic action plans for .
In the context of the EU 2020 strategy , agriculture will play an important part in Europe 's future success .
Particularly when it comes to sustainable growth and employment , and when it comes to climate change , European agricultural policy is highly significant , as it has an indispensable role to play in retaining jobs in rural and peri-urban areas .
We should not forget , furthermore , that agriculture supplies 500 million Europeans with high quality food , provides 40 million jobs and is responsible for an annual turnover of approximately EUR 1.3 trillion .
The production of renewable energy provides additional jobs and helps to reduce CO2 emissions and the dependence on fossil fuels .
Agriculture is innovative , creates value and is the real source of sustainable regional economic cycles .
European agricultural policy must therefore be given greater consideration in the context of this new strategy .
I would like to draw attention to an inconsistency between the targets of the 2020 strategy and the effects which will be the consequence of proposed changes to the budget priorities for 2014-2020 .
One of these targets is an improvement in environmental conditions .
The change of budget priorities suggests a restriction on funds available for the common agricultural policy , which means that , in 2020 , agriculture is going to have to be highly efficient or even downright industrial .
This means it will be a threat to the environment , and this , in turn , means that the EU would have to depart from the European model of agriculture , which affords particular care to the environment , the landscape , biodiversity , the well-being of animals , sustainable development and the social and cultural values of the rural environment .
There is a piece of old and practical wisdom which says ' better ' is the enemy of ' good enough ' .
We should beware lest , in caring for the environment , we do the environment harm .
The objective of the European Union 's future strategy is to accept current and future challenges and to master them as well as possible .
In the context of the EU 2020 strategy , the agricultural sector , in particular , will play an important role in relation to the new , EU-defined challenges such as protection of the environment and the climate , renewable energy sources , biodiversity and sustainable growth and employment , specifically in rural areas .
Europe must be aware that around 40 million jobs depend on agriculture , directly or indirectly .
The top priority , however , must continue to be the security of the supply of high-quality foods for 500 million Europeans , in particular , against the backdrop of the doubling of food production by 2050 .
European agricultural policy must therefore be given greater consideration in the context of this new strategy .
The EU 2020 strategy is the latest opportunity for the EU to assert itself as a world economic power , after the Lisbon Strategy became a failure .
Against the backdrop of the global economic crisis , the EU 2020 strategy has to be the model which all the Member States must follow in order to bring us into a new era , with new paradigms which will promote sustainable development based on good practice .
After the loss of many millions of jobs throughout the EU , the fight against unemployment has to be its ' touchstone ' .
We have to be able to create jobs and make our workforce better trained and qualified .
This will only be possible with the complete support of SMEs , which are responsible for the creation of most jobs .
However , for the EU 2020 strategy to be a success , we cannot make the same errors which were made with the Lisbon Strategy , particularly the lack of commitment and responsibility on the part of the Member States .
I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution of the European Parliament .
The EU 2020 strategy is intended to set new objectives , not only for political action , but also for the way in which we think .
In order to make a good recovery from the crisis , we have to create common instruments and mechanisms which will not only eliminate the effects of the current economic crisis , but will also allow us to react appropriately to future crises and even not to permit them at all .
The Commission , Parliament and all EU institutions should remember that working for the common good of Europe 's citizens is , for them , a priority .
It is the citizens ' problems which are , for us , the most important , and it is the citizens whom we should serve by giving advice , offering help and taking action .
In the context of the crisis , problems such as unemployment , poverty and social exclusion are the order of the day .
If we want to build a modern , fully innovative , development-based and cohesive Europe , we must guarantee our citizens a sense of security in the future .
I am disappointed that , in the original proposals concerning the EU 2020 strategy , agriculture was omitted .
Economic reconstruction and realisation of the objectives of environmental policy are included in agricultural policy .
Without inclusion of this policy in the EU 2020 strategy , and also in every successive strategy , we have no chance of achieving the objectives , not only in the areas I have just mentioned , but also in many others .
I voted against the second part of paragraph 6 of the joint motion for a resolution on the EU 2020 strategy because it implies an intention to further dismantle the traditionally constructed European social state .
The EU should make its social union more visible , by rebuffing competitive pressure on the international economic stage from forces which have either clearly stripped down social welfare benefits and structures or which apply social dumping .
It would appear that social policy and employment policy are being adapted selectively and flexibly to market forces .
The unifying strategy tends to seek institutional integrity in everything to do with market forces ; however , it would appear to be imperfect in terms of policy to regulate the impact of de-unification phenomena ( such as unemployment , regional inequalities and lack of social cohesion ) .
Now more than ever , the signs of the times advocate a more social Europe .
I voted for this resolution as I believe that the EU 2020 strategy must provide an effective response to the economic and financial crisis and give new impetus and European coherence to the recovery process in the EU by mobilising and coordinating national and European instruments .
I support the need for better cooperation with national parliaments and civil society as the involvement of more players will increase the pressure on national administrations to deliver results .
At the same time , I believe that European industry should use its pioneering role in the sustainable economy and green mobility technologies by exploiting its export potential .
This will reduce resource dependency and facilitate compliance with the necessary 20-20-20 climate change targets .
Europe is not the world 's most competitive economy in 2010 .
Far from it : with GDP down by 4 % and 23 million citizens without jobs , its state of health is not exactly brilliant .
If the European Union needs a severe electric shock to get the economy and employment back in a virtuous circle , it must do so with similar objectives but using a method that is completely different from that of the Lisbon Strategy .
It must also take account of the negotiations ahead of it in the areas of energy , climate change , industry and agriculture .
That is why I support the determination tinged with pragmatism of the new 2020 strategy .
Ensuring that 75 % of people of working age actually have a job , and seeing the gamble of investing 3 % of GDP in research pay off are now , more than ever , objectives that Europe must achieve .
Whether the 27 capitals cooperate is another matter , however .
That is why we are calling for penalties and incentives to be envisaged for the good and bad students of the 2020 strategy ( section 14 ) .
Penalties on the one hand , and incentives on the other .
The carrot and the stick .
It is as old as the hills , but it works .
in writing . - I voted ' no ' to motion for a resolution RC7-0151 / 2010 submitted today for voting in Parliament for the same reason that we Greens did not vote for the Barroso II Commission : because of a lack of ambition .
On this occasion , it is the turn of Parliament 's largest political groups to disappoint by adopting a resolution that is pure posture - it does not contain a single economic , social or environmental proposal .
I believe that Europeans expect more from this Parliament .
The EU Parliament was sidelined during the design of EU 2020 strategy .
Now that Parliament belatedly has a chance to react , its biggest political groups conspire to deliver an empty resolution .
This is a missed opportunity to get the European Parliament into the heart of the debate on substance and onto centre stage as an institution .
The question of where the EU should be in relation to employment and economic development in 2020 is of key importance .
Especially in times of economic crisis such as these , the EU 2020 strategy should act as the engine driving us out of the uncertainty .
That makes it more important to choose the goals in such a way that they can actually be met .
The policy is not an end in itself but has the purpose of creating realistic programmes that the population and the economy can keep pace with .
The sustainable economy must be a major point in shaping the immediate future .
This is an objective that we must attain step by step , not least because of climate change .
The issue of the security of raw materials , too , will , in future , concern Europe more and more , for which reason we should be paving the way for the sustainable use of resources now , and pointing European policy in this direction .
I voted against the joint resolution , because the three major groups are obviously using it to endorse the business-as-usual approach of the Barroso II Commission .
My constituents expect a different approach and want the Europe 2020 strategy to usher in a green new deal , a 21st century green revolution which will reconcile human development with the physical limitations of the earth .
The European Union continues to swear by the policy of uncritically increasing growth in GDP .
However , the greens and environmentalists want to transform the Europe 2020 strategy from one which strives for GDP growth alone to a broader political concept of the future of the EU as a social and sustainable Union which will place people and environmental protection at the heart of its policies , seek to ensure human well-being and create the best possible opportunities for everyone .
In our view , GDP must include a set of welfare indicators , as well as indicators which will take into account broad external economic factors and environmental pressures .
My group has therefore submitted an eight-page text which explains our alternative approach in detail .
I prefer that text to the three largest groups ' compromise .
I voted against the resolution on the EU 2020 strategy because paragraph 6 , which mentions the restructuring of social security systems and talks about greater flexibility for workers , has been adopted .
Moreover , the resolution is more like a mishmash of more or less good intentions to the detriment of precise quantitative and qualitative objectives .
Therefore , it would appear that account has not been taken of the almost complete failure of the Lisbon 2010 Strategy .
The Europe 2020 strategy aims to set out a plan for the future to achieve economic growth and the promotion of jobs within the European Union .
Its approach must be made on the basis of objectives which refer to a sustainable social market economy , the sustainable knowledge society , and the role of SMEs in promoting employment .
A strong , modern and flexible cohesion policy must be a central element of this strategy .
Embodied in the new Treaty of Lisbon , cohesion policy , through horizontal application , has an essential role in responding to the new challenges of the European Union .
In this context , the objective of European territorial cohesion can be seen to be fundamental .
The priorities for European cohesion must aim not only at promoting competitiveness at European level , through the efficient allocation of funding , but also at helping disadvantaged regions to overcome their social and economic difficulties and to reduce existing disparities .
The active role of the European regions in promoting this strategy must also be highlighted .
The importance of governance at various levels deserves to be highlighted .
It will be desirable to have a deep sharing of objectives , tasks and responsibilities relating to the Europe 2020 strategy between the European Union , the Member States and local and regional authorities .
For the above reasons , I voted in favour of the aforementioned motion for a resolution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , bringing about an exit strategy from the crisis is crucial in the short term , but something more is needed in the medium term .
If we really want to give social market economy , our social model , a chance , we need more economic growth , green growth , that will make us competitive and create new jobs .
Undertaking further investment in research and development , in innovative products , production processes and services , is crucial if we are to maintain our standard of living in the global economy .
This impetus towards structural reform is reflected in the ' 2020 strategy ' proposed by the Commission .
It is also crucial that the Commission change tack and focus on a number of smaller targets which are measurable and tailored to individual Member States .
As the resolution rightly suggests , the strategy will fall short of ensuring that the stated objectives are enforceable .
The absence of a genuine penalty mechanism if the objectives are not met , or even if insufficient efforts are made to that end , means that this ' 2020 strategy ' is flawed in the same way as its predecessor .
The joint resolution provides a good basis for further discussions with the Commission , the Council and the President of the European Council .
I therefore emphatically voted in favour of this resolution .
The joint motion for a resolution by the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe on the EU 2020 strategy expresses the joint decision by the political face of capital to use every means to implement the savage attack and anti-grassroots plans of the monopolies against the working classes and workers throughout the EU .
The EU 2020 strategy follows on from and extends the anti-grassroots Lisbon Strategy by laying down the strategic objectives and plans of monopoly capital and laying the workers ' fundamental wage and social rights on a Procrustean bed .
To be precise , we have : widespread application of the famous ' flexicurity ' , in conjunction with ' lifelong learning ' , ' training and retraining ' and ' mobility ' of workers , abolition of collective agreements , shared jobs , drastic wage and pension cuts , an increase in the retirement age and sweeping changes in social insurance , health , welfare and education .
It also gives capital massive sums from State coffers in the form of subsidies and incentives for ' green development ' .
The Greek Communist Party voted against the European Parliament resolution on the EU 2020 strategy .
Long ago , Jacques Delors used to say that one cannot fall in love with a single market or a single currency .
I am in love with a Union that takes the real needs of families in the Member States seriously , in strict accordance with national and European competences .
However , on reading the EU 2020 strategy and our parliamentary resolution , I find that our ambitions are limited to a shy flirtation with the free market economy .
There is no acknowledgement of the citizens ' investment in social cohesion or solidarity between the generations .
Should we not change our perspective on labour relations and the creation of the added value from which society as a whole benefits ?
The Commission is proposing a quantified target for combating poverty .
This move will inevitably bring back the creaming-off process , which hardly helps the poorest citizens .
The absence of a list of poverty indicators inadvertently demonstrates a lack of understanding of what poverty means .
Poverty means much more than simply being out of work , and those who experience extreme poverty on a daily basis are not just looking for a job ; they want proper access to existing rights .
Europe 2020 should respond to this situation with greater enthusiasm and determination .
I abstained .
I read both Judge Richard Goldstone 's report and the conclusions of the ambassador Dora Hold , which dismantle many of the arguments presented in the report of the UN Commission headed by Judge Goldstone .
While comparing them , I noted the biased tone of the Goldstone report and therefore , I have not supported the resolution on applying the recommendations from the Goldstone report on Israel and Palestine .
Actions must be analysed in a transparent and impartial way in relation to both sides in the conflict .
The Goldstone report fails to mention the reason that triggered the Israeli operation in Gaza : nearly 12 000 attacks with rockets and mortars against Israeli civilians .
Following the withdrawal of Israeli forces from Gaza , the number of rocket attacks has risen by 500 % .
While in 2004 and 2005 , 281 and 179 rocket attacks respectively were launched against Israeli territory , following the Israeli withdrawal from Gaza ( in September 2005 ) the number of attacks has risen to 946 in 2006 , 783 in 2007 , while 1 730 attacks took place in 2008 .
Not a single Member State of the European Union has voted in favour of adopting the Goldstone report as part of the United Nations Human Rights Council .
Compliance with international law must be a priority for all the parties involved .
in writing . - We decided to abstain on all of the votes on Palestine and Israel .
We could not vote for resolutions that purported to give the European Union the power to conduct foreign policy or that were inconsistent with our policy of neutrality on the conflict .
We do take a neutral policy position between Israel , the Palestinians and other Arab and Muslim countries .
However , our policy is not a neutrality of indifference .
In particular , we recognise that attacks on civilians either by states or by organisations are entirely unacceptable .
Furthermore , we would be gratified to see an end to the conflict by an honourable settlement .
in writing . - Having visited Gaza earlier this year , I have seen in person how vital it is that Parliament acts in this area .
The Goldstone recommendations need to be implemented in full , and I will be tracking this issue over the coming months .
in writing . - Whilst I recognise that the conflict in Gaza and the West Bank is a humanitarian tragedy , my votes do not support the existence of international influence of the European Institutions as I do not recognise the European Union .
My votes in Parliament on 10 March 2010 reflect my conscience on this subject .
in writing . - I sponsored this resolution which stresses that respect for International Human Rights and Humanitarian law is an essential prerequisite for a just and lasting peace in the Middle East ; it expresses concern at the pressures being exerted on NGOs by Israeli and Gaza authorities because they cooperated with the Goldstone enquiry ; it calls for an unconditional end to the blockade of Gaza and calls for Europe to publicly urge Israel and Palestinians to implement the Goldstone recommendations .
The Goldstone report itself concludes that the extremely high mortality among civilians , including over 300 children , arose from an Israeli policy of deliberately using disproportionate force contrary to international law .
It also concluded that the siege of Gaza is tantamount to collective punishment of the 1.5m population , contrary to international law .
It recommends that the State Parties to the Geneva Conventions ( which includes Ireland ) should prosecute those responsible for these policies and their implementation .
I am currently preparing a formal complaint to the Irish Police based on the findings of the Goldstone report , to enable the Director of Public Prosecutions to consider the case for prosecutions in Ireland of those responsible .
We Swedish Social Democrats do not believe that Hamas should be included on the EU list of terrorist organisations .
We are very critical of Hamas and , not least , of its attacks on the Israeli civilian population , but , at the same time , we are concerned that the unconditional condemnation by the EU may aggravate the situation and cause Hamas to shut itself off even more .
We do not share the opinion that the EU 's decision to continue the political isolation of Hamas following its success in a free and democratic election is the right one .
We believe that the EU must compare the possibility of achieving success by means of isolation and sanctions with the use of critical dialogue and cooperation .
Anyone who has followed for many years , as I have , the Israeli-Palestinian conflict , can only conclude with sadness that many of the sincere efforts for a lasting peace continue to be insufficient to persuade and motivate those who have opted for violence to abandon it once and for all .
The electoral victory of Hamas and the partitioning into two parts of the Palestinian territory , with each under its own authority , have significantly exacerbated an already grim situation .
As long as Hamas does not accept the legitimate existence of the State of Israel , dialogue will be no more than play-acting .
For its part , Israel will have to take care that the stances that it adopts are appropriate and proportional , lest it endangers the international legitimacy which it currently has .
Like Yitzhak Rabin , I also believe that diplomatic peace is not quite a genuine peace , but it is an essential step towards it .
It is necessary to work in this direction and to remove the obstacles blocking steps towards genuine peace .
The report of Judge Goldstone notes some obstacles put in place by both sides in this process , namely abuses and serious crimes which must be investigated , judged and punished .
Attention must be paid to the armed conflict that started in Gaza on 27 December 2008 and ended on 18 January 2009 , causing the death of over 1 400 Palestinians and 13 Israelis .
The loss of human lives was coupled with the destruction of most civilian infrastructure .
The High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and the Member States must work towards an EU common position on how to act on the Inquiry Mission 's report on the conflict in the Gaza Strip and in Southern Israel .
I want to emphasise that the respect for international human rights law and international humanitarian law is essential to the achievement of a fair and lasting peace in the Middle East .
I agree with the call for the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and the Member States to control the implementation of the recommendations contained in the Goldstone report through the consultation of external missions of the EU and the NGOs that operate in this field .
The adoption of this resolution on the conflict in Gaza by Parliament was a positive step as it recognises the violations of international law by Israel .
This proves the impact which the Goldstone report has had on the Middle East peace process by making the constant violations of international law committed by Israel known within Parliament .
The truth is that the Goldstone report contains clear proof of the violations of international humanitarian law committed by the Israeli forces in Palestinian territory during its military operations in 2008 .
For this reason , we want the conclusions of this report to be immediately adopted and its recommendations to be put into practice .
At the same time , we urge European Union officials to ensure that there will be no strengthening of the EU-Israel association agreement as long as there is no end to the violations of international law and fundamental human rights which Israel continues to commit in the occupied territories of Palestine .
This is yet another retrospective assessment of the mistakes made by each of the parties involved in the conflict .
If the same causes produce the same effects , there is reason to question the causes since the effects are always disastrous .
The same causes are the launching of rockets over Israeli cities .
The same causes are the disproportionate counterattack by the State of Israel .
The same causes are the wretched situation of the inhabitants of Gaza .
The same causes are also the exploitation of their misery by the most radical factions .
Here is an idea : why not start supporting only those forces in the two camps that have genuinely chosen peace ?
Those forces exist on both sides and they are all too often accused of betraying their own people since they dream of a scenario in which it is possible to transcend the divisions in a region which has long been the backdrop of one of the most dangerous conflicts on the planet .
I voted in favour of the resolution calling for the implementation of the Goldstone recommendations because it is vitally important to obtain a pledge from the Israeli and Palestinian authorities that they will carry out impartial and transparent investigations into the Gaza tragedy of 2008-2009 , not in an aggressive but in a determined way .
The Member States , for their part , must work even harder to defend a strong position and must commit themselves to keeping up these demands on their Israeli and Palestinian partners .
International humanitarian law must be respected by all the parties involved in the conflict , and the EU 's objective must be to ensure respect for these principles .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution as it underlines the horrific circumstances that the vast majority of the Palestinian population in Gaza live in today and , in particular , calls for the ' immediate ' and ' unconditional ' opening of all Gaza 's borders .
I fully support the right of the Palestinian population to self-determination and their right to defend themselves against the repeated attacks of the Israeli army and state forces .
However , I strongly disagree with the ideas of right-wing political Islam and of Hamas .
I also oppose individual attacks against Jewish workers that further divide Israeli and Palestinian working class people .
This only serves the Israeli Government and other extreme right wing groupings in Israel with a pretext to launch further attacks on the Palestinian population .
The Israeli Government does not serve the interests of the Palestinian masses , nor of the Israeli working class .
Attacks on living standards and democratic rights need to be jointly defeated by Israeli and Palestinian workers .
The only solution that can achieve lasting peace in the region is a socialist Israel , alongside a socialist Palestine , in which borders are mutually agreed by both communities and are part of a democratic socialist confederation of the Middle East .
in writing . - I strongly support the findings of the Goldstone report , and am pleased that the Parliament has endorsed its recommendations .
I hope the process of lasting peace through a two state solution will be supported by the Goldstone findings .
The EU should be deeply concerned for the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict which , in addition to the victims it has caused , has , for decades , created great instability in the region and in the world .
Even so , I believe that there are differences between what Israel does , as a democratic and sovereign state which shares and promotes the basic values of Western societies , and radical movements such as Hamas which , in the majority of instances , refuses to recognise the existence of the State of Israel .
This serves as an obstacle to a full resolution of the conflict .
This does not prevent us condemning , in all situations , the acts of violence which have occurred on both sides of the conflict , which have shocked the world and which can only motivate and commit us still more to finding ways to promote understanding .
Today 's joint motion for a resolution on the Goldstone report once again gives expression to the EU 's striving for a fair assessment and review of events during the conflict in Gaza .
On 26 February 2010 , both sides were once again called on by the UN General Assembly to carry out credible investigations and to submit further reports within five months .
The Palestinian authorities have now instituted an independent investigative panel , which is very good news .
The European Union 's actions on the international stage must be focused on strict compliance with the principles and objectives of the UN charter and of international law .
Similarly , compliance with international humanitarian law and the norms of international human rights law by Israel and by the Palestinians is a material prerequisite for the peace process , which is to lead to two States , coexisting in peace and security .
With this resolution , the EU is attempting to prompt the attainment of a settled common position on the measures resulting from the report by the UN Fact-Finding Mission on the conflict in Gaza and southern Israel led by Justice Goldstone .
The report also argues for publicly advocating that the recommendations of the report should be implemented and that responsibility should be assumed for all violations of international law , including imputed war crimes , for which reason I voted in favour .
The joint motion for a resolution on the Goldstone report expounds the European Union 's wish for an investigation of the events surrounding the conflict in Gaza fairly and in detail .
On 26 February 2010 , the UN General Assembly , too , once again called for an investigation within five months into the incidents and the alleged serious human rights violations .
According to the latest information , so far , only the Palestinian side has complied , which is a great shame .
In my opinion , the European Union must actively go in to bat in international organisations and committees for compliance with and the implementation of international law .
That very respect for compliance with international humanitarian law and the norms of international human rights law by both parties in the conflict would be a basic precondition in the Middle Eastern conflict for discernible progress in the peace process , which could now suffer a serious setback , once again , as a result of Israel 's planned settlement construction .
The joint resolution calls for the recommendations of the report by the UN Fact-Finding Mission on the conflict in Gaza and southern Israel led by Justice Goldstone to be implemented , for which reason I voted ' yes ' .
Human rights must be respected by all sides in the Middle East conflict .
Every suspicion that human rights have been violated , by any of the sides , should be checked .
Here , however , an identical approach must be used for all the sides of the conflict .
The Goldstone report is a document which has created a great deal of emotion and controversy .
It has met with numerous accusations of partiality .
Many have pointed out that the report does not give equal treatment to all the factors which led to the conflict .
The international community must not , however , turn its back on the conflict .
The Goldstone recommendations include a proposal to conduct international investigations of crimes alleged to have been committed by any of the sides in the conflict .
The realities of the Middle East conflict place a question mark over the possibility of doing this .
There is a serious danger that the European Parliament will not be able to monitor actions taken by Hamas , but only those carried out by Israel .
Taking these circumstances into account , I decided to vote against adoption of the joint resolution at the final vote .
I have not supported the joint resolution of the socialists , the liberals , the left block and the Greens on applying the recommendations of the Goldstone report on Israel .
This report was adopted by the General Assembly of the UN in November last year , by only five out of 27 EU Member States .
The reason for this is that the report was not responsibly analysed at the level of the Human Rights Council , and thus the General Assembly voted on an unbalanced report , which describes Israel as a terrorist organisation .
I am one of those politicians who strive for an objective and uncompromising investigation into all cases of alleged human rights violation in the Gaza conflict .
At stake , however , is the credibility of the conclusions of the investigation .
It is not acceptable to allow the politicisation of an ongoing investigation , which has yet to be completed .
The aim , after all , should be to achieve a peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the future prosperity of two independent states , Israel and Palestine , and not a power struggle between Europe and the US for influence in this region .
in writing . - I voted in favour of motion for a resolution RC7-0136 / 2010 on the Goldstone Recommendations , mainly because it insists on asking for a strong EU position on the follow-up to the Goldstone report and that implementation of its recommendations and accountability for all violations of international law should be publicly demanded , it asks all parties to conduct investigations that meet with international standards within five months , and it demands active monitoring of the implementation of the report by the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the Commission and the EU Member States .
Furthermore , it adds new points to what Parliament has already said in the past , such as asking the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the Commission to assess the results of the investigations by all parties and report back to Parliament , recalls that the responsibility and credibility of the EU and its Member States require full monitoring of the investigations and shows concern about pressure put on NGOs involved in the drawing up of the Goldstone report and in the follow-up investigations , including reference to the restrictive measures imposed on their activities .
This is not a good time to adopt a resolution on Israel .
We can soon expect to receive a full evaluation of the Goldstone report and I believe that we should not anticipate it .
The situation is a sensitive one and the conflict between the parties has become polarised .
We must not aggravate the situation by adopting a resolution which will definitely be regarded as unsatisfactory by the parties involved .
I also find it strange that the EU can adopt a resolution on a mandate which was not supported by any of the EU Member States on the UN Human Rights Council .
I do not think the joint resolution on implementation of the Goldstone recommendations on Israel / Palestine fully reflects the views expressed by Members of the European Parliament during the debate which took place in Brussels on 24 February .
The resolution does not adequately represent the position of the majority of the political groups which helped to create the document .
The report to which the resolution refers - the Goldstone report - is biased , and does not treat all the factors which led to the conflict equally .
In addition , the joint resolution does not mention the circumstances which led to the conflict , neither does it contain any reference to the 8 000 attacks on Israeli civilians organised by Hamas and other armed groups .
Nor is there any information on the way Hamas has ignored the ceasefire .
Item 7 of the document I am referring to shows plainly that the European Parliament will not be able to monitor actions taken by Hamas , but only those carried out by Israel .
Such a position reduces the credibility of Israel 's judicial system , and also of Israeli institutions , and undermines their ability to conduct investigations .
Therefore , at the final vote , I voted against adoption of the joint resolution .
Reducing the IsraeliPalestinian conflict to a mere comparison of the number of deaths in one or the other warring camp can only distort our view of this war , which has been going on for too long now .
We all agree that it is difficult to find a solution to this conflict , since the causes themselves are complex and deeprooted .
Thus , seeing things in purely black and white terms is impossible in this area of the world .
The mission led by Judge Goldstone was tasked solely with listing the violations of international law .
Although not all of the conclusions in this report are unjustifiable , voting against these resolutions , which approved the approach and the conclusions of a text that I believe has been managed in a biased fashion but , above all , on the basis of incomplete objectives , struck me as being the most honest intellectual solution .
Yes , we do need to denounce and stop the abuses that are committed by one or the other of the warring parties in that region , but we need to be very careful with regard to the procedure used if we want the justice to be established in the region to lead us in the direction of a lasting peace .
I voted in favour of the joint resolution on the Goldstone report , not least because it recognises that the people of Gaza continue to live under appalling conditions as a consequence of the blockade and because it calls for an immediate , permanent and unconditional opening of the border crossings .
The approved text pushes for the implementation of the recommendations in the Goldstone report and for accountability for all the violations of international law , including the war crimes allegations .
The report is the result of a balanced and thorough investigation , which was based on field visits and witness interviews .
According to the report , the parties involved committed violations of international humanitarian law .
The report holds senior officers of the Israeli army to account for the following : for the indiscriminate use of white phosphorus , for making no distinction between civilians and combatants , for the human consequences of the blockade , which is an instrument of collective punishment , and for a breach of martial law .
The report contains enough elements to require the UN Secretary General and the Security Council to start legal proceedings , which will be the best way to guarantee that all the doubts and discussions surrounding the events in Gaza are eliminated .
I find it regrettable that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) have not thrown any weight behind this text .
in writing . - The ECR Group does not recognise a substantial amount of the Goldstone report and hence we did not vote in favour of the PPE motion for resolution and the joint motion for resolution .
The ECR Group has grave concerns about the legitimacy and biased nature of the report produced by Judge Goldstone and , especially , do not want to see members of the IDF or politicians indicted for war crimes .
We do support continued talks for peace and security in the region , we support a two-state solution and we do recognise the humanitarian issues brought about by the ongoing conflict in the region .
As a global player , the European Union should keep in view not just the good of its citizens , but should also not forget to maintain a world perspective .
For this reason , decisions made by Members of the European Parliament should be based on a reality which is more than just European .
Voting on the resolution on implementation of the recommendations of Justice Goldstone 's report , before the report has been adopted by the UN , is a mistake .
Leaving aside the fact that there was not enough time to debate the report , we were not given a presentation of the report which included comprehensive coverage of the opposing arguments .
In a situation in which the Member States of the European Union are not showing the will to take consistent action on Israel and Palestine , adoption by the European Parliament of any kind of resolution is not helpful to the peace process in the Middle East .
For these reasons , I abstained from voting on the resolution of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , and voted against the joint resolution put forward by the other parties .
I have particular reservations concerning items J and 10 of the joint resolution , which , while they underline the tragic situation of the residents of the Gaza Strip , do not explain that this is a direct result of the rule of Hamas - a group considered by the international community to be a terrorist organisation .
Furthermore , I cannot agree with items 2 and 4 of the joint resolution , which call for implementation of the Goldstone recommendations , while not all of them are legitimate .
Thanks to the Goldstone report , it has been possible to highlight the need for independent investigations to be carried out quickly in order to establish the reality of events and the responsibility of the parties involved , and to draw conclusions from any violations of international law and humanitarian law committed during the Gaza conflict .
These investigations must be conducted in an honest fashion by the Palestinian and Israeli public authorities .
I hope that they will thus be able to facilitate a resumption of negotiations , and I therefore unreservedly support the principle of the investigations .
I would also like to emphasise that this conflict in Gaza has caused the destruction of many projects financed by the European Union and intended to mitigate the humanitarian crisis suffered by the population , which is the victim of a shortage of staple goods and of a lack of access to basic public services .
The population on the ground needs to be given hope and to continue to believe in a swift resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian problem .
It is only under these circumstances that the conditions will be in place to achieve a just and lasting peace between a Palestinian state and an Israeli state that are viable , safe and peaceful neighbours .
It is not long since I reminded Parliament that elections are not free in Belarus , that freedom of expression , association and protest do not exist and that there have been an increasing number of repressive activities directed by the authorities .
Furthermore , political prisoners have still not been freed , the death penalty has not been abolished and there has been no guarantee of either the separation of powers , in particular , the independence of the judiciary , or respect for human rights .
The recent use of the police against the Union of Poles in Belarus and the denial of the rights that they were seeking are two further episodes which serve to weaken European confidence in the Belarusian dictatorship .
They call for all European democrats , particularly European institutions and the governments of the Member States , to provide rigorous vigilance and a firm and coordinated reaction to the Minsk authorities , which continue to be loyal to the worst legacies of communism .
The European Union cannot be the partner of a Belarus which does not respect either its own nationals or international law .
As the saying goes in my country : ' better alone than in bad company ! ' .
The European Union should not recognise the legitimacy of the Belarusian Parliament until free elections are held in that country .
Therefore , I call on the Belarusian authorities to undertake a complete reform of the country 's electoral legislation , in accordance with the recommendations of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe / Office on Democratic Institutions and Human Rights .
The actions of the Belarusian authorities against the members of the organisation that represents the Polish national minority are absolutely reprehensible , as are the politically biased trials and the fact that the judicial authorities apparently take orders from the executive .
The EU cannot agree with the decision of the Belarusian authorities to limit Internet access or with the lack of guarantees of freedom of the press , freedom of peaceful assembly and association and freedom to worship in churches other than the Belarusian Orthodox Church , as well as other rights and political freedoms .
I argue that the level of Community cooperation with the Belarusian authorities should be directly proportional to the level of respect for human rights in that country .
I still share the concerns about the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy 's statement on the repression of the Polish national minority , which was weak and late .
Since the end of the Cold War , relations between Belarus and the West have been moving forwards in the development of a new understanding and the European Union has been developing positive dialogue in terms of providing Belarus with incentives to make progress relating to democracy and human rights .
The above notwithstanding , the EU cannot accept actions which conflict with international principles and legislation regarding the rights of national minorities .
The EU cannot hold relative opinions regarding human rights .
Mr President , as a co-author of the European Parliament 's resolution on the situation regarding civil society and minorities in Belarus , I voted in favour of the resolution .
Although , last year , the Lukashenko regime freed political prisoners and has become somewhat milder , the European Union cannot look the other way in the face of the recent human rights violations concerning members of the Union of Poles in Belarus .
It is only possible to extend the benefits of the EU 's Eastern Partnership to Belarusian citizens if the Belarusian administration guarantees the human rights and civic freedoms of Belarusians and begins democratic reforms .
The concessions made by the regime up to this point have been continually insufficient , and the arrest of the leader of the Union of Poles in Belarus , Angelika Borys , as well as the refusal to allow the movement to be registered and the freezing of its assets , are yet another blow to relations with the European Union .
In my opinion , following the continual violation of human rights principles and the rule of law , the European Union has no option but to consider reimposing sanctions on the Belarusian administration .
I voted in favour of adoption of the joint motion for a resolution of the European Parliament .
Several months ago , the European Parliament adopted a resolution calling on the Belarusian authorities to end the use of capital punishment on its citizens .
Today , once again , we are talking about Belarus , violations of human rights and the principles of civil society .
The European Union has opened up to Belarus .
We have put the right measures in place , such as inclusion of Belarus in the Eastern Partnership .
The trust we have placed in Belarus was supposed to initiate a switch to the tracks of democratisation and respect for civil rights .
Unfortunately , this has not happened .
In view of this , the European Union must be firm and adopt a stronger position on relations with Belarus , and must take effective action which will guarantee that the rights of minorities will be respected .
I hope the present resolution will initiate changes in the desired direction .
If this does not happen , I expect a review of the European Union 's approach to Belarus and the imposition of appropriate sanctions .
Every ineffective solution will be evidence of our weakness .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this resolution which was , in fact , a text agreed among all the major groups , including ours .
The resolution was unanimously adopted .
The absence of freedom of speech , problems with registering political and even social organisations and the use of State media for propaganda purposes are symptomatic of excessively authoritarian functioning of the State .
The Union has extended a helping hand to Belarus in the form of inclusion in the Eastern Partnership , a programme which is intended to strengthen democracy and the rule of law .
The activities of the Belarusian authorities do not meet international standards for the rules governing conduct towards the opposition and non-governmental organisations or standards concerning the protection of national minorities .
It is important to find an adept way out of the situation , in which the Union should show its disapproval by specific measures , such as sanctions or visa restrictions , but , at the same time , we must not isolate Belarus from the rest of Europe , because all of Belarusian society will suffer , and not the authorities condemned by the Union .
We should show Belarus how much it can profit from cooperation with the EU , and stipulate that the extent to which Belarus complies with EU requirements will be reflected in the support on which Belarus can rely .
I was pleased to hear the results of today 's vote .
We have adopted a resolution in which we condemn the recent repressions against the Polish minority in Belarus .
Adoption of the document by acclamation has a special implication .
It is a vote of the entire Parliament , of all the political groups and of the representatives of the 27 Member States of the European Union .
I do not imagine that Belarus will benefit from what is being offered under the Eastern Partnership without the prior re-legalisation of the Union of Poles in Belarus and the return of its property , and , in addition , without the release of political prisoners such as Andrei Bandarenko , Ivan Mikhailau and Arystom Dubski .
Today , we have sent Belarus a clear signal .
We are now awaiting a response .
The European Council has underlined that it is important to revise the economic and social contract between financial institutions and the society they serve and to ensure that , in the good times , society is able to take advantage of the benefits provided and is protected from risk .
In this matter , the European Council has called on the IMF to consider all possibilities when carrying out a review , including taxes for financial transactions on a global scale .
I support this resolution and think that the European Union must reach an agreement on a common position in this matter .
The European Commission must prepare an impact assessment of a general tax on financial transactions and examine its merits and shortcomings .
I also agree with the resolution 's provision that we must analyse at Community level how the financial sector might fairly help cover damage done to the economy because of it or damage that is linked to government interventions aimed at stabilising the banking system .
The current motion for a resolution , which comes in the wake of the G20 discussions conducted as part of the Pittsburgh Summit and of the request made by some international bodies , such as the IMF , may provide a solution for both avoiding any new financial disasters and for recovering the sums which the treasuries have made available to the banks to save them from collapse .
In any case , the adoption of such legislation in France and Belgium , in a pioneering spirit , is welcome ( with the United Kingdom also examining the possibility of introducing similar legislation ) , and we expect to see its impact .
According to French estimates , the 0.005 % tax will remove more than EUR 20 billion from the coffers of French banks .
However , how is the banking sector going to respond ?
Will it restrict the number of speculative transactions , considered harmful , or will it take advantage of capital mobility and continue to carry out such transactions through bank branches located in states where this kind of duty does not exist ?
This is why I think that the success of such duties requires a global approach , which also means presenting it to international bodies such as the UN .
Even by doing this , it is difficult to believe that a joint global action can be achieved ( compare offshore legislations ) .
By supporting the resolution adopted today by a very large majority ( 536 votes to 80 , with 33 abstentions ) , the French delegation of the Democratic Movement has repeated its wish to have an impact assessment and practical proposals from the European Commission on the creation of taxes on financial transactions .
We call on the Commission to draft a proposal in order to define a common European position to be presented to the G20 in June .
It would also be a good idea to evaluate the extent to which a tax such as this could help to stabilise the financial markets .
The questions to which the Commission should provide answers concern the use of this tax to support developing countries ' adaptation to climate change and the financing of development cooperation , but also the levers that the Commission could use to persuade its partners to join it in implementing this tax so as to prevent the migration of capital .
Above all , however , an in-depth impact assessment must be carried out to ensure that this tax will not reduce the Union 's competitiveness or sustainable investment , nor have negative repercussions for SMEs and individual investors .
In 2000 , I tabled with the Globalisation Intergroup the first resolution calling for the Commission to examine the feasibility of a tax on speculative capital flows .
The resolution was not adopted , since it was just short of the number of votes required .
Ten years have passed , the G20 , like several Member States , is no longer ruling out the idea of such a tax , and above all , the financial crisis has served to remind us of the damage that volatile financial markets can cause .
That is why I welcome the adoption by a wide margin of the resolution on taxes on financial transactions .
This is only a small step , but the message is clear .
Parliament is calling on the Commission to finally take up the issue and to work on an implementation project .
A tax such as this would have the twin advantage of helping to stabilise the markets and of generating huge revenues to help developing countries finance their adaptation to climate change and the fight against poverty .
Objectors tell us that it will only be effective if it is global , but make a start we must , as some countries have done with the tax on flight tickets .
A waitandsee policy will get us nowhere .
We must show the way .
The financial sector has to accept its responsibilities for the economic crisis that still plagues us .
Up to now , the real economy , taxpayers , consumers , public services and society in general have been the ones paying for a substantial part of the costs and consequences of the financial crisis .
There are several Member States that have called for a tax on financial transactions .
The political and regulatory context in this area is different nowadays .
There are new regulatory initiatives , such as the fight against tax havens , the removal of legal loopholes from management accounts , the requirements applicable to stock market transactions and the use of transaction repositories for the register of derived instruments .
The European Union must adopt a common position in the international framework of meetings of the G20 .
In order to do this , the Commission must assess the impact of a global tax on financial transactions before the next G20 summit .
This assessment must specifically evaluate the effects of the introduction of the tax on financial transactions in the European Union , as opposed to its introduction at global level .
Costs have to be determined , as well as whether this tax will contribute to the stabilisation of financial markets .
The various statements made in the preamble to the resolution now approved by a majority of Parliament are positive to see .
This is particularly true of the statement that the financial sector must take a fair share of the burden of economic recovery and development , given that up until it now it has been the real economy of taxpayers , consumers , public services and society in general which has had to pay a substantial part of the costs and consequences of the financial crisis .
However , beyond this , there was almost regret for any action which might help to lead to a possible tax on financial transactions , through the attachment of many constraints to the application of the resolution .
That is why we abstained .
Regrettably , there has been a delay in applying new regulatory initiatives and in advancing the promised fight against tax havens , the removal of legal omissions regarding management accounts , the requirements applicable to stock market transactions and the use of trade repositories for the registration of derivative instruments .
It is necessary to make decisive progress and not continue in these muddy waters , which only serve to help financial speculators and large capitalist interests .
in writing . - I support a tax of financial transactions , and I am very pleased that this initiative is gaining such support .
In order to be effective , it should be a global tax , and I support measures to introduce such a charge on financial transactions .
in writing . - We have voted overwhelmingly today to maintain the political momentum behind a global financial transaction tax ( FTT ) .
It is clear that the time has come for radical action to ensure the financial sector pays its way in the wake of the crisis and an FTT could be an important tool .
It has strong support from the public and from NGOs and Unions across Europe .
An FTT could help reduce volatile and risky financial trading while raising billions to help tackle the effects of climate change and help developing countries who have been hit hardest by the financial crisis .
This resolution calls for the Commission to analyse options for such a tax and sends a clear signal that Europe will push for a global agreement to deliver on the public 's demand for action .
It is disappointing that the ECR Group and its Conservative Members , who are clearly against any financial transaction tax , have chosen in their statements to deliberately misrepresent today 's vote as a call for an EU-only FTT .
If Europe takes no action and comes to no view , then we will be left out of the international debate - our vote today is a mandate instead for Europe to help lead this debate .
The Portuguese Democratic and Social Centre Party is , as a rule , against the creation of European taxes .
There is also the fact that taxes are important tools at the disposal of the Member States , and more so than ever in difficult times , such as the present crisis .
Finally , the different taxation options , whether via taxes or contributions , which are exercised in the various Member States , would necessarily give the tax in question here a more or less penalising quality , allowing injustices at European level , which would not make sense .
For me , it is an unavoidable truth that the financial sector should contribute fairly to the recovery and development of the economy , especially given that considerable costs and the consequences of the financial crisis were borne by the real economy , taxpayers , consumers , the public sector and society as a whole .
A potential tax on financial transactions could reduce the immense volume of speculation capital that has again had a detrimental impact on the real economy recently , and thus also represent a step towards sustainable growth .
However , before we consider introducing such a tax , we must carefully weigh the pros and cons .
That process is exactly what the resolution proposed by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is calling for , which is why I voted in favour of the resolution .
A crucial point that is only mentioned in passing in the text but that must be clearly defined before a decision is made is the potential use of the capital that could be generated by such a tax .
I believe that the tax must be levied where the transaction takes place , and must also , in other words , benefit the States on whose territory the relevant stock exchanges are located .
The exact method of calculation still has to be specified .
If the EU insists on levying the tax itself , it must , in any case , be offset against the gross contribution of the Member State in question .
Under no circumstances may it be allowed to lead to a tax competence on the part of the EU .
in writing . - I voted in favour , today , of motion for resolution on taxation of financial transactions , and am delighted that , for the first time , Parliament has demanded an assessment of the feasibility and impact of introducing a financial transaction tax at EU level .
This is considerable progress .
Pressure must now be exerted on the Commission to propose concrete steps .
European citizens expect the costs of the financial crisis to be borne by those on the financial markets who caused it .
We cannot therefore be content with a minimalist solution in line with the US proposal , which would generate a few billion euro - a relatively small revenue considering the huge costs .
Poverty reduction , the fight against climate change and tackling the financial crisis require additional revenue of several hundred billion euro .
A cleverly designed financial transaction tax would provide such a revenue , while simultaneously curbing speculation on financial markets .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the Single Euro Payments Area ( SEPA ) which aims to promote the creation of an integrated market for services involving payments in euro , which will involve effective competition and in which there will be no difference between payments in national or foreign euro .
SEPA continues to work in an imperfect way and it does not cater for the real needs of its users .
The European Community must set an appropriate and binding deadline regarding the use of SEPA instruments , after which all euro payments must be made using the norms of this system .
It is equally important to ensure that the adoption of this system will not lead to additional costs for the European public .
The creation of the Single Euro Payments Area ( SEPA ) is fundamental to the greater integration of the market for payment services .
It will increase competition by treating euro payments across borders and within a country in the same way and it may come to have a direct positive impact on the lives of the European public .
As such , it would seem urgent for national governments to implement SEPA services and to make the rules which regulate this initiative adequate so that there will , in fact , be a simplification of the current position regarding payments services and a reduction in costs for the benefit of consumers .
The Single Euro Payments Area ( SEPA ) will be an integrated market for payment services , subject to effective competition and in which there is no difference between national and cross-border payments in euro .
We should have established a legally binding time limit for the migration to SEPA instruments .
Public administrations ' migration to SEPA is below our expectations .
Therefore , it is important that all interested parties - legislators , the banking sector and the users of the payment services - be involved in the achievement of SEPA .
The continued legal validity of existing direct debit authorisations should be ensured in all Member States , since the obligation to sign new authorisations during the transition from national direct debit systems to the SEPA system would be costly .
Thus , the Commission must establish a clear , adequate and legally binding time limit for the migration to SEPA instruments , no later than 31 December 2012 , after which all payments in euro will have to be made in accordance with SEPA norms .
The Commission must aid public authorities in the migration process by developing integrated and synchronised national migration plans .
The Single Euro Payments Area ( SEPA ) must quickly turn itself into an integrated market for payments services .
However , there is much to be done before this can be achieved and , despite the existence of directives which stipulate the framework for SEPA cards and the SEPA direct debit system , the truth is that these systems are not yet in operation .
It is thus necessary to overcome all the obstacles to the implementation of the SEPA system so that it can begin to operate fully as quickly as possible .
It is important that the transition period does not last beyond 21 October 2012 .
The Single Euro Payments Area ( SEPA ) is a concept whose introduction will make everyday life easier for millions of Europeans .
Irrespective of which Member State they are citizens of , they will easily be able to make rapid and cheap payments to persons or firms in another Member State at the same cost as payments made within the borders of their own country .
In an age of Internet banking , this will bring about increased competition between banks , and this will benefit clients .
Introduction of the SEPA is the next step towards realisation of one of the four fundamental freedoms of the common market - the free movement of capital .
What is extremely important is that the SEPA will lead to an economic rapprochement between countries in the euro area and countries which , although Member States of the European Union , are not part of the euro area , as well as the other countries of the European Free Trade Area .
Therefore , I fully support the European Parliament resolution on the implementation of the Single Euro Payments Area ( SEPA ) .
At the same time , I appeal to the European Commission to give priority to the interests of retail banking clients and to questions of the security of the system while monitoring work on the introduction of the SEPA system .
The resolution on ACTA , which has been adopted today and of which I am one of the initiators , is extremely symbolic because it is unanimous .
It is a clear signal sent out to the Commission , which has been negotiating this agreement in the utmost secrecy for two years .
Parliament demands complete transparency with regard to the negotiations under way , as well as respect for the treaties , which entitle it to receive the same information as the Council .
Whether in terms of the method or in terms of what we know of the substance , I am opposed to the way in which the ACTA negotiations are being conducted .
We have many fears with regard to the calling into question of the acquis communautaire .
Aside from the risk of reintroducing the ' flexible ' response , respect for the fundamental rights of citizens , in terms of freedom of expression and of protection of privacy and of data , and the principle of nonliability of Internet access providers and hosts could be called into question .
Parliament has already proved its commitment to these principles , and if the Commission does not change its strategy , I will lead the campaign against the ratification of ACTA by Parliament , as we have already been able to do for the SWIFT Agreement .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution .
Undoubtedly , better protection of intellectual property rights and combating counterfeiting and piracy are very important issues in the European Union and worldwide , and I very much welcome the opening of negotiations at international level to strengthen IPR and to fight counterfeiting and piracy more effectively .
However , I am very disappointed at how those negotiations are taking place .
Under the Lisbon Treaty , the European Parliament has to be informed immediately and fully by the Commission at all stages of international agreements , which is not the case with the ACTA Agreement .
Moreover , the European Parliament will have to give its consent to the ACTA Treaty prior to its entry force in the EU .
How will we able to do it if we are kept in the dark ?
I very much hope that the European Commission will fulfil its duty and will provide all necessary information on the state of negotiations .
Mr President , I have voted for the resolution of the European Parliament on transparency and the current state of negotiations over the ACTA Agreement , because I share the doubts of the authors concerning the progress of negotiations to date .
These are taking place under a ' restricted ' regime , which means that only the European Commission and EU Member States have access to the negotiating documents .
The European Parliament is completely left out , and yet its agreement is an essential precondition for the agreement to come into effect .
I take the view that digital content and the handling thereof should not be included in the text of the agreement , and if it is included , the provisions in question should not be of a repressive nature .
I strongly believe that the ACTA Agreement should not go beyond the framework of the currently valid intellectual property laws and that any penalties for copying digital content should be left to the discretion of individual states .
The protection of privacy and the protection of personal data must remain a pillar of European legislation , which will not be undermined by international legal agreements .
I am in favour of an ACTA agreement that will combat counterfeiting , which represents a real danger to the economy and the consumer and undoubtedly violates intellectual property rights .
On the other hand , copying that is carried out exclusively for one 's own needs should be left out .
The inclusion of this would , in my opinion , conflict with the right to personal freedom and to information .
In short , counterfeiting and copying cannot be treated in the same way .
in writing . - Whilst we as a group voted against the ACTA resolution on Wednesday , 10 March 2010 , we did so on the principle that the ACTA Treaty itself should not exist in any form .
It is a catastrophic violation of individual private property .
Had we voted in support of the resolution , we would have been recognising the existence of such legislation , but decided on that basis not to recognise the treaty .
Despite the Treaty of Lisbon and codecision on international trade , the Commission and the Member States are preventing a public debate from being held on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) .
This lack of transparency arouses genuine suspicion , which can only be diminished by consulting the public and the European Parliament .
While the fight against counterfeiting is indeed legitimate and necessary , the ACTA Treaty would make authors ' rights and copyright more powerful .
Must Internet access providers be allowed to control digital file exchanges and impose penalties on users , including cutting off their Internet connection ?
The cost of such monitoring would be exorbitant for access providers , and the checks complicated .
Moreover , Internet piracy is not yet classed as a crime in either European law or international law .
Therefore the idea of systematically imposing penalties on such a large scale is unjustifiable , all the more so given that Internet access , in the name of one 's right to information , is still a fundamental freedom .
The Commission will have to provide Parliament with a document outlining the negotiations and all the positions under discussion .
If it fails to do so , Parliament could reject this text negotiated in secret , just as it rejected the SWIFT Agreement .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the transparency and current position of the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) negotiations because I support a transparent process in the conduct of negotiations .
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament will have to give its agreement to the text of the ACTA Agreement before it becomes valid in the European Union .
Parliament 's contribution is essential to guarantee that the means of applying intellectual property rights will not obstruct innovation , competition , protection of personal data and the free movement of information .
Counterfeiting constitutes one of the principal scourges of the global economy and efforts to combat it notwithstanding , it is evident that there is a manifest incapacity for individual states to bring this fight to a successful conclusion .
The risks to the health and safety of consumers which the purchase of certain products can involve are today clear .
From a commercial and industrial point of view , this parallel industry , which illegally feeds off the creativity and fame of others , weakens the value of brands and renders their special role less effective .
In this way , although it is important to establish an open , free and just market , this can only succeed if counterfeiting is generally rejected and fought against by the main producers .
The Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement may be a path which it is worthwhile to tread , but it must be understood and debated in a transparent way beforehand , as opposed to what has happened up until now .
In 2008 , the European Union and other countries of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development opened negotiations for a new multilateral agreement aimed at reinforcing the application of intellectual property rights ( IPR ) and at taking actions against counterfeiting and piracy ( Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement - ACTA ) .
Together , they decided to approve a confidentiality clause .
Any agreement related to ACTA made by the European Union must abide by the legal obligations imposed on the EU on matters of privacy and data protection legislation , as defined in Directive 95 / 46 / EC , in Directive 2002 / 58 / EC and in the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights and of the European Court of Justice ( ECJ ) .
In the wake of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament will have to give its approval to the text of the ACTA Agreement before it enters into force in the European Union .
In addition , the Commission pledged to immediately provide Parliament with complete information throughout the process of negotiating international agreements .
Therefore , a legal basis should have been created before the beginning of ACTA negotiations and Parliament should have approved a negotiation mandate .
The Commission should submit proposals before the next round of negotiations .
The general condemnation of Parliament regarding the suppression of information by the Commission relating to the ongoing negotiations on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) and the limitations which , by proceeding in this manner , the Commission has attempted to impose on scrutiny and democratic control , have been quite clear .
For this reason , we believe it to be important that the resolution points out that the Commission ' has had a legal obligation to inform Parliament immediately and fully at all stages of international negotiations ' .
Democratic and transparent procedures in the conduct of negotiations are required , as well as public debate on their content , something which we consider to be positive .
Furthermore , we emphasise the argument for the need to respect ' fundamental rights , such as the right to freedom of expression and the right to privacy , while fully observing the principle of subsidiarity ' , as well as the protection of personal data .
That is why we voted in favour .
This draft AntiCounterfeiting Trade Agreement , known as ACTA , may seem like a good idea , so great is the suffering of the European economy and European jobs as a result of these unfair practices in the world of excessive free trade that you are imposing on us .
However , as is always the case when there is something fundamentally harmful in an agreement negotiated by the Commission , everything is done in secret .
I am thinking of the Blair House Agreement , which sacrificed European farming to feed the appetites of the US agrifood multinationals .
I am also thinking of the scandalous MAI , the Multilateral Agreement on Investment , which sought to exempt multinationals from the laws in force in the countries in which they were operating .
Fortunately , that agreement did not see the light of day .
In this instance , it is the ' Internet ' section of ACTA that is in question : it literally boils down to introducing a monstrous worldwide ' Hadopi ' law .
Customs could search the MP3 players , mobile telephones and laptops of any citizen suspected of having illegally downloaded a file .
Access providers may be forced to cut their customers ' connection or to supply information on them .
This is unacceptable , and that is why we have voted in favour of this resolution , which calls for complete transparency in the negotiations and threatens to drag the Commission through the courts if it refuses .
I endorsed the resolution aimed at obtaining complete transparency from the European Commission on the subject of the negotiations on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) , which are currently being held in secret .
Aside from the risk of reintroducing the ' flexible response ' , respect for the fundamental rights of citizens , in terms of freedom of expression and of protection of privacy and data , and the principle of non-liability of Internet access providers and hosts , could be called into question here .
It follows that the European Parliament , as the voice of the European peoples , cannot be excluded from these negotiations and must receive the same information as that issued to the Council ; this is a democratic requirement .
Lastly , ACTA must not compromise access to generic medicines .
In this context , considering , at this stage , the method and the worrying rumours circulating about its content , I can only vote in favour of a resolution that is critical of such an agreement .
In the resolution which has been adopted , the European Parliament has clearly declared its support for greater transparency in the European Commission 's negotiations on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement .
Piracy and counterfeiting are a growing problem for the European economy and for other economies throughout the world .
The economies of developing countries are increasingly becoming knowledge-based economies .
Therefore , we also need clear and effective principles for the protection of intellectual property rights which will not interfere with innovation and competition , will not place an unjustified burden on legally conducted trade and will protect our privacy and fundamental rights , such as freedom of speech .
This is why the resolution adopted today does not challenge the idea of making the agreement itself .
However , the negotiations being conducted by the European Commission are not open .
The European Parliament and European citizens are not being kept up-to-date about progress in the negotiations .
This absence of information is a cause for concern .
We want greater transparency from the European Commission .
We want to know , now , what obligations the European Commission 's negotiators are accepting on behalf of 500 million European Union citizens .
The Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) negotiations concerning provisions of copyright law and combating counterfeiting and product and Internet piracy represent , without doubt , an important step towards the protection of intellectual property .
Regrettably , the Commission 's information policy in relation to the negotiations leaves a lot to be desired .
The lack of transparency about the state of the negotiations makes it difficult for the European Parliament to play a constructive part in drawing up the provisions and thus to ensure , in advance , that there is no curtailment of Europeans ' civil rights and no violation of the directives on data protection .
I support the motion for a resolution ( RC7-0154 / 2010 ) and thus the European Parliament 's call on the Commission to frame its information policy in relation to the ACTA negotiations in a more transparent , complete and thus also holistic way .
in writing . - Transparency of the ACTA negotiations is of vital importance , and I am glad the Parliament has called for full disclosure in such powerful numbers .
While I am pleased to hear assurances that individuals will not be criminalised for personal use , and that the ACTA Agreement will not be used to prevent generic medicines reaching developing countries , I hope the Parliament will be able to access all documents and monitor the negotiations to ensure this is upheld .
The lack of transparency in the negotiations of the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) are contrary to the spirit of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
It is essential for the Council and the Commission to immediately make available all the documentation which has been the basis of negotiations .
Non-compliance with this basic duty by the Commission and by the Council could lead to Parliament using legal procedures to gain access to these documents , something which would harm the prestige of the European institutions involved .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs and all Members who are responsible for the fact that the European Parliament has clearly expressed its uncompromising position with such a huge majority against the non-transparent negotiation of such an important international agreement .
We expect that the agreement will open up a new international dimension in the fight against counterfeiting , but without reducing the right of European citizens to privacy .
I also see a problem in the fact that China has not been invited to the negotiations .
In the debate yesterday , the Commission told me that it considered this to be a strategic error as well .
The idea that China , which is the largest source of counterfeiting in the world , will sign up to a negotiated agreement later is unrealistic .
I trust that our critical report today will persuade the Commission to reassess its approach to Parliament , which has joint decision-making powers in new areas , including foreign policy , thanks to the Treaty of Lisbon .
in writing . - I supported resolution RC7-0154 / 2010 on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement , and I am glad that a large majority of Parliament did so .
ACTA risks becoming known as the ' Absence of Commission Transparency Agreement ' .
In its negotiations on ACTA , the Commission should be upholding the principles of transparency , human rights and the EU Parliament 's legal right to information .
Instead , the Commission is failing this litmus test of its compliance in informing Parliament under the terms of the Lisbon Treaty .
The EU cannot continue to negotiate on ACTA if the people are not allowed to take part in the process .
It is also a totally absurd and unacceptable situation if MEPs , behind closed doors , have to ask the Commission about the content of the agreements we are supposed to vote on .
Furthermore , the EU Parliament has shown that it does not accept secrecy and that it cherishes an open Internet for all .
MEPs have also shown that the Parliament will not accept to be treated like a doormat .
The Commission has been strongly urged to keep us fully and immediately informed on the ACTA negotiations .
The current generalised system of preferences ( GSP ) will soon be coming to an end .
I voted in favour of the resolution , a specific aim of which is to involve Parliament fully in its revision by 2012 .
This trade regime enables 176 developing countries and regions to benefit from preferential access to the European market in exchange for their ratification of ILO conventions on social rights and of UN conventions on human rights .
Its implementation is unsatisfactory , however .
That is why we demand , before the revision , a report on the current state of ratification , implementation of the conventions , an impact assessment of the effects of the GSP during the period 20062009 , the inclusion of a condition stipulating that 27 fundamental UN conventions must be implemented , and more transparent investigation processes - involving , in particular , regular consultation of Parliament .
It is regrettable that , during this vote , an amendment calling for an investigation procedure to be carried out in Colombia concerning the numerous killings of trade unionists and the mass graves containing the bodies of hundreds of people killed in the region of La Macarena was not passed because of opposition from the right .
The European Union is the world 's largest provider of humanitarian and development aid .
We know that , every year , the European Union and the Member States give millions to cooperation and development programmes , that this assistance is necessary and that , in many cases , it makes all the difference .
It is , however , my conviction as a supporter of the market economy that development assistance can ( and must ) be provided by means of trade policies which benefit developing countries .
I believe that within this context , there is a role for the Generalised System of Preferences , which allows developed countries to offer preferential and non-reciprocal treatment on products imported from developing countries .
It is by no means certain to say , as the resolution does , that the current Generalised System of Preferences ( GSP ) is a mechanism to help developing countries .
This mechanism has effects which accentuate the economic dependence of these countries as it leads to production for export , to the detriment of their internal market .
To a large extent , it is the large transnational companies , some of them from EU countries , which benefit from this system , rather than the people of developing countries .
Thus , some of the intentions which are supposed to underlie the GSP create a contradiction with its actual results .
On the other hand , against a backdrop of increasing pressure for the liberalisation of international trade , it is apparent that the EU has been using the aim of this regulation as a form of blackmail to gain acceptance of the aforementioned free trade agreements through an unacceptable level of diplomatic and economic pressure on these countries .
For the GSP to become a mechanism of development aid , there will be a need , as we propose , to abolish and then renegotiate both it and other policies for development assistance , forming an effective solidarity , and combating economic dependency and the exploitation of people and natural resources by economic groups within the EU .
The actions which the European Community has undertaken since 1971 in relation to developing countries through trade preferences under the Generalised System of Preferences are a way of making world trade more just and , at the same time , helping those countries with their growth and economic development .
The current regulations expire in 2011 , meaning that it is necessary for us to start making immediate efforts towards working on a new instrument which could maintain and , if possible , even further increase the benefits which this system has been providing to developing states , something which is even more important within the context of leaving the international crisis behind us .
If we are to avoid unfairness , it is , however , crucial that the new list of countries which will benefit from this system are realistic about their economic situation .
in writing . - In the end , I voted in favour of the common resolution on Generalised Tariff Preferences ( GPS ) ( RC7-0181 / 2010 ) although I am very sorry and upset that the Colombian Embassy has been very successful in convincing some of our colleagues to keep out almost all references to the need to investigate the human rights violations in Colombia and decide on the basis of the findings in order to decide whether to withdraw the tariff preferences for Colombian goods .
The European Parliament report on the EU Common Foreign and Security Policy , in conjunction with the corresponding report on the Common Security and Defence Policy , produced by the anti-grassroots alliance of conservatives , social democrats and liberals in the European Parliament , maps out the constant support of the political mouthpieces of capital for the promotion of even greater militarisation of the EU , especially following the entry into force of the reactionary Treaty of Lisbon , and their active role in promoting the imperialist policy of the EU and the interventions and wars which it unleashes against third countries and peoples in every corner of the planet , in order to serve the interests and sovereignty of monopoly capital under conditions of escalating imperialist infighting .
The report calls for :
a ) effective organisation of the EU 's European External Action Service ( founded under the Treaty of Lisbon ) , the new political / military arm for organising , supporting and implementing the imperialist interventions of the EU ;
b ) an increase in spending from the EU budget for its military and political interventions ;
c ) better interweaving of the EU 's political and military capabilities , with a stronger EU / NATO link being pivotal in the more effective exercise of its imperialist interventions using military means .
The Greek Communist Party voted against and condemns this unacceptable report , which is purely and simply a manual for imperialist attacks against the people .
The European Union must develop its strategic autonomy through a powerful and effective foreign , security and defence policy in order to defend its interests globally , ensure the security of its citizens and promote respect for human rights and democratic values throughout the world .
Through having more effective European security agreements , Member States must demonstrate receptiveness towards making the European Union a bigger player on the international stage .
I believe that the Council 's next annual report on the Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) must refer directly to the implementation of the European Union 's foreign policy strategy , assessing its effectiveness , as well as offer the conditions for establishing a specific , direct dialogue with the European Parliament , focused on devising a strategic approach to the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
in writing . - I voted against amendment 18 as this amendment , in my opinion , contains a paradox .
It deplores the logic of militarisation in its introduction and concludes that ' CFSP should be based on peaceful principles and the demilitarisation of security ' .
My personal position is in line with my country 's international status of neutrality and therefore , as the amendment is not at all lucid , I decided that I could not vote in favour or abstain .
I support this report , as I believe that a clear and coordinated Common Foreign and Security Policy may contribute significantly to the strengthening of the European Union 's powers at international level .
Undoubtedly , one of the most important CFSP matters is the EU 's increasing energy dependence on sources of supply and transit routes and the need to curb the EU 's energy dependence on third countries .
I would like to call on the Commission 's Vice-President and High Representative , Catherine Ashton , to implement without hesitation Parliament 's recommendations on the creation of a consistent and coordinated policy by firstly promoting EU cohesion in maintaining a constructive dialogue with energy suppliers , particularly Russia , and transit countries , by supporting EU energy priorities , by defending the common interests of Member States , by developing effective diplomatic work in the area of energy , by establishing more effective crisis resolution measures and by promoting energy supply diversification , the use of sustainable energy and the development of renewable energy .
I am convinced that only by acting together will the EU , in future , be able to ensure the uninterrupted and secure supply of gas and oil to Member States and increase the energy independence of the whole of the EU .
We Swedish Social Democrats believe that the partnership between the EU and NATO should not be developed solely on the basis of the UN Charter .
Therefore , we think it is important for the wording to include the perspective of the Member States on this question and to take into consideration the different traditions and positions of the Member States with regard to foreign , security and defence policy .
Like many of the Member States ( if not all of them ) , the European Union finds itself confronted with a budget which is much less grand than its ambitions and in no way sufficient for all that it would like to do .
The list of the multiple European values and expectations on this matter emphasise this asymmetry .
The fact that , to achieve excellence , policy is an activity in which it is necessary to predict and take measures assumes a particular relevance when the issues in question are matters which are so essential to our common lives , such as foreign and security policy .
The Treaty of Lisbon and the consequent creation of the post of High Representative indicate the conviction of the Member States that there is a real need for promptness , coordination and convergence in European action in matters of foreign and security policy .
Only after action in practice will we able to see if the provisions of the treaty are sufficient and whether what has been set out in its text will play its role successfully .
I am hoping that the Union will be capable of responding effectively to this important challenge .
The report on the implementation of the European security strategy is an annual document by Parliament that assesses European security and defence policy and presents proposals to improve the efficiency and visibility of this policy .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the external action of the EU gains a new dimension and importance .
Parliament plays a fundamental role here as a guardian of the democratic legitimacy of external action .
The creation of a European External Action Service will serve as a diplomatic corps and instrument for the Union which , hitherto , could only rely on national representation .
However , it is crucial that the EU has the necessary budgetary resources at its disposal to reach the goals of external representation .
I would like to refer to a few points in the ' Western Balkans ' subchapter of the report on the main aspects and basic options of the Common Foreign and Security Policy in 2008 .
Consideration must be given to the fact that at the Council Meeting for General Affairs and External Relations in February 2008 , the decision was made that each EU Member State would decide , in accordance with national practice and international law , their relationship with Kosovo .
At the same time , the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice is expected during the first half of this year in the case relating to compliance with international law of the unilateral declaration of independence made by the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo .
A balanced approach must be maintained in assessing developments in the stabilisation process in Kosovo , bearing in mind that some tense situations were noted during 2009 , including during the election period in November .
In this respect , I believe that there are numerous challenges to be overcome , especially with regard to law enforcement , the fight against corruption and organised crime , protection for the Serbs and other minorities , reconciliation between communities and the implementation of economic and social reforms .
The Treaty of Lisbon brought Parliament new responsibilities with respect to common foreign and security policy , and we are ready to take on these responsibilities , and to contribute to the choice of both policies and the individuals who will represent those policies throughout the world , by scrutinising those nominated for the European External Action Service , also including here the special representatives of the EU .
The EU has to demonstrate before the international community that it has a foreign policy which is becoming increasingly representative , coherent , systematic and effective .
The EU must increasingly come to be the principal driver in building world peace .
I voted against the Council 's annual report to Parliament on the main aspects and basic choices of the Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) in 2008 , because I think that the objective of the CFSP should be to define the EU 's external policy , not defend its territory .
I do not agree with the link between the EU and NATO established by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Instead , I support demilitarisation and zero armament .
I condemn the logic of the militarisation of the EU , which has intensified with the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , and the changes that it introduced , such as the European External Action Service and the role of the High Representative .
We are currently witnessing the highest degree of militarisation in history .
Weapons expenditure is higher than it was even during the Cold War .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left demands the withdrawal of all military bases belonging to the United States and other countries that are on the soil of EU Member States , and we ask for military expenditure to be used for civilian purposes in order to achieve the Millennium Development Goals .
This report attempts to position the EU as a stronger global actor .
In so doing , however , it does not give any clear specification of objectives or direction to the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) .
The demand for a stronger financial footing must therefore be rejected , given this context .
In future , international engagements should , in fact , be assessed for how sensible they are and their benefit to the EU .
Ultimately , a strategy-based approach should be developed in the CFSP .
I feel I must roundly oppose the objective of abolishing the principle of unanimity .
This is particularly the case if , as has been stated several times , the aim is to have a closer partnership with NATO .
The EU must manage to create its own structures , and must , of course , have the necessary resources available for such structures .
When it comes to the numerous operations and missions , many of the current 23 different actions in which the EU is involved should be reconsidered .
In Afghanistan , in particular , the strategy followed there under the leadership of the United States is to be regarded as a failure .
The EU 's involvement should therefore be reconsidered without delay .
In the context of the Eastern Partnership , it is worth pointing out , once again , that Russia 's interests must be taken account of for historical , cultural and geographical reasons , and that unilateral action by the EU should be avoided .
Since the report does not really take this into consideration , and because it is also deficient in other areas , I voted against it .
With regard to the Albertini and Danjean reports on the European Union 's foreign , security and defence policy , I would like to make it clear that the votes of the Spanish delegation of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament confirm the non-recognition of Kosovo as an independent state .
Kosovo has not been recognised by Spain or by four other EU Member States , or by 100 other Member States of the United Nations .
Therefore , both in the Committee on Foreign Affairs and today in this Chamber , we have supported the amendments that were in line with our viewpoint .
The position of the Spanish socialist delegation is , however , positive with regard to the stabilisation and enlargement process in which the countries of the western Balkans , Turkey and Iceland are now involved .
in writing . - I have finally voted in favour of the report , known also as the annual report on the CFSP , mainly because two of our five amendments were adopted ( the one on the Transatlantic Legislators ' Dialogue and the one about the expectation that a strategic relationship between the EU and China will be developed ) .
Finally , there were no major changes to the original draft and no surprises on the amendments adopted .
The report was , in the end , voted with 592 votes in favour ( among which ours ) and 66 against .
I have voted against the report , which states that the EU 's values and interests must be advanced worldwide by deepening the Union 's collective strategic thinking .
This seems to be a neo-colonial approach .
According to Mr Albertini , the EU 's competence should cover all areas of foreign policy and all security questions , including a common defence policy , which might lead to a common defence .
Europe is divided on this issue .
Parliament is also calling for increased budget appropriations from the Member States , in particular , with regard to the need for the EU to establish quickly a large presence at the UN which speaks with one voice .
The EU Member States will , of course , keep their own seats at the UN , but the EU , with its one voice , will have a major influence over them .
The European Parliament also believes that the EU and NATO should develop an intense and effective partnership .
This is in conflict with my country 's policy of non-alignment .
The citizens of Europe have never had the opportunity to express their opinion on this issue because some of the Member States have refused to hold referendums on the Treaty of Lisbon .
The EU report on the EU CFSP is a call for a widespread war by the imperialist centre of the EU aimed at the peoples .
It marks a new escalation in competition with other imperialist centres .
The report :
Welcomes the 70 000 members of the 23 military and ' political ' missions of the EU around the world , in most cases , in cooperation with the US and NATO .
Welcomes the imperialist maritime supervision of Somalia by the naval forces of the EU and calls for the EU to set up a Sudanese ' state policing and regular army mechanism ' abroad , which must not overthrow the country 's government .
It supports the creation of a political / military Crisis Management and Planning Directorate and the creation of a permanent EU operations centre .
It calls for state terrorism to be stepped up and for democratic rights to be strangled in the name of ' combating terrorism ' and ' radicalisation ' .
It promotes the rapid organisation of the European External Action Service with political and military competences .
It calls for the organisation of military and political interventions , even in the Member States of the EU , within the framework of alleged mutual support provided for in the ' solidarity ' clause of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The only interest the peoples have is in overturning the entire imperialist and anti-grassroots policy and the very construct of the EU .
The European Parliament has received , through the vote of the EU 's citizens , more powers with regard to matters such as the budget and control over foreign , security and defence policy .
In these circumstances , Members of the European Parliament must be included by the other EU institutions in the decision-making process and in appointing staff who represent the EU internationally .
The powers which the European Parliament has received through the Treaty of Lisbon are intended to increase the legitimacy of the decisions concerning the common foreign , security and defence policy .
This justifies the request to set up a Defence Council as part of the External Affairs Council , as well as the creation of a permanent EU operations centre to deal with operational planning and the implementation of military operations .
The discussions about the anti-missile shield , in the current form proposed by the US Administration , must take place across the whole EU , with the active involvement of the European Parliament .
However , it must be made clear that the EU has exclusive rights in determining the defence and security policy , and the interventions of third states are not justified .
The European Union decides how best to guarantee the security of its citizens , which must be done based on a consensus among the Member States , and not at all through the involvement of non-Member States .
The EU has variously been defined as an economic giant and a political dwarf , and this is supposed to mean that it has not been provided with the means necessary to pursue some of its aims , in particular , in respect of its foreign policy .
There have been many instances which have demonstrated the lack of unanimity of will and action amongst the Member States .
I am doubtful whether this situation can be changed in the short-term .
Rather , I believe that this situation is entirely to be expected , given the number of states which make up the Union and their particular histories and interests .
The question of common defence policy , something which touches upon the very essence of sovereign powers , has historically always been a matter of distrust for European countries and even today it deserves particular care , and quite justifiably so .
This must not prevent us from searching for deeper cooperation and coordination with the aim of improving our common security and defence .
Its nature as a soft power not withstanding , the European Union should consider becoming a true second pillar in an Atlantic alliance which cannot continue to require the US to make all the sacrifices .
This report , which brings together the conservative right and the social democrats , is a dangerous symptom of what we have denounced many times regarding the Treaty of Lisbon : its contribution to the deepening of neoliberalism , based on the federalism and militarisation of the European Union as the European pillar of NATO .
At the behest of the great powers , the EU is aiming to settle its own contradictions and reposition itself within a process of arranging forces at an international level , based on a vision involving competition between powers over natural resources and markets and greater affirmation of the European Union as an economic , political and military bloc with ambitions for global interventionism .
Here , the majority of this House has offered the prescription which it has been advocating for many years :
the militarisation of international relations and internal security on the basis of the aforementioned fight against terrorism ;
the increase of budgets in these areas and the creation of new military capacities which will contribute to a new arms race ;
adaptation to the US and NATO concept of preventative wars and an increase in its intervention at the world level .
The result of these developments could be more conflict , exploitation and poverty in response to the crisis into which capitalism has plunged the world .
The path of peace requires a break with these policies .
Subject to the following remarks , I voted in favour of the Danjean report .
1 ) The report calls for the abolition of the Assembly of the Western European Union ( WEU ) .
One therefore searches in vain for the slightest reference in the report to the work carried out by the Assembly to further European integration .
It is too bad for the work of the European Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs when all day long , elements are praised even though they are often less commendable than the ideas that the Assembly in Paris has so far come up with .
2 ) Parliamentary control of European defence matters will have to take due account of the contribution of the national parliaments .
Indeed , they are the ones on which the decision to make national troops and capabilities available to the EU for EU military operations will depend , and for a long time yet .
The same applies to the financing of military operations , which are paid for out of the national budgets .
The desire to prevent any democratic deficit in European defence matters should guide us in our search for an institutional solution that is truly acceptable at parliamentary level .
in writing . - Labour MEPs welcome this annual review of the European Security Strategy and Common Security and Defence Policy , especially in the light of the changes brought about by the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , and , in this regard , especially welcome the role of High Representative , Baroness Cathy Ashton , in the associated debate in Parliament .
While voting in favour of the report as a whole , we decided to vote against paragraph 20 , which proposes the establishment of an permanent EU Operations Centre .
It is our longstanding position and that of the British Government that there is no need for such a centre , which would needlessly duplicate existing structures .
On Amendment 20 , we chose to abstain as , although we wholeheartedly welcome moves towards a world free of nuclear weapons , we note the inaccuracy in this amendment that the ' US ' weapons in this context represent NATO , rather than US capability , and , as such , we believe that the question of the removal of nuclear warheads from Germany or elsewhere is a debate to be held by NATO allies including the US .
It is not a debate for the EU as a separate multilateral entity .
The Common Foreign and Security Policy and the European Security and Defence Policy are two fundamental pillars allowing the EU to become the principal actor of the international community in the fight against the challenges and threats which were identified in the European Security Strategy .
Notwithstanding the fact that the EU considers the UN Security Council to be the primary responsible party in the maintenance and preservation of world peace and security , the EU must have policies which are effective and shared by all Member States so that it can respond in an effective manner to the those challenges and threats which have a global character .
I voted against the Danjean report because it proposes a future Common Foreign and Security Policy that is focused on promoting the militarisation of the EU and its interventionism .
It does not propose any civilian and peaceful focus or solution to the conflicts , focusing instead on defence and the militarisation of the EU .
I am also opposed to this text because it refers to the Treaty of Lisbon and its application .
This promotes a move towards the centralisation of powers , with no parliamentary control mechanism , which will turn the EU into a military player on the international stage .
Instead of permanent , structured cooperation between the EU and NATO , which is what the report advocates , I am in favour of all activities being conducted strictly within the framework of the United Nations Charter and international law , with strict separation between the two institutions .
Mr Danjean 's report into the implementation of the European Security Strategy and the common security and defence policy is very comprehensive and deals with numerous topics that are important for Europe .
However , there is a lack of a clear focus on the fundamental shaping of EU foreign policy over the next few years and also a lack of a strict policy line .
On the one hand , the report seeks to strengthen the EU 's autonomy in respect of other global players , in particular , in respect of the United States , through having a strong foreign , security and defence policy , and this is something that I welcome .
Yet the report again comes out in favour of strong cooperation between the EU and NATO and wants , for example , to create joint institutional structures .
The call for a White Paper to be drawn up on the common security and defence policy ( CSDP ) which clearly defines the objectives of the policy is thus more than advisable .
Much as I am critical of the increasing centralism of the European Union , I do support the creation of a permanent EU operations centre .
Such a centre would enable us to both plan and execute diverse operations more efficiently .
In addition , avoiding duplication of work would also lead to cost savings .
The solidarity clause in connection with natural disasters that is referred to , like the establishment of a European civil protection force , is undoubtedly worthwhile and something that we should indeed strive for .
Nevertheless , in the light of the unclear position in various areas , I was forced to abstain from the vote .
in writing . - I have finally abstained in the final vote on the annual report on the implementation of the European Security Strategy .
This was the most complex and delicate report for us but we managed well .
Two and a half of our 11 amendments were passed ( with a very important one calling on the HR / VP to overcome the imbalance between civilian and military planning capabilities ) .
No other major changes were voted .
The report was , in the end , approved with 480 votes in favour and 111 against .
I , as I said , abstained , together with the rest of my group .
I have voted against the report .
This document is one of the most militaristic that I have read in all my years in Parliament .
The European Parliament is calling for the establishment of a permanent operations centre which will be responsible for the operational planning and conduct of military operations and for strengthening cooperation with NATO .
The European Defence Agency will develop military space surveillance capability .
In addition , maritime surveillance capability is to be established which , among other things , will limit ' illegal ' immigration .
The report also calls for more Member States to take part in the EU 's military operations than has previously been the case .
The EU and Parliament are to become involved in discussions on a strategic concept for NATO .
As a citizen of a non-aligned country , I cannot support this far-reaching report .
I wish to thank all my fellow Members in the European Parliament for the support they have given me in plenary , voting in favour of Amendment 34 to the Danjean Report on the European Security Strategy .
I initiated Amendment 34 with the aim of modifying the text in paragraph 87 of this report , which referred to the development of the anti-missile shield in Europe in the wake of a bilateral agreement between the United States and Member States , including Romania .
The amendment proposes removing the recommendation to develop this system ' in dialogue with Russia ' replacing this phrase with a more balanced wording of ' dialogue at continental level ' .
The new US project involving the development of the anti-missile defence system is strictly defensive in nature and guarantees the security of the whole of Eastern Europe and the Western Balkans .
The project is not targeted against Russia .
Consequently , I do not believe that there are any reasons for making Russia a participant and , possibly , a decision maker in the project 's development .
These considerations have formed the basis for Amendment 34 .
I am pleased that this amendment was approved by 358 votes in favour .
The number of votes in favour highlights that the support given has transcended the boundaries of political groups and national affiliations , demonstrating the importance of the motion for a resolution and the existence of a European majority which shares the same point of view .
I consider that strengthening efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and achieve a world free of nuclear weapons is an absolute and important priority .
Strengthening the Non-proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) by having all the Member States sign and apply it comes within this framework .
I opted to abstain from this particular motion for a resolution because it includes a basic point to which I am opposed and which the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left tried , unsuccessfully , to change .
I refer to the phrase and import of the view that the EU can ' use every means at its disposal to prevent , deter , halt and , where possible , eliminate proliferation programmes , which causes serious problems ' .
To be specific , the use or the threat of use of military means , especially as regards Iran , is extremely dangerous , will not have positive results for peace , and contradicts the perception of the left on military action by the EU .
The principles which lay behind the signing of the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty and which date back to the period of the Cold War continue to be of relevance today and are even of greater urgency .
The fall of the Soviet bloc led to the spread of nuclear material to various states , and the end of unified control over its use and storage raises fears over its irresponsible utilisation or even its deterioration , with unimaginable consequences for the health and safety of the region .
The increase in the number of members of the ' nuclear club ' , the terrorist threat and the relative ease with which weapons of mass destruction can be built today combine to deepen the climate of unrest in which we are now living .
The European Union must be capable of assuming a common and coherent position on these questions , aimed at creating a world which is safer and increasingly free of weapons .
International changes provide new opportunities on the issue of non-proliferation .
At the beginning of his term , President Obama stated his ambition of a world without nuclear weapons and pledged to actively pursue the ratification of a complete ban on nuclear testing by the United States .
The Union must be up to the challenges of nuclear non-proliferation , especially those posed by Iran and North Korea , which continue to be the biggest threats to international security .
As for the reduction of nuclear arsenals , the priority is to continue to reduce the two main arsenals , that is , those of Russia and of the United States , which hold 95 % of the world 's existing nuclear weapons .
Parliament expects a common and ambitious position from the European Union during the next review conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons .
Nuclear disarmament at international level is of vital importance .
This justifies the need to promote and strengthen the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) and to ensure its ratification by all states .
In the current international climate , the danger of a new nuclear arms race is a matter of genuine concern .
The imposition of disarmament and of the end of the development , production and storage of new nuclear weapons are the basis of the spirit and letter of the NPT .
The ongoing dispute over Iran 's nuclear programmes requires a peaceful solution , based on negotiations which it will be important to resume .
Any military action or threat of the use of force will be counterproductive and will have consequences which are potentially dangerous for the region .
In this regard , we must show our clear opposition to plans which could , in any way , open the door to the justification of military intervention , as in the case of Paragraph G of the preamble to the adopted joint resolution .
The Iranian problem is at the heart of the debate in preparation for the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty ( NPT ) review conference .
To recap : Iran , in accepting the NPT , abandoned over time the option to equip itself with nuclear weapons .
If the Republic of Iran were no longer to honour its commitments , we would have two problems .
In the short term , this would constitute a threat to stability in a region in which most of the players are tempted to adopt radical positions .
In the medium and long terms , Iran 's refusal to respect the provisions of the NPT would set a serious precedent as regards regional , and indeed global , security .
It would clearly seem that the agitation of the members of the United Nations Security Council , who have the right of veto , plus Germany , is no longer enough to shake things up .
A strong signal from the United States and Russia to show that they are both inclined unilaterally to reduce their nuclear arsenal could help give a sense of responsibility to the average nuclear powers that are also ready to disarm .
Lastly , a strong gesture from the major powers could perhaps convince countries that are currently acquiring nuclear knowhow to abandon their projects .
in writing . - Labour MEPs would like to express our deep commitment to the aim of a world free of nuclear weapons .
We are proud that Britain as a nuclear power is leading efforts towards a nuclear non-proliferation agreement in May in New York that involves global consensus .
We have supported this resolution with the clear aim of sending the message that the European Parliament and Labour MEPs will support all efforts to ensure we leave behind the bad old days of nuclear stand-offs and mutually assured destruction .
We decided to abstain on Amendment 2 as we believe that military doctrine is a matter for national governments to decide and not in the prerogative of the European Parliament .
We also joined with our political group in supporting Amendment 3 as we believe there is a right for all states to develop civil nuclear power , but there is a responsibility for these states to reject the development of nuclear weapons .
Labour MEPs will continue to support disarmament amongst possessor states , to prevent proliferation to new states , and ultimately to achieve a world that is free from nuclear weapons .
in writing . - I am fully aware that international nuclear disarmament , and therefore the strengthening of the NPT and its ratification by all states , are of vital importance and that every effort should be made to implement the treaty in all its aspects .
To ensure effective multilateral efforts , they must be set within a well-developed vision of achieving a nuclear weapon-free world at the earliest date possible .
We must insist on the commitment of the nuclear weapons states under Article VI of the NPT to disarm completely , as it was a key promise and so many countries have signed the NPT and thus forego nuclear weapons permanently .
We oppose the phrase in this joint resolution ( Recital G ) : ' ... making use of all instruments at its disposal to prevent ... ' .
I warn , in particular regarding Iran , that any military activity to prevent proliferation is completely counterproductive and highly dangerous .
I am convinced that the best way to deal with the problem of proliferation would be to abandon atomic energy once and for all , as its civilian use bears great dangers on its own and , moreover , it cannot be excluded with sufficient certainty that civilian nuclear technology will not be used for military purposes .
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction truly represents a serious threat to mankind , to peace and to international security .
Extreme terrorism , unchecked and often fundamentalist , causes the world to fear and to try to prevent groups and governments with unscrupulous leaders from acquiring this technology .
Therefore , it is important that governments that possess this type of weapon progressively demonstrate that they intend to reduce their arsenals , setting a good example .
The next summit , scheduled for April of this year , could make a very important contribution to this matter , and there are high expectations of greater stringency and control over the unauthorised trading of nuclear materials .
Let us also hope that the USA and China play an important role in the nuclear disarmament of the Korean Peninsula .
It is still important that states do not distance themselves from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons , as it concerns all of us , not just some .
I am delighted that the European Parliament has clearly adopted the report on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons .
As a Christian , I welcome the fact that the representatives of Western civilisation , more than 60 years after the end of the war , realised that the existence of nuclear weapons was a huge global risk and therefore made efforts to reduce them .
The fact that Iran and the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea do not intend to sign the Treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons constitutes a major risk .
These countries also fail to fulfil international obligations in the area of nuclear safety .
The fact that Iran denies access to its nuclear facilities to the inspectors of the International Atomic Energy Agency constitutes a real safety risk , not only for states in its immediate vicinity , but also for the EU .
In conclusion , I would like to thank Members for their effort to make the text of the resolution as balanced as possible .
in writing . - I have finally given my ' yes ' to this complex resolution ( RC7-0137 / 2010 ) on the Non-proliferation Treaty .
Basically , I am glad that the original text presented by the PPE , Socialists , ALDE and the Verts / ALE was confirmed and that one of our four amendments was adopted ( 331 in favour , 311 against ) , especially , surprisingly , as this was the one calling on all parties to review their military doctrine with a view to renouncing the first-strike option .
The efforts of the PPE to delete the paragraph concerning nuclear free zones , including in the Middle East , was defeated .
in writing . - There are many elements to the resolution we can agree with .
We are strongly in favour of a robust and effective Non-proliferation Treaty .
However , the resolution as it stands includes some unhelpful elements and the ECR Group therefore abstained .
Recital L questions the holdings of tactical nuclear weapons in five European non-nuclear states .
We are in favour of the continued presence of such weapons as they contribute to burden-sharing and guaranteeing US military commitment to European security .
In a number of places , there are implied criticisms of close allies whereas our criticisms should be aimed at those that are a threat to international security .
Neither the UK nor France , nor indeed the US , now produce fissile material for weapons .
It is a different matter to say that their production facilities for fissile materials should , at this stage , be abandoned .
The call for the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East is obviously aimed at Israel .
Israel faces an existential threat from neighbours , several of whom have a history of developing nuclear and other WMDs , and indeed at least one , Iran , continues in that direction .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
( The minutes of the previous sitting were approved )
EU policy on Arctic issues ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy regarding the EU 's Arctic policy .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I welcome very much the opportunity to discuss with you what I believe is an evolving Arctic policy in the European Union .
It is a serious issue of growing political importance and I believe we have to treat it as such .
In the aftermath of the Copenhagen negotiations , it is right that we pay increasing attention to that part of the world which has been witnessing the most tangible effects of climate change .
Scientific evidence shows that the ice caps lost more than half of their thickness over the last decade .
Other environmental changes are also having a growing impact on the Arctic 's people , biodiversity and landscape , both on land and at sea .
Like other international actors , we have been increasingly active on Arctic issues .
As you know , the Commission published its Arctic Communication in late 2008 , which was welcomed by the Council , and that was followed in December 2009 by extensive conclusions on Arctic issues .
I believe this represents another step in the process to gradually building up a coherent , comprehensive Arctic policy .
As you know , the Commission has been asked to prepare a follow-up report in June 2011 , and that will be another opportunity to further develop our thinking together .
All this work is in progress , and that is why I am very eager today to hear the views of Members of this House .
In this context , the Commission appreciated your resolution on Arctic governance of October 2008 , which provided good impetus in the last stages of the Commission 's drafting of the communication .
We seek support from Parliament for our efforts to ensure the European Union is recognised as a responsible and respected player in the Arctic .
Our geographical position and our ongoing programmes in the Arctic are our starting point , but we want to develop this further .
There are three main areas for the work which I would like to mention very briefly .
First we want to contribute to the protection of the Arctic region , including its population .
The Arctic 's ecosystem is very fragile and therefore needs maximum protection and safeguards .
At the same time , because of climate change , the resources of the Arctic are becoming increasingly accessible .
That offers opportunities , but must be handled with great care .
We want to ensure our citizens and companies are treated fairly , including in the areas of transport and natural resources , and that needs to be done in a very deliberate and careful manner with appropriate environmental safeguards .
Both objectives can and should be developed jointly by EU institutions and Member States , especially the three Arctic Member States .
All should continue to work closely together with other Arctic stakeholders .
Our third objective is to contribute to robust and enhanced governance arrangements to handle the multiple challenges that affect the Arctic region .
That includes the implementation of existing agreements , frameworks and arrangements , including the Arctic Council , and full respect for the UN Convention on the Law of the Seas .
But , where relevant , we should take a careful look at whether and how these arrangements could be complemented and developed further .
To be credible , we should recognise that the Arctic region is radically different from the Antarctic and this recognition should guide our policy response .
Unlike the Antarctic , which is a vast and inhabited continent surrounded by an ocean , the Arctic is a maritime space surrounded by land which has been inhabited by people for thousands of years and which belongs to sovereign countries .
Therefore , proposals to replicate the Antarctic Treaty in the Arctic region would be unrealistic , and they would probably also be detrimental to the proactive role that we aim to develop .
As you know , this is also the view of the Council .
We very much want to maintain close cooperation with the European Parliament as we pursue our common goals of gradually building up an EU Arctic policy and we must work together with the Arctic states and the international community to find the most effective way of preserving and protecting the Arctic for future generations .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , many thanks for having opened the debate here on this subject , which I think is an important one .
Those who are participating in this debate here today will share this view , and I think that we will also be able to achieve a very large consensus in the debate .
I am the rapporteur for a report that is still to be drawn up on this subject , and I would very much like to work closely with all those involved .
You mentioned a number of key words .
Protecting the environment is very important .
You mentioned the resident populations , the resources below sea level , and also fisheries .
Another key word is shipping , the shipping routes that climate change is opening up : the Northwest Passage and the Northeast Passage .
In the vicinity of these passages , alongside our three Arctic Member States , are , of course , at least two global players - the United States and Russia - as well as a major partner in the shape of Canada .
These States are the immediate adjacent territories with whom we must , at all events , build up and improve our contact in the context of this policy , which we are now aiming to develop .
Where raw materials are concerned , specifically , we have the potential for cooperation - but there is also the potential for conflict if we do not approach this in the right way .
The EU will certainly not be planting its flag on the seabed , as the Russians have done .
We should , however , seek dialogue with these affected parties in order , in this way , to be able to achieve , in a consensual manner , those things that are important for the region in terms of environmental protection , the extraction of resources and the rights of local residents .
Mr President , a while ago , US Secretary of State , Hillary Clinton , stated in an interview how difficult her job was and said that it was about moving from one crisis to the next .
Unfortunately , there is very little time left to deal with such core future challenges as the development of the Arctic region .
Baroness Ashton , I suppose you must have felt the same sort of anguish by now , and that is why we greatly appreciate the fact that you are initiating a debate on Arctic policy so early on and that over the weekend , you are going to Lapland , which is part of the Arctic region .
There , you will certainly obtain important information .
The Arctic treasure chest that is opening up is full of economic opportunities , but it poses many environmental and security risks , as well as those connected with the fate of the indigenous peoples .
Global warming is opening up new sea routes and enabling the exploitation of oil and gas resources in an environmentally destructive way .
The Swedish International Peace Research Institute ( SIPRI ) , among others , has already published a paper , ominously entitled ' Ice-free Arctic ' , on China 's Arctic policy .
That is why the European Union must take urgent action and draw up its own Arctic policy .
The Commission 's conclusions you presented to us are welcome , inasmuch as the region , with its oil , gas and minerals , is not just seen as a new Eldorado : the main focus is on the people who live there , and this is a very important aspect of the situation .
The EU also has to be willing to hold constructive talks with the indigenous peoples , and that is one way the Union can come to play a decisive role in Arctic policy .
For example , Parliament 's recent restrictions on seal hunting infuriated the indigenous population .
It is very important to strengthen the status of the Arctic Council , and for that reason , we must now have a greater influence on Canada and Russia in particular , so that the European Union can have a stronger role to play .
Arctic research is an important area of cooperation ; for example , the University of Lapland , where you are going , is where the University of the Arctic is based , and I am sure that when the Arctic Information Centre is established , as the Commission has indicated , Rovaniemi would be a suitable location .
In addition , the European Union 's own structures need to be strengthened .
Unfortunately , it does seem to be the case that in the Council , the Arctic Ocean has been trampled underfoot by the Southern and Eastern Dimension , and so this Northern Dimension 's Arctic window should now be opened .
Baroness Ashton , the Commission needs to clarify the role of each DirectorateGeneral and indicate the person responsible for Arctic issues .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I should like to say to the High Representative : thank you so much for your statement .
I think many of us in this Chamber are so pleased that you are carrying on what was started by the Commission and also followed up by the Presidency statements last autumn .
You underlined the fragile nature and environment of the Arctic .
That fragile nature is , as you recognised , a global concern , not just one that concerns Europe or indeed those nations in the Arctic .
The Arctic also presents itself as a unique opportunity for multinational cooperation .
It is unique also for us as the EU to have a positive relationship with Russia there , through the Northern Dimension .
That is something we must absolutely build on with other partners .
But it has to be a meaningful cooperation overall in the Arctic , and it is worrying - and you did not touch on this in your statement - that we see the development of an inner core of five coastal states of the Arctic meeting outside the architecture of the Arctic Council .
This could seriously undermine a very precious cooperation and it has to be treated with some seriousness .
Likewise , we - the EU - have been rebuffed for observer status .
We have some fences we need to mend and we need to try to re-establish confidence in what it is that we want to establish in the Arctic .
I believe that the original Commission communication was an amazing document in the way it brought together many cross-cutting issues across a number of DGs in the Commission .
This is a good basis on which we can build .
We all wait with interest as to how you will coordinate this policy , going forward in the new Commission and with your unique role wearing two hats .
But thank you for the start .
Mr President , a sort of cultural schizophrenia is apparent in our attitude to the Arctic region .
On the one hand , we are concerned .
It is quite obvious that climate change is taking place faster in the Arctic than elsewhere .
The region has been compared to a canary in a mine .
Since 1979 , the average annual ice cover in the Arctic Ocean has shrunk by around 1.5 million square kilometres , which is the area of France , Italy , Spain and the United Kingdom combined .
This melting process is accelerating climate change because it is reducing the earth 's reflectance , or albedo .
It is releasing methane from the tundra , and could also release it from the seabed .
Methane speeds up climate change even more .
The melting process also allows toxins that have accumulated over many years to be released into the environment .
While we are concerned about the situation , at the same time , an oil and gas rush has started in the Arctic .
Countries are quarrelling and negotiating about how the seabed might be divided up .
Moreover , the indigenous peoples are largely being ignored in all this .
The EU should now be promoting a consistent approach to sustainable development .
It should control the glittery images of euro and dollar signs and support the protection of the Arctic region by means of the same sort of agreement that applies to the Antarctic .
Furthermore , the indigenous peoples should be included in all decisionmaking processes that relate to the region .
In any event , there should be a 50year moratorium on the exploitation of fossil resources in the area .
It needs to be understood that nature and wildlife in the region are delicate and vulnerable .
For example , there are much greater problems and worse risks associated with drilling for oil there than elsewhere .
Shipping companies also need to acknowledge the enormous difficulties and risks that exist in the region .
It is of no help whatsoever if we merely tag a few nice words about the environment and the indigenous peoples on to the decisions we take but our actual deeds mean that we seriously risk contaminating the environment irreversibly and that we violate the rights of the indigenous population .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , when Denmark joined the EU in 1973 , the EU assumed an Arctic dimension through the Danish dependency of Greenland .
In 1985 , Greenland chose to leave the EU but , when Sweden and Finland joined 10 years later , they substantially enlarged the EU 's interest in the Arctic region .
Since then , the EU has become one of the many actors with a vital strategic interest in the Arctic - its environment and its natural resources .
As countries with territory in the Arctic , the United States , Canada , Russia , Norway and Iceland all defend their interests robustly and vigorously .
The European Union should not hesitate now to do so as well and the Arctic Council , in my view , is the best arena in which to do so .
The Union 's ad hoc observer status in the Arctic Council is inadequate for this purpose .
I hope that the High Representative will insist on permanent observer status for the EU at the next ministerial meeting in April next year in Greenland .
It is regrettable that Canada is blocking the EU in retaliation for the Union 's ban on seal products , and I hope that , eventually , common sense will prevail .
This approach makes little sense , given the fact that six EU Member States , including the United Kingdom - my own - are permanent observers .
Nevertheless , the coordination between Denmark , Sweden and Finland on the Arctic Council has been exemplary and has served as a platform for the EU 's wider interest to be heard in the region .
The contributions of our ally , Norway , and Iceland , now an aspiring EU Member State , have further galvanised European participation in the Arctic Forum .
This is vital because Russia has left us in little doubt as to its own designs on the Arctic , famously planting a Russian flag on the seabed of the North Pole in 2007 .
We know to our cost that Russia sometimes follows its own rule book in international affairs .
Only a united front by other members and the observers on the Arctic Council , working through the EU 's Northern Dimension policy , will keep the Kremlin in check .
We cannot allow the Arctic to become the new arena for Russia 's expansionist tendencies .
Mr President , there are many good reasons for discussing the Arctic .
A number of them have been mentioned .
There is the question of climate change , in that the Arctic region has been hard hit by global warming .
There is the question of natural resources , in that the Arctic region offers enormous riches .
Then there is the question of the opening of the northern maritime route , which entails totally new transport patterns .
However , the crucial question for my group is from what angle we should approach the Arctic .
Should our starting point be all the advantages , in a narrow sense , which the EU can get from the Arctic region ?
Or should our starting point be how the development of the Arctic region can benefit the global community - while at the same time , let us not forget , fully respecting the right to self-determination of the Arctic people ?
A key test of this question lies in the position we take : should we work towards the Arctic becoming an area where a new arms race can be allowed to flourish - Russia has played an active part here and others have followed - or should the Arctic , like the Antarctic , be a demilitarised area ?
Obviously , there is a difference between the North Pole and the South Pole , the Arctic and the Antarctic .
However , it is interesting that we have succeeded in forging a treaty on the Antarctic , in which we have ruled out military presence and stipulated that this region may only be used for peaceful purposes .
The major issue facing the Commission is whether it should work towards making the Arctic a demilitarised area , and should that be the case , which specific initiatives it should take in that direction .
Mr President , the Arctic issue is important and it has now also come before us here .
We in Finland are familiar with conditions in the Arctic .
We live there .
When Baroness Ashton goes to Lapland , she will find a lot of people who live and work north of the Arctic Circle .
When I myself go there on Sunday , I will find a lot of people there who are particularly worried about work and their livelihood , because in a real democracy , people can choose freely where they want to live .
They can also live in the Arctic if they wish .
The University of Lapland in Rovaniemi is the best place to carry out this study from the viewpoint of finances and research .
Diana Wallis had given a positive appraisal of this in the Finnish newspaper ' Kaleva ' , and for once I would be quite happy to express my agreement with a liberal view , so I will .
From the viewpoint of the future , we should take three issues into account : nature , animals and people .
If these three can be accommodated in every part of the Arctic and can live there in harmony , we will achieve a sustainable Arctic policy , and we will also be able to exploit its logistics and economy , but only by respecting nature , people and animals .
Mr President , I welcome the opportunity to take part in this debate today and want to address a very specific issue that has already been raised by some of the colleagues that I have listened to .
There is no doubt that living conditions in the beautiful Arctic area are harsh , but there is equally no doubt that , with new technologies and advances , the area will inevitably be opened up for greater exploitation of its natural resources , with fisheries being a prime example .
In the Commission communication of 2008 , the current extent of fisheries is examined , as is the possibility that new areas could be opened up .
It is indeed right that there should be some systematic approach to this .
Fishing in a sustainable manner protects stocks and gives a future to fishing communities .
The same document also , quite rightly , makes mention of the need to protect indigenous peoples and local populations , using the statistic that about one third of the four million people who live in the area are indigenous to the area - again , a very laudable objective .
However - and this is where I warn the Commission - I still see the evidence , in both of the documents , that the Commission has not learnt the lesson from the disaster of the common fisheries policy which , in Northern Ireland , has been responsible for the destruction of the fishing industry .
The top-down approach of always controlling and setting policy targets and methods from Brussels has been an abject failure , yet the inference from the 2008 document and from the Foreign Affairs Council of December 2009 is that the EU will use the same approach in the Arctic region .
I urge the High Representative , as she continues to explore how to coordinate policy in this area , to be mindful of this particular issue .
( PL ) Mr President , with the development of the modern world , policy on Arctic issues , which has been associated with extreme climate conditions , polar bears and boundless ice fields , is beginning to take on new significance .
Development of international trade and increased need for natural resources has caused a growth in interest in the region .
As a result of rapid shrinking of the Arctic ice cap , new possibilities for exploitation of the region have arisen .
The Arctic is being transformed from an outpost to the centre of interest of countries seeking new shipping routes , endless sources of natural wealth and stocks of fish .
However , we already know all this .
The question is - how should the Union react to the nervous preparations for a kind of invasion of the Arctic which have been under way for some time in Russia , the USA , Canada and Norway ?
Above all , it is necessary to deal with the unregulated legal status of the Arctic region .
Policy based on the diplomatic means which have been used until now should produce an international understanding guaranteeing a fair division of potential territorial acquisitions .
The lack of legal regulations may make the region a source of conflict which is global in nature .
What is needed , then , is systematic and coordinated action which will respond to the challenges which are appearing at rapid speed .
Research infrastructure , development of multipartite management of the Arctic based on the UN convention and involvement of the local Arctic population are only some of the elements which must be contained in future European Arctic strategy , whose aim will be to maintain a balance between protection of the natural environment and sustainable use of its resources .
( EL ) May I extend a welcome to the High Representative for Foreign Affairs .
The Arctic is the place on the planet where climate change is most obvious .
Global warming has caused the ice to recede significantly .
The landmark year was 2007 , when the ice receded by 34 % compared with the period from 1970-2000 .
However , the melting of the Arctic ice cap has numerous , drastic consequences .
It speeds up climate change .
To date , the white surface of the Arctic ice reflected 80 % of sunlight falling in the area , thereby affecting global and local temperatures .
This reflection is reducing constantly , causing a rise in the temperature of the planet and of the polar area as a whole across a 1500-metre zone within Canada , Russia and Alaska .
In 2007 , the temperature rose by 2 ° between August and October .
At the same time , the melting of the ice has caused unforeseen changes in sea currents .
It is having an adverse effect on marine ecosystems and fisheries and reducing the ability of the sea to absorb carbon dioxide , as it affects plankton and other organisms and raises sea levels .
That is why European citizens are saddened by frequent talk of the European Union 's participation in escalating competition to reap geopolitical benefits from this environmental catastrophe in the Arctic .
The role of the European Union should not be to win an international geopolitical competition for oil and shipping lanes in the Arctic .
Our role should be to safeguard respect for our principles , respect for the environmental integrity of the area , the prevalence of principles such as international competition and respect for UN institutions under whatever new regime arises in the Arctic from the huge environmental catastrophe under way .
Madam President , let me take the opportunity to wish Baroness Ashton well during her term in office and I would like to welcome her commitment to maintaining close cooperation with Parliament in the development of what she describes as a more coherent EU policy on the Arctic .
The European Union , of course , has a central role to play in Arctic policy .
Two Arctic states , Iceland and Norway , are members of the EEA .
EU policies in areas such as the environment , climate change , energy , research , transport and fisheries have a direct bearing on the Arctic .
In my capacity as chairman of Parliament 's delegation to Switzerland , Iceland , Norway and the EEA , I am therefore the representative of Parliament on the standing committee of parliamentarians of the Arctic region .
In this capacity , I would like to inform the House that in September of this year , the Parliament in Brussels will host the biannual meeting of parliamentarians of the Arctic region .
( GA ) A preparatory meeting will be held in Washington next week and in Oslo closer to the time of the meeting .
I believe that the hosting of those meetings will be vitally important to the European Parliament and indeed to the European Union .
I am very sorry , but we had no interpretation for the last part of your speech .
Madam President , I have no doubt but that everyone in the House will have understood what I said !
I said in conclusion that we would host the conference and I would hope that , subject to your availability , of course , that you might consider my invitation to attend part of this meeting , Baroness Ashton .
It is an ideal basis , I believe , for developing a greater understanding of the issues involved , and it enables parliamentarians from across this vast region to forge and to strengthen ties .
( DE ) Madam President , I welcome this debate and I am pleased that Baroness Ashton is here and taking part in the debate .
You spoke of how this is about protecting the region and the resident population .
That is certainly true .
When it comes to the indigenous peoples of this region , though , in particular , it is about more than protection that we grant from outside ; it is about respect for their right to self-determination .
This has to be a very important principle in Arctic policy .
As concerns the protection of nature in this region , it should be pointed out that there are , of course , an especially high number of sensitive areas .
I am aware that many of you participating in this debate reject the idea of a moratorium .
Perhaps , Baroness Ashton , that was at the back of your mind when you said that ' the Arctic region is radically different from the Antarctic ' , but even when rejecting a moratorium , the question must be answered - and in practical , not just lyrical , terms - of how the areas of particular sensitivity in this region can be effectively protected under the precautionary principle .
We cannot allow the situation to develop to the point where , in the interests of short-sighted economics , the battle cry of ' we need the gas , we need the fish ' ultimately overrides all precautionary principles .
I would also like to tie in to what Mr Gahler had to say .
Mr Gahler , you spoke about the potential for conflict .
This is undoubtedly true .
We can also already see that , internationally , these discussions are not characterised solely by a will to find common ground , or else Canada and Russia , for example , would not have attempted to block the EU 's observer status in the Arctic Council .
The Arctic Council , of course , is itself a soft-law organisation with no fixed budget or staff .
It will not do as a governance structure .
However , we must take care , when considering new governance structures - and I understood this to be your position , High Representative - to move forwards in an inclusive manner , and to acknowledge that other organisations , too , want to be involved here .
( DA ) Madam President , I see that both the Commission and the High Representative have taken the view that the EU should lay down a policy for the Arctic .
I sympathise , of course , with the idea of protecting the environment in the Arctic and , as a Dane , I am extremely aware of the geopolitical situation .
I am also well aware of the problems faced by the local population and we should , of course , respect their way of life .
Having said that , I do not think that the EU should have a policy for the area , nor do I think that the EU should take on an administrative role in the Arctic region .
That would not be to the benefit of the Union or the Arctic .
In my view , we should leave the Arctic to those countries which are directly involved in the region .
It neither can nor should it be the EU 's job to set up a policy for all areas , let alone for the Arctic , which is an area where we have traditionally cooperated very well and where only two ( and not three , as was said here ) of the countries involved are members of the EU .
Neither the US , Canada , Greenland nor Russia have expressed a wish to become a member of the EU .
You might perhaps suspect that the sudden interest in this area has been triggered solely by the different countries wanting to get their hands on raw materials , rather than anything else .
In other words : the best policy with regard to the Arctic would be for the EU to get involved on the sidelines only .
Madam President , there is an English folk tale about King Canute who , by ordering the tide not to come in and wet his feet , showed his courtiers that not even kings are exempt from reality .
In doing so , he became a byword for arrogant folly .
King Canute lives on in the Council of the European Union , which begins and ends its conclusion on Arctic affairs with the alleged importance of global warming .
This involves a refusal to accept scientific reality .
According to the US National Snow and Ice Data Centre , Arctic summer ice has increased by 409 000 square miles , or 26 % , since 2007 .
This is exactly what was predicted by scientists aware that the previous shrinkage of summer ice , wrongly used as evidence for global warming , was in fact nothing more than a snapshot of an ages-old natural cyclical pulse of advance , retreat and advance .
So the Arctic summer ice will not vanish by 2013 and polar bears have not , and will not , drown because of global warming .
But millions of hard-working voters are drowning in a sea of debt and taxes , and they are growing very impatient with the political class 's use of the global warming fraud to impose undemocratic international governance and bogus green taxes .
The UN has now announced a review of the IPCC 's dodgy dossiers and fiddled statistics .
On behalf of the taxpayers of Britain , I ask this Parliament to do the same and to stop wasting any more money on the most expensive big lie in human history .
( SV ) Madam President , the Arctic is a unique region which is coming under discussion increasingly often as a result of the melting of the ice cap and the new opportunities that this brings with it .
This is a good thing , because we need to have more debates , not just about the impact that the ice melting will have on our opportunities to make use of the resources that have suddenly become accessible , but also about the responsibilities that this involves and how we can best preserve the Arctic and assess the future consequences of our presence and our activities in this sensitive natural environment .
However , before we decide on the common EU policy regarding the Arctic , we should spend more time evaluating the current situation in the Arctic ecosystem , because otherwise it will be difficult for us to take adequate measures .
In my opinion , it is both naïve and unrealistic to think that we can simply leave all the resources untouched .
Instead , we should focus on ensuring that the extraction of resources , transport , tourism and other industries are all run in the best possible way in order to protect and preserve the natural environment .
Of course , this must take place in consultation and collaboration with the local population on the basis of the actual situation and the current conditions .
The Commission 's report on the Arctic is a positive first step towards a coherent policy on the Arctic .
During the Swedish Presidency , Sweden supported the Commission 's decision to apply for permanent observer status on the Arctic Council .
However , I believe that both the Commission 's report and the debate until now have focused too closely on the water and not enough on the areas of land .
Some countries , such as Sweden and Finland , have extensive reindeer herding , mining , farming and forestry activities in the Arctic and it is very important that these are taken into consideration .
Another dimension of the debate which is not often mentioned , but which needs to be highlighted , concerns the EU 's strategic objectives and geostrategic interests in the Arctic and the consequences of the change in the conditions in this region for international stability .
Some EU Member States lie within the Arctic region .
Other parts of the region are the EU 's immediate neighbours to the north .
Therefore , it should not be difficult to draw up common strategic objectives and to gain support for them among all the EU Member States .
Given the increased competition between different countries and some unresolved conflicts , it must be in the EU 's interest to ensure that tensions do not arise over security in the Arctic .
( LT ) Today , we are debating a very important matter .
The effect of climate change is fundamentally changing the situation in the Arctic region .
Due to the impact of global warming , new maritime routes have opened up in the Arctic , offering opportunities to transport oil , gas and other natural resources , but at the same time , this region is becoming very vulnerable because of environmental problems and the division of its resources between states and this may have negative consequences for international stability and the interests of European security .
As we discuss the impact of the environment and climate change on this region , one of the main goals of Arctic policy must be to mitigate the negative impact of climate change and help the region to adapt to unavoidable change .
Until now , no arrangement has been applied to the Arctic region .
The European Parliament has underlined the importance of the governance of the Arctic on more than one occasion .
I think that now that the situation has changed , we must gradually begin to form an autonomous European Union policy and the European Commission should , in turn , play an active role in this matter .
For a long time , the situation in this region has caused tension between the countries of the Arctic territory and this tension will increase even more as this region becomes increasingly more accessible .
I believe that the European Union must initiate a comprehensive dialogue with the other countries and this would open the door to new opportunities for cooperation .
I feel that it is also time to start thinking about an international convention on the governance of this region .
( ET ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , as well as the considerable changes in the natural environment , we must also keep in mind the fact that the thawing of the Arctic Ocean , which has accelerated , has opened up the possibility of a race for new natural resources .
This could , however , give rise to a potential security threat to relations between the European Union and other countries .
For this reason , I would like to draw your attention to the behaviour of Russia , which is not about fishing , tourism or mineral ores , but about the world 's last untouched gas and oil supplies .
Despite the idea arising from the European Commission 's Arctic Strategy to engage in cooperation with neighbouring countries in matters concerning adjacent territories , since the turn of the millennium , Russia has not shown any willingness to consider our wishes .
Last year 's Russian national security strategy sent a threatening signal westwards that , if necessary , Russia is prepared to use military force to obtain new resources in the Arctic .
I believe that we should implement targeted policies towards Russia in order to avoid a competitive race .
( ET ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , thank you for immediately dealing with this most important subject during the start of your stressful term of office .
Most urgent in my view is the Arctic .
You said very directly that the Arctic is not the Antarctic , and that it would be unrealistic to copy the agreement on Antarctica for the Arctic Sea .
I believe that if someone somewhere in the world is to stand for idealism , then it should definitely be the European Commission .
And why should the European Commission not present an idealistic proposal to its partners that , before we start a new gold rush in the Arctic Sea , we should apply a moratorium for several decades - that we do not start a process which will create the possibility of an arms race and other threats ?
I want to say a few words about the rights of the indigenous people of the Arctic .
I believe that , in the dialogue between the European Union and Russia on human rights , the question should be asked of whether the indigenous Arctic people living in the Russian Federation get enough involvement in the work of the Arctic Council .
Yes , Antarctica is not the Arctic , but steps which helped to bring about a settlement in the south during the Cold War should not be repeated simply because there is no idealism in the Commission .
I am a native of the country from which the Antarctic explorer Bellingshausen set out .
He went and he discovered things , because he was an idealist .
I wish you some idealism in your work .
Madam President , the European Union wants a comprehensive Arctic policy .
This proposition is entirely bizarre .
Cyprus and Greece , for example , have historic cultures , but look at the geography .
It is really rather hard to understand why a country on the Aegean Sea needs there to be an EU policy on the Arctic .
But an EU Arctic policy is perhaps not so bizarre as the appointment of the supremely unqualified Baroness Ashton , the Sarah Palin of the ex-student Left , as High Representative .
At the hearings , it was clear that the High Representative has forgotten nothing and has learnt nothing .
And , by the way ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
I am sorry but I do not think we should listen to personal comments like that in this Chamber .
( Interjection from the floor )
Your speaking time has finished .
We will not have personal comments of that nature .
( Interjection from the floor )
We shall now move to the next speaker .
( FI ) Madam President , let us get back to the point .
As many of our fellow Members have said , the race is on for the natural resources and administration of the Arctic region .
The Arctic region , however , needs a comprehensive approach , as the High Representative said here .
It will have to take account of the extremely fragile nature of Arctic wildlife , the longterm effect of melting ice , and , more than anything , the rights of the region 's indigenous peoples and of the other people who live there .
So far , the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and its Fish Stocks Agreement have been enough to regulate the extraction of natural resources in the Arctic sea area and on the seabed .
The Arctic Council has concentrated on environmental and research cooperation , but the agreements that focus on the use of natural resources have brought with them a growing need to develop international administration strategies , and the EU , too , may have a role to play here .
Furthermore , the EU 's Arctic policy needs its own strategy , and it should be jointly coordinated .
An appropriate way for the EU to be involved in the Arctic would be to establish an Arctic Centre .
The first time this need for an EU Arctic Information Centre was mentioned was in the Commission 's Communication on the European Union and the Arctic Region in autumn 2008 .
At the Council 's behest , the Commission began to explore the possibility of establishing such a centre in the European Union .
The Arctic Centre at the University of Lapland in Rovaniemi , on the Arctic Circle , has indicated its willingness to function as the EU Arctic Information Centre .
Finland does not have any territorial claims with respect to natural resources , so the country , as a neutral actor , would be a suitable choice for running the Centre , as Mrs Wallis has also encouragingly stated .
I would therefore urge High Representative Ashton to make a decision on the form an EU Arctic Centre should take , its location and its tasks , thus raising the EU 's profile in Arctic policy .
I wish you a pleasant trip to Lapland .

( DE ) Madam President , in the context of the climate change debate , there is now a more intense debate about the Arctic as a waterway for shipping with the opportunity of perhaps shortening trade routes and thus consuming less fuel - do not forget that that , too , is one side of the picture - which includes the question of whether and in what form resources ranging from oil to gas are present and how they can be exploited .
Fishing , too , has been mentioned .
Of course , there has been , and continues to be , a very symbolic value to this debate , which was made clear when Russia laid - hoisted is not quite the right word here - its flag on the seabed .
The other States , too , are starting to articulate their claims more strongly .
With that in mind , I am very grateful to the High Representative for the fact that she is tackling and prioritising this issue .
In my opinion , what has so far been discussed in the European Parliament , and also in the Commission , such as in its 2008 proposal , which has also been referred to , is far too defensive .
I believe that this question must be approached offensively , and in both respects .
That means both in respect of the issue that many Members have raised here , namely the protection of the environment and of local residents , and in respect of the fact that we need to cautiously face the issue of whether this perhaps also comes with opportunities and to have an honest discussion about that .
In the context of an oil report in 2008 , we did have initial and very cautious discussions about this issue and set a first course .
When we are always talking about how we need diversification and new sources , including for resources and energy supplies , we do have to discuss whether there is a possibility of exploiting these sources without jeopardising nature and the environment .
This debate must at least be held - we must use this opportunity .
We are in a different technological position today and , incidentally , the technological achievements in this field today are European achievements .
If we are talking about further development of the technology , then this must be in all areas .
I am grateful that this debate is being held .
I hope it will be held in an objective and open way .
( PL ) Madam President , who will take control of the Arctic ?
That is the title of a press article I found when researching the subject .
It succinctly , but one might also say pointedly , describes the current situation of the race for the Arctic .
In this matter , the question posed by Mrs Ashton would appear to be very appropriate - how can the European Union be a responsible player in the area of problems connected with the Arctic ?
Responsible - I stress this .
This is why this debate in the European Parliament seems to me to be in every respect useful and good , because it is taking place , here , for the second time , as a result of the first and the present communication from the Council to Parliament , and from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament .
The Arctic is a region which is not governed on the basis of international law , and the huge interest in the Arctic is , on the one hand , as has already been emphasised , a result of climate change , but , on the other , it is also increasingly clearly being recognised and readily used as a potential resource , especially of energy resources and gas , but also of natural resources such as , for example , fish .
There are , of course , dangers associated with this - dangers for the environment in connection with the use of raw materials and fishing , but also for the indigenous people of the region , and that is something of which we must also be particularly aware .
In addition , the opening of a route , the sea lane , in connection with changes in the region , is having a huge influence on the way people are looking at the Arctic .
A similar influence is being had by the attempts at actually dividing the territory based on a series of faits accomplis , such as a symbolic placing of flags .
I would like to say it should be noted that the five Arctic countries are not specially interested in legal regulations , but the Union should , however , be playing an important role in this part of the world , not only by its presence , but principally by its involvement and knowledge .
It is essential to build mutual trust , and we can build that mutual trust by an initiative in the area of regulation , such as , for example , the Arctic Charter .
( CS ) It is high time to create a coherent European and Arctic policy that will also resolve lengthy disputes over new territories .
As a result of melting , the extraction potential in the new territories will increase to 200 m below the surface , involving millions of square kilometres .
Disputes between Russia , Norway , the US and Canada obviously have a geopolitical significance as well .
The ice cover has already shrunk by half .
The most important thing , however , is to protect the water from pollution , while the nuclear waste in the Russian Arctic is also a key issue .
Madam High Representative , I come from a country which seemingly has nothing to do with the Arctic , but I can assure you that even in the Czech Republic , many citizens are interested in what position the Union will adopt as far as foreign policy is concerned , including influencing the future of the Arctic .
This involves the sustainable extraction of raw materials , sustainable transport , conditions for scientific research , the protection of nature and , last but not least , the rights of the indigenous inhabitants .
I follow with displeasure the disputes over both new and historical possessions .
I fear that this may even be a new source of serious conflicts .
Another one is the dispute over the strategic north passage between Asia and America .
Commissioner , you must ensure that the passage falls permanently within international waters , and that the Arctic remains a permanently demilitarised zone .
Take an active coordinating role in reaching international agreements on all of these issues relating to the Arctic .
The Union should not look on passively , but should negotiate actively and thereby prevent the escalation of conflicts and of the harm to nature .
( DA ) Madam President , it is important that the EU is involved in the debate on the Arctic and it is also good that the EU is engaging with the region , where many interests and concerns are at stake .
In my opinion , the most important thing is that the EU 's actions are considerate and respectful of the wishes and needs of the indigenous population .
The EU should take responsibility when it comes to global warming , which manifests itself very much in the form of temperature increases .
In this context , we need to take into account what this means for the people 's living conditions .
In addition , we know that climate change will facilitate our access to resources , such as oil and gas , and to new transport routes from Europe to Asia .
On the one hand , that could be positive but , on the other , we should ensure that we take safety measures which will fully take into account the unique climate and the fragile environment of the Arctic .
With the growing economic interests in the Arctic , it is also important that the EU takes a position on various countries ' actions in the area .
It should not go unnoticed when countries do not play by the international rules which apply to this region .
One telling example currently in evidence is Canada , which is seeking to set up a compulsory register for all large vessels passing through the Northwest Passage from July 2010 .
I would stress that we are talking about international waters here and that Lene Espersen , the Danish Foreign Minister , has also emphatically said that this is unacceptable .
Now , that is a position that I would like to see the EU and the High Representative endorse .
( DE ) Madam President , it is a question of us , as the European Union , following a clear strategy and preventing a gold or gemstone rush .
Europe must actively involve itself here .
Europe , as a partner , can show strength here by speaking with one voice .
This relates to shipping on and below the water , fisheries , resources in the form of primary energy carriers and raw materials .
In this connection , we need stable and dependable treaties with the other partners in the Arctic .
We need cooperation , not confrontation .
We need dialogue in the field of environmental protection in order to conserve natural resources and nature .
We need dialogue in the field of animal protection in order to conserve the biodiversity , and we need protection and respect for the local inhabitants and their human rights .
If we can implement positive resource management together with our partners in the Arctic , we will have the opportunity to take new political roads here , and it will also be a first acid test for our common foreign policy - a chance to prove that we , as Europeans , can indeed pursue objectives together .
We now move to the catch-the-eye part of the debate .
Before we do so , I just want to clarify that , if , as the President of the debate , I feel speech is being used which tends to disrupt the business of the House , I am fully within my rights to stop that person from speaking .
( FI ) Madam President , firstly , I would like to express my sincerest thanks to the High Representative for including this important issue in the agenda at such an early stage .
I truly hope that the Commission and the whole of the European Union will have a strong role to play in Arctic policy and that the EU will formulate its own Arctic strategy .
A common Arctic policy will create boundless opportunities for the whole of the European Union , in terms of its security , environment , energy , transport , and its indigenous peoples .
If we , the European Union are excluded from the debate - excluded from this policy we will be losing a great deal .
I wish to make two more points .
Firstly , I hope that the Arctic Council , as an administrative body , will continue to grow in strength and that the European Union will have a strong role to play in it .
Secondly , I hope that the plans for an Arctic Information Centre become a reality : this , I believe , will promote dialogue between the Arctic territories .
Furthermore , and as has been said before , an excellent and suitable location for it would definitely be Finnish Lapland , and specifically Rovaniemi , which has long been associated with Arctic issues .
Madam President , the Arctic debate has certainly generated some heat this afternoon !
What kind of Parliament is it that tries to prevent its Members speaking when it disapproves of what they say ?
However , we should not be surprised at this when our new High Representative for Foreign Policy was once described by MI5 as a Communist sympathiser and , when she was Treasurer of the CND , it took money from the Soviet bloc to undermine her own country 's defence policy .
This place looks more and more like the Soviet Union every day .
( DE ) Madam President , if , in future , methane , with its considerably higher warming potential than CO2 , is emitted from the Arctic Ocean in greater quantities as a result of the thawing of the sea bed , we will have a highly dangerous new variable in the sensitive climate system - a variable that urgently requires closer investigation .
The Arctic is not only a concern with regard to the climate , it also involves something of a potential for conflict .
The fact that even China has supposedly now begun building icebreakers highlights the importance of a trade route via the Northwest Passage as the ice sheet melts .
This potential peaceful use , however , is far less problematic than , for example , the intensified desire of the United States to station military early warning systems in the Arctic region .
The conditions for any conceivable economic exploitation of the mineral resources linked to the melting of the ice should also be clarified in advance .
Ultimately , the suspected oil and gas reserves to be found there could guarantee Europe 's energy independence .
( DE ) Madam President , High Representative , I would like to stress one more time very clearly that , as well as the self-evidently important areas such as environmental and energy issues , the question of shipping routes has a very special role to play .
Given that ships sailing traditional shipping routes are being seized , since the lives of captains and crews are being jeopardised by this , as these routes are really unsafe , shipowners are looking for new routes .
In my home town of Hamburg , this discussion is of very major importance .
I would very much like to encourage you to continue on this route in this EU Arctic debate .
( RO ) The Arctic region , just like Antarctica , is particularly vulnerable to climate change .
In addition , the global climate system depends on its stability .
As a leading advocate of the battle against climate change , the European Union must adopt a firm stance on the Arctic region .
The European Union must show restraint with regard to both the use of offshore resources and transit transport through the Arctic region .
In the long term , these activities will only end up breaking up even more areas of icebergs and what little is left of the polar cap , thereby irrevocably jeopardising the ecosystems in the area and the populations living in the Artic region .
Protecting icebergs and the polar cap from uncontrolled human intervention is an absolute must .
The European Union must work in close cooperation with the United States , Canada , Norway and Russia and constantly exchange information via SEIS , Eionet and SAON .
Madam President , I should like to say to Lady Ashton : this is the first opportunity I have had to comment on your new role .
I , like you , come from the United Kingdom .
The only difference is that I was elected and you were not .
On the issue of the Arctic , is this going to become a resources race with Russia , America and Canada for fishing stocks and a quarter of the world 's oil and gas ?
You have experienced at first hand the arms race during the Cold War .
Will you now be taking us into an ice war ?
Actions in the Arctic are likely to exacerbate foreign relations and Europe should not even have a foreign policy in the Arctic , and certainly not with someone like you at the helm .
You have proven already not to be capable of doing this job .
I have no doubt your leadership will have us all skating on very thin ice .
If you had a school report on your first 100 days , it would say ' you must do better ' , but the reality is that if you were in the office for 100 years , you would still be a failure .
Please do the honourable thing and resign .
Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Madam President , I think it has been a very interesting debate and I am so glad that we have had the focus on an important region of the world .
The passion with which people have spoken about the importance of what we do in terms of policy for the Arctic is extremely important for me as I take forward what I believe we should be doing in the future .
I want to assure Members of the House that preserving the environment and dialogue with the relevant populations - indigenous and non-indigenous - are paramount to the approach that we want to take .
We want to make clear in all international discussions that Arctic resources should only be accessed and exploited when we have the highest environmental and safety standards and when they are fully respected .
We have to continue to underline that the European Union wants to work together with all the stakeholders concerned in the Arctic to make sure that we face the challenges appropriately .
That includes hydrocarbon extraction in that context .
For my part , I think we have much to contribute , from our diplomacy on environment to our climate change policies ; from our extensive Arctic research programmes to our policy supporting indigenous policies worldwide .
I believe , too , that the Arctic Council has much to contribute .
It is because of the work it does , not least in making sure that there is a full participation of indigenous people - in fact , it is the only organisation that allows them to sit alongside sovereign states - that we want to become permanent observers , which a number of honourable Members have indicated would be very useful .
I think it is possible to find a proper balance between Arctic protection and preservation , on the one hand , and the sustainable use of its resources on the other , and we must ensure that we do that properly .
The bringing together of seven representatives from different parts of the Commission - I think you told me yesterday , Madam President - to produce the report is a good example of the future that we wish to have in terms of collaboration and effective working manifested through the work that we do on the ground across the world .
Finally , I very much look forward to going to Lapland this weekend .
It will be my third trip there .
There is a big meeting to discuss issues with some of the foreign ministers .
Concerning Rovaniemi and the possibility of a centre , there are two possibilities : one is an individual centre , or there is the possibility of networking different centres , and we certainly need to examine that as well .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The issues linked to the Arctic region , ranging from the effects of global warming to the use of the resources and navigation in this region , have attracted ever-growing attention recently .
We must be aware that the planet 's future is closely linked to this region 's future .
The melting of the icebergs in the Arctic region , the growing need for resources and recent technological progress are some of the reasons why the Arctic region has become an area of particular interest to each of us .
I think that the European strategy for this zone must focus on protecting and conserving the region , promoting sustainable use of the resources in the context of multilateral governance and , above all , on involving the population of this region in all these measures .
The appearance of new navigable channels also requires much tighter security and environmental standards to be established .
Each maritime region needs a particular approach , and Europe can use the experience acquired from the programmes developed in other maritime regions , such as the Baltic Sea and Mediterranean Sea , while also offering models of good practice in this area .
A spectre is hovering over the Arctic .
The spectre of global warming .
The melting ice is having a crucial influence , not only on nature , but also on social relations , the economy and politics .
On that oceanic ice shelf , on an area greater than Germany , Italy and France put together , apart from what is already being used , there are riches such as gas and crude oil .
The layers of ice , which are getting thinner year by year , have stopped protecting the deposits from explorative drilling .
A ruthless race is in prospect - a madness on the scale of the 19th-century gold rush .
The European Union must adopt an unequivocal position on this .
It is essential to develop a common , EU Arctic policy , especially concerning the use of new possibilities for the exploitation of natural deposits , dangers to the natural environment and new shipping opportunities .
The Arctic forms part of the territory of three EU Member States : Denmark , Finland and Sweden , as well as Iceland , which is applying for membership .
We must remember that this is a completely new situation for the people of the far north , and also for the fauna and flora .
The residents of the Arctic are aware of the growing influence of external social , economic and political factors on their lives .
Our role is to help local communities find their feet in the new conditions and to protect their culture and language .
Just as at the centre of EU policy are its citizens , so in plans to manage the Arctic , the key position must be occupied by the Arctic 's people .
in writing . - The Arctic has long been absent from our agenda , but now it is once again drawing the attention of politicians and academics .
The growing concern over the region is a consequence of climate change causing the melting of the Arctic ice cap .
Not getting involved in the dispute over the speed and extent of this process , it is widely assumed that it will eventually open up new possibilities for natural resources exploration and new maritime routes .
We all agree that environmental consequences of this process will be profound .
What I would like to draw the attention of this House and the EU as a whole to though is its political and , indeed , security dimension .
The Cold War showed us how strategically important the Arctic is .
We have witnessed economic , political , even military rivalry in this region .
For its positive future , there is a clear need for a joint international effort , in which the EU should play an active role .
There is a need to find a balance between economic exploitation of the region and its ecosystem , but there is also a need to protect , inter alia , the existing legal regime governing the Arctic , to name just this one issue .
Cuba ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on Cuba .
Madam President , the death of Orlando Zapata was an extremely negative event , which should never have happened , and we do not want it to happen again in Cuba or anywhere else .
The European Union and its institutions must be committed to condemning events that constitute violations of human rights , and working to ensure that nothing like this ever happens again .
This must be the European Union 's commitment .
Human rights are a fundamental symbol of the European Union 's identity , because we believe in the values of freedom , tolerance and pluralism .
It is therefore our personality , our most genuine personality .
Where there are violations of these universal rights , the European Union condemns them publicly , and we have done this with Cuba .
We did so when we indicated our pessimism and concern regarding the lack of progress on human rights in Cuba , and we did so when we demanded that the prisoners of conscience in Cuban prisons be released .
There are currently around 200 prisoners of conscience , some of them in a very complex situation with regard to their health , and one of them is Guillermo Fariñas , who is in a very grave situation and also on hunger strike .
We also did so when we said that human rights defenders in Cuba needed to be protected , and we did so when we said that the Cuban Government , which had a number of prisoners under its jurisdiction , should be called to account for the death of Orlando Zapata .
However , the European Union 's policy with regard to Cuba goes further .
The European Union 's policy with regard to Cuba is structured around certain elements , and I would like to highlight some of them .
Firstly , there is political dialogue .
Political dialogue with the Cuban institutions , with the authorities and with the whole of civil society , which naturally also extends to human rights .
Secondly , there is development cooperation with Cuba , which is solidarity with the Cuban people , nothing more and nothing less .
It also involves promoting progress in terms of culture and democratic practices in Cuba .
These are the fundamental elements of a policy that is essentially aimed at a single target : the Cuban people , their welfare , their progress , their living conditions and respect for their human rights .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission deeply regrets the death of Mr Orlando Zapata and its circumstances .
I would also like to express my deep concern for the other political prisoners in Cuba .
All of us in this room share the same sense of anger and frustration at the death of Mr Zapata , and we should do our very best to make sure that such events do not happen again in Cuba , or in any other country .
The European Union is rooted in the values of democracy , human rights and fundamental freedoms , which we strive to protect and promote after having suffered , until very recently , violations of basic human rights on our own continent .
Human rights are universal and have no borders .
This principle is an integral part of our dialogue with all partners in Europe and outside .
Constructive engagement , not a policy of coercion and sanctions , remains the basis of our policy towards Cuba , as underlined in the common position adopted in 1996 .
This is the rationale that led the Council to decide in June 2008 to lift the 2003 diplomatic measures , as a means to facilitate the political dialogue process and enable full use of the instruments under the 1996 common position .
This is also the rationale that has led numerous Member States to resume their development cooperation with Cuba over the past few months , representing a diverse range of the political parties represented in the European Parliament and reflecting , therefore , the shared view of the important role to be played by development cooperation in Cuba .
At such times in Cuba , inaction would be the worst possible option for the credibility of the European Union as a global actor .
What is at stake is not only that credibility , but also our capacity to be present in Cuba .
Thus , I firmly believe that the way forward is to pursue and deepen the ongoing political dialogue and continue cooperation with Cuba as a tool for improving the lives of the Cuban people .
Cooperation with Cuba has never been suspended by the European Union , because development is not about supporting the government - it is about supporting the people .
Our view has always been that development cooperation constitutes an important element of our relations with Cuba .
The ongoing projects in Cuba benefit the population directly by addressing their basic needs , through support for rehabilitation and reconstruction after the hurricanes , food security and adaptation to climate change .
Projects are also being run in support of non-state actor activities .
I would like to be very clear that there is no EC funding channelled through the government or public entities .
The money is channelled via United Nations agencies and European NGOs , who welcome the presence of the Commission and the European Union in Cuba .
It is important that the European Union continues to address the basic needs of the Cuban population while intervening in strategic sectors through the available thematic or geographical instruments .
The task that the EU needs to face in a determined way is to find the right balance between showing openness to dialogue , supporting the Cuban population through development cooperation and reaffirming our principles .
Madam President , when my group asked for this matter to be included on the agenda , it did not do so in order to highlight errors , which are sometimes irreparable , in policies that indulge the enemies of freedom .
It also did not do so in order to gain political return from this condemnation .
It did so in order that Parliament , which is the institution at the democratic heart of the European Union , could speak out to condemn the death of an innocent person , and , above all , to express its solidarity with those in Cuba who are fighting , living and dying , like Orlando Zapata , for their freedom and their dignity .
As the European Commission said , the Council 's common position is still valid , and it is an honourable position because it asks for the immediate and unconditional release of political prisoners .
It is also a consistent position , because it asks for human rights and fundamental freedoms to be respected , in order for Cuba to be rooted in our system of values and not in foreign systems such as those of China or Vietnam .
Madam President , the words of a brave man , Oswaldo Paya , who won the Sakharov Prize in 2002 , still resound in this House .
He said that the first victory to be proclaimed was that there was no hate in his heart .
He said to those who oppressed him , who were his brothers , that he did not hate them , but that they were not going to impose their will through fear .
He said that Andrei Sakharov left a legacy of dignity and of working towards peoples living together peacefully , and that often the voices that count the most are the voices that are not heard .
In this House , we have not been able to hear the voices of the ' Ladies in White ' , who were also awarded the Sakharov Prize by Parliament .
Now we will unfortunately not be able to hear the voice of Orlando Zapata , but soon we will be able to hear the voices of many more Cubans .
In the meantime , Madam President , with the legitimacy that Parliament has in representing 500 million citizens from the 27 Member States of the Union , it needs to loudly and clearly echo the unstoppable shout of freedom that we are hearing from the beloved island of Cuba .
( Applause )

Madam President , Mr López Garrido , Commissioner , let us never again allow our silence to result in us colluding with liberticide .
Let us never again allow a person who fought for his rights and the rights of all to die in prison in Cuba , or anywhere else , without speaking out loudly and firmly to demand that he be saved .
Mr Orlando Zapata Tamayo , a 42-year old black builder , who was only asking for his conditions in prison to be improved , died after 86 days on hunger strike and seven years in prison for demanding that human rights be respected .
During this seven-year period , he was mistreated , humiliated and harassed by his guards , during which time - we should not forget - there was nothing but silence from the international community .
Other prisoners and human rights activists in Cuba are currently on hunger strike , such as the psychologist and journalist Guillermo Fariñas .
Ladies and gentlemen , the resolution that we are tabling and debating today , and which we will vote on tomorrow , which I represent on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , demands that all prisoners of conscience in Cuba be freed .
Once again , it is in favour of a democratic transition , and of strict respect for fundamental human rights .
For the moment , let us not enter into a subject that divides us : whether the common position should be maintained or not .
Let us focus now on saving lives and on human rights .
Let us also open up a period of calm reflection in which we seek out points of agreement on future policy regarding Cuba .
This text does , however , have significant added value .
The fact that it is being tabled by six political groups expresses a new era of broad consensus in this House on the subject of human rights .
Let it never again be said that European democratic law yields to the orders - in inverted commas - of Yankee imperialism .
However , let it also never be said again that the socialists and democrats are complacent or complicit in communist dictatorships .
I say this quite simply because both of these statements are false , and the victims of liberticide , wherever they may be , need to know that we are united in unconditionally defending their cause .

Madam President , finally I would like to thank Mr Salafranca , who negotiated this text on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , Mrs Weber , from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , Mr Romeva i Rueda , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , Mr Kožušník from the European Conservatives and Reformists , and other fellow Members who have taken part in this task , which has been difficult and complicated , but which I hope will be successful tomorrow .

Finally , I would also like to thank the Spanish Prime Minister and current President of the European Union , Mr Rodríguez Zapatero , for his encouragement and support for moving forward with this resolution that we are debating today .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , on behalf of my political group , I would like first of all to express our condolences to the family of Mr Orlando Zapata Tamayo , who has paid the highest price for his convictions .
Over the years , his activism protecting human rights has been an inspiration to many other human rights advocates , inside and outside Cuba .
The resolution which is proposed by several political groups expresses our deep concern about human rights conditions in Cuba .
Let us be very honest .
The situation has not improved and many independent journalists , peaceful dissidents and human rights defenders are still being imprisoned simply because they want to exercise their right to freedom of speech , peaceful meetings and assembly .
At the same time , Cuban independent NGOs are not allowed to work as the government exercises a draconian control over them .
At the time of this debate , several human rights defenders are on hunger strike .
This is a matter of concern as there are indications that Mr Guillermo Fariñas ' health , at least , is deteriorating rapidly .
It is too bad that , so far , the Cuban authorities have disregarded the repeated calls from the EU to unconditionally release all political prisoners .
This is why I strongly believe that this Parliament should ask the EU to continue to use all possible mechanisms to guarantee the work , and the lives , of those who aspire to a pluralistic and democratic Cuba .
Madam President , I would also like to join personally and on behalf of my group in offering condolences for the death of Orlando Zapata .
Irrespective of each person 's opinion with regard to Cuba , this is obviously a regrettable incident in itself , which deserves our condemnation and certainly something more than reflection and remembrance .
This event merits the coherent wording of the request that we make in this resolution , which is for those detained for their political motives or motivation in Cuba and anywhere in the world to be freed .
I think that what we are doing is coherent , I think that it needs to be done , and I think that it is important that we also do it - I would like to stress this - irrespective of the motivations that might be behind it .
This is part of the agreement .
We also need to ask for these people to be freed immediately , in the case of Cuba , and , above all , recall the delicate situation - as has been mentioned - of some of the people who , following the example of Orlando Zapata , began a hunger strike , especially the case of Guillermo Fariñas .
However , I would also like to warn about the risk of using and exploiting this case politically for other issues which , as Mr Yáñez-Barnuevo has said , could be dangerous .
I think it is important to remember that there are many processes under way that are useful , that are working , and that we should not , under any circumstances , be tempted - as some seem to want - to return to past events , to times gone by ; to return to the political failure of the embargo , because we know the consequences of that .
Therefore , if we agree that we do not want situations such as that of Orlando Zapata to be repeated , I think it is important that we know how we can move forward together to prevent it from being repeated , starting with facilitating the process of democratisation and normalisation of the island .
I was personally very upset about the death of Orlando Zapata , and I would therefore like , on behalf of the entire ECR group , to express condolences to all of his family .
I myself was born in 1971 , at the peak of the so-called communist normalisation in my country , which was one of the harshest periods of communist terror that my country went through .
The experience which my country had with the criminal ideology of communism is the reason for the great solidarity of Czech citizens with the Cuban people , and we are therefore very sensitive to the sad news that has recently come out of Cuba .
Given that the totalitarian regime in Cuba is still asserting the slogan ' socialism or death ' , forty years after the Cuban revolution , it deserves no tolerance whatsoever .
I believe that Orlando Zapata 's death was not in vain and that it will rouse the Cuban people to mass resistance against the communist regime .
When Pavel Wonka died in a communist prison as the last victim of communist terror in my own country , the regime collapsed within a year and a half .
I hope that Orlando Zapata will be the Cuban Pavel Wonka , in other words , the last victim of communist despotism .
Cuba will perhaps soon break free from the grip of the revolutionary old guard and will become a true island of freedom .
I therefore appeal to you .
Until there is fundamental and irreversible progress in the release of political prisoners , progress leading to the democratic functioning of the Cuban society and the holding of free elections , as well as a start to the process of structural reforms leading , among other things , to a better standard of living for all Cuban citizens , then it is impossible to consider opening talks on a reassessment of the EU 's common position .
Madam President , my group deeply regrets the death of the prisoner Orlando Zapata .
As is the case for any prisoner , the State was responsible for his safety and for his life .
In this case , it is Cuba that is responsible , and we therefore deeply regret his death .
We do not agree with the way that this House manipulates the issue of human rights .
Today , we are debating this issue and tomorrow we will vote on it .
We did not do this for the military coup in Honduras .
This House might be the only parliament in the world that did not condemn or vote against the military coup in Honduras , with its murders and torture .
We therefore do not agree with the philosophy that it depends on where it is happening , which human right is being violated and what the situation is as to whether we need to give an opinion or not .
A week ago , the largest mass grave in Latin America was discovered in Colombia .
The authorities themselves are talking about 2 500 bodies , and this may rise to up to 50 000 .
Is this being condemned ?
Is this being discussed , voted on and condemned ?
What is happening with the civilian victims in Afghanistan ?
What is happening with the persecution in the Western Sahara ?
No !
We will not be part of this hypocrisy .
I think that the fundamental issue is that we establish an equal relationship with the Republic of Cuba in order to tackle all the agendas : the political agendas , the human rights agendas , the penitentiary situation , but on an equal footing , because the European Union still has a common position with the Republic of Cuba , which is the exception to the rule .
It does not have a common position with any other country in the world .
It does not have one with the People 's Republic of China , which has been mentioned , or with Vietnam .
Why is this ?
Why does it have one with Cuba and not with the People 's Republic of China ?
I call on the Council , on the President of the Council , to clearly raise the following question : is the common position going to be ended ?
It is , in my opinion , one of the most obvious obstacles to moving forward with a frank dialogue between the European Union and the Republic of Cuba , with common , shared agendas that are of mutual interest .
( DE ) Madam President , the death of the dissident Orlando Zapata as a result of a hunger strike and the arrest of the blogger Yoani Sánchez , who told the world about day-to-day life in Socialist Cuba , make clear that we must continue with the link established in our Cuba policy in 1996 with progress on democratisation and human rights .
Hopes for progress under Raúl Castro , of course , have long since vanished into thin air .
The situation of political prisoners , for example , has not really improved .
They still do not enjoy anything like the freedoms that the Castro brothers themselves were afforded during their imprisonment during the Batista dictatorship .
With its stubborn adherence to the planned economy , Cuba is no longer even capable of meeting the most basic needs of its own population .
In Cuba , prosperity and self-initiative are clearly regarded as criticism of the regime .
In that regard , even the people of Communist China have things easier in that they can at least improve their lives through their own efforts .
The relaxation of the United States ' economic embargo in respect of computers and software services will not be entirely able to meet the expectations that the public has drawn from President Obama 's promises , but it will perhaps make it possible for the opposition to be better organised .
Not least , it will also be harder for the Cuban regime , with increasing choice , to suppress the free expression of opinion .
For this reason alone , we should support Europe 's initiatives as best we can and push for further relaxations in the Communist system .
( PL ) The tragic death of the Cuban prisoner of conscience , Orlando Zapata , is further proof that the regime of the Castro brothers is ignoring the appeals of the international community to end violations of human rights , quietly getting rid of those who demand freedom and democracy .
Today , this tragedy , this tragic death , has acquired symbolic significance .
It is a desperate cry for help and for effective action , principally from international politicians and decision makers , who , while building relations with the Cuban authorities , do not want to talk to people from the opposition , and are turning a deaf ear to the voice of the representatives of civil society in Cuba .
We must , as quickly as possible , take concerted action to put pressure on the Castro regime and demand the immediate release of those have been sentenced to many years of imprisonment for their views .
In recent years , the European Union has been trying to soften its stance and has even lifted diplomatic sanctions against Cuba , in the hope that this gesture will encourage the authorities to respect democratic standards .
Unfortunately , the tragic death of Orlando Zapata shows that this policy is naive , ineffective and very clearly should not be continued .
Tomorrow , we are going to vote on the resolution to wind up today 's debate .
This should be a clear signal of our opposition to the violations of human rights , the inhumane treatment of political prisoners and the lack of respect for fundamental civil liberties in Cuba .
We must show that we are in solidarity with the Cuban people .
We must be the voice of those who now have no voice in Cuba .
( Applause )
( NL ) Madam President , the tragic fate of Orlando Zapata Tamayo has led to deep indignation the world over .
In his hopeless situation , Zapata felt the only option open to him was to kill himself by hunger strike .
He has had to pay with his life for his protests against his imprisonment and the appalling conditions in his Cuban prison .
And why ?
What crime did Zapata commit which led to him being in that prison in the first place ?
Expressing and propagating in a non-violent way an opinion other than that of the government is no crime .
That does not make you a criminal or a traitor .
Zapata 's death is no isolated incident .
The psychologist and journalist , Guillermo Fariñas , has also started a hunger strike , because he wants to bring about the release of 26 sick political prisoners .
What fate awaits him ?
Will he , too , soon pay with his life for his campaign for respect for human rights ?
When is the Cuban Government going to alter its position ?
It is estimated that there are around 200 other political prisoners in Cuba .
Detaining people for their ideals runs totally counter to the Universal Declaration on Human Rights .
We call on Cuba to directly and unconditionally release these prisoners of conscience and to put an end to this gross violation of human rights .
No government can control or govern its people 's thinking .
Even if you imprison people behind walls or put them behind bars , their ideas will continue to survive .
Any attempt to stamp out such thoughts and ideas will always fail .
Has Cuba not already had years of experience of this ?
The government will simply have to enter into dialogue with people who hold dissenting views .
Political dialogue is the only instrument for moving forward .
That is what Cuba owes its citizens , because the Cuban people deserve democracy and respect for their fundamental freedoms .
Zapata 's death must not be allowed to go down in history as meaningless ; it must mark an end to the current human rights situation in Cuba .
The European Union must do everything within its power to help improve the human rights situation in Cuba .
This is not just a question of political prisoners like Zapata ; it is also a question of defenders of human rights being able to freely go about their work .
The Cuban Government must take care of the Cuban people .
It cannot simply detain people or treat them as criminals , out of fear .
Depriving citizens of their freedom is a crime .
( ES ) Madam President , defending human rights means condemning the avoidable , cruel and unjust death of Orlando Zapata and calling for those who are still in prison to be released .
I hope that this will make the Cuban authorities think , as their regime needs to make progress so that their citizens can enjoy true democracy .
In Cuba , there is a dictatorship because there are prisoners of conscience , because there is fear of debate , free exchange of ideas and plans , because there is fear of freedom .
It is not a crime to have ideas ; they can provoke , surprise and shock , but they always need to be argued and debated .
They never require imprisonment .
Societies think and feel , and so do prisoners , and it is impossible to forbid people from thinking and feeling .
This means that the ideas and feelings that people want to repress end up seeping into the consciousness of the whole of society , like water .
This is true for Cuban society as well and the protagonists of the revolution that put an end to the regime of Fulgencio Batista should know this more than anyone .
I hope that this resolution helps them to make the transition that they need to make !
However , human rights are non-negotiable .
Parliament gains in credibility when it reacts with the same strength to all human rights violations in all countries : in Afghanistan , in Palestine , in the Basque Country - my little country - in Honduras and in Colombia .
This should be our commitment .
It is , of course , the same commitment .
( PL ) I think all of us in this Chamber will agree that the corrupt Communist dictatorship is making any kind of positive change in Cuba impossible .
The police state of the Castro brothers is ruining the island economically , destroying civil liberty and depriving many Cubans of the hope of a life worth living .
The future of Cuba lies , of course , in the hands of Cubans themselves , but the European Union can play an active role here .
We must demand the release of all political prisoners .
In fact , this should be the first condition for any kind of dialogue with Cuba .
We must support the activity of non-governmental organisations , support respect for human rights and promote access to independent media , including the Internet .
Promoting democratic change is an area in which transatlantic ties may play a very important role .
This is why we should cooperate closely with Washington .
By combined effort , we can develop a long-term strategy on Cuba , which will not start with a blind acceptance of the status quo , but a far-reaching vision of democratic and economic reconstruction .
( Applause )
( PT ) Mr President , this debate demonstrates , once again , that the majority of Parliament is two-faced .
The same majority which declined to condemn the military coup in Honduras , ignoring the fact that it led to the imprisonment and death of countless people , is now prepared to negotiate association agreements with a government that is the result of elections rigged by those behind the coup .
Of course , we all regret the death of the Cuban citizen , Mr Orlando Zapata Tamayo , after a hunger strike in a Cuban hospital .
However , we must deplore the terms of this debate and its unacceptable position against Cuba , leaving aside the grave consequences of the economic , trade and financial embargo imposed by the United States on Cuba and the detention in American prisons of five Cuban citizens who only wanted to defend their country .
We cannot continue with an unacceptable common position which prevents the European Union from maintaining open and complete relations with the Cuban Government on the basis of bilateral interests .
It is time to end the common position in order to start normalising relations between the European Union and Cuba .
We expect this of the Spanish Presidency .
( PL ) Madam President , we remember Fidel Castro 's famous cry of ' socialism or death ' .
Today , we can safely say that , from this cry , only death remains .
Proof of this are the circumstances which led to the death of the Cuban prisoner and patriot , Orlando Zapata .
Castro 's dictatorial rule is a disgrace to the idea of democratic socialism .
What is happening in Cuba brings disgrace upon all who are involved in politics under these Left-wing banners .
I was ashamed of the European Union , too , when the then Commissioner , Mr Michel , visited Cuba with a proposal of cooperation on development , but carefully avoided contact with the democratic opposition .
We must end this kind of policy , this closing our eyes to the reality of a country in which there have never been free elections , and where prisoners of conscience are serving prison sentences of many years in scandalous conditions .
The Spanish Presidency is , today , proposing operating an open policy towards Havana , but an essential condition of this policy must be democratisation of the Cuban regime , release of political prisoners , commencement of dialogue with society , lifting of censorship and restoration of civil liberties .
This should be clearly , openly and firmly said to the government in Cuba .
Besides , it is in their interest .
We know there are different ways to freedom for people oppressed by dictators .
There is the path taken by Poland and South Africa - the way of dialogue and understanding .
However , there is also the path which Romania took in its bloody overthrow of the regime .
It is in everyone 's interest to avoid such a scenario .
Which path will Havana choose ?
The key to this is to be found in Cuba .
The policy of the European Union should actively contribute to leading Cuba into the area of freedom and democracy .
This , too , should be the position of the European Parliament .
Madam President , firstly I want to express my own deep sympathy for the death of Orlando Zapata Tamayo and my deepest concern for the four further Cuban prisoners and one opposition activist who have themselves started hunger strikes in protest .
The European Parliament should reiterate our call for the immediate and unconditional release of prisoners of conscience in Cuba - 55 according to Amnesty International , 200 according to Cuba 's Human Rights Commission - and we should express particular concern today for the recent detention and beating of Darsi Ferrer , director of a health and human rights centre in Havana .
Amnesty International itself has not been invited to visit Cuba for 19 years and should be allowed to do so .
We should ask the Cuban Government to agree specific dates for the proposed visit of Manfred Nowak , UN Special Rapporteur on Torture , who we intend to meet in Geneva next week .
As I am one of the people in this House who has always opposed the US embargo on trade , inflicted since 1962 , I have welcomed the fact that under President Obama , measures have been approved to allow Cuban Americans to travel more freely as well as sending more money home .
I welcomed the review in 2008 of our EU common position leading to the establishment of a political dialogue between Cuba and the EU and re-establishing EC development cooperation , and I welcome the fact that the BBC has recently been given free access to Cuba .
But I express disappointment that , in the United Nations Human Rights Council , Cuba has failed to agree the recommendations to ratify the two key human rights conventions - the ICCPR and the ICESCR - and to allow independent inspection of prisons .
I say to the Commission and to the Presidency this afternoon that you - and all of us who visit Cuba - should remain firm in ensuring that we meet members of Cuban civil society .
US Deputy Assistant Secretary of State , Bisa Williams , was able to undertake such an unrestricted visit last year and we should insist - any of us that go to Cuba - that we do the same .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , Minister , the death of Orlando Zapata Tamayo is tragic evidence of the despair to which a lack or an absence of freedom can lead .
As the Minister said , this clearly should not have happened .
We must denounce the detention of prisoners of conscience and demand their release .
We cannot support the arbitrariness of a power that obstinately refuses to embrace the exercising of the most fundamental freedoms , but it is my belief that we cannot deprive ourselves of the virtues of , and prospects for , a political dialogue , which , now more than ever , remains the most tangible expression of our European values .
Relations between Cuba and the European Union have been complex for a very long time now ; often , they are based on a lack of awareness and of understanding , which has led to serious tensions and which regularly undermines the advances in and prospects for political dialogue .
We all know that Cuba is today at a turning point in its history .
More than ever , I remain convinced that we would be wrong not to preserve the advantages and advances , however modest , of a dialogue sustained by particular historical , cultural and linguistic links .
The European Union is , without doubt , the only political power capable of convincing the Cubans that the isolation in which they are confining themselves is suicidal and can only lead them , sooner or later , to a tragic fate .
We cannot shirk this responsibility that we have to pursue the dialogue without excluding any of the difficult issues but also without applying - as I believe is all too often the case - double standards .
( PL ) Liberty will triumph in Cuba .
There will be democracy there , and there will be a free-market economy .
The European Union cannot help in bringing down the regime and , I suppose , does not want to , but it should want and should be able to help the Cubans after the system has been changed .
The experiences of countries like Poland , the Czech Republic , Slovakia and Hungary show that this can be done , and that it can be successful .
We can help with our experience , and after Castro 's overthrow , the European Union should help with its experience and its money , so that Cuba never reaches the situation , described by Polish commentator , Marek Magierowski , in which in the future , the descendants of Orlando Zapata , of whom frequent mention has been made in this Chamber , serve rum on the promenades and boulevards of Havana to the descendants of Castro .
( CS ) I am originally a doctor by profession and I know how difficult it is to save human life .
I sincerely regret any waste of human life and I share your sorrow over the death of Orlando Zapata .
I have carefully examined all of the proposed resolutions of the political groups .
I am afraid I must repeat what I said when we were recently debating the report into the human rights situation in the Central Asian republics .
I said then that we were making a mistake in setting ourselves up as mentors with nothing good to say and showing no respect for the specific historical and cultural traditions of these countries , not even for the positive results which these countries have achieved .
The same applies to Cuba .
I firmly believe that the only way to improve the situation in Cuba is through a dialogue of equals , which Cuban officials are ready for .
In this way , we can also help to improve social and economic rights in Cuba .
We must not forget that Cuba , despite its difficult economic situation , is always in the first rank of countries providing assistance to others , for example , in the disaster in Haiti .
It is true that he who is quick to condemn likes to condemn .
We should definitely not take this path .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I truly believe I can declare that we will write a worthy page in the history of this Parliament today and even more so tomorrow when we vote .
We are writing it because for once , putting aside our mutual prejudices due to our membership of different groups , we bow down before the supreme mystery of a man 's death and acknowledge the truth .
What will we actually write in this resolution ?
We will write things that may seem simple and go without saying but that are actually very important .
We will write that in Cuba , there is no freedom ; we will write that in Cuba , there is no democracy ; we will write that life is life and people should not be killed .
We may take this almost for granted , but it has taken us many years to overcome our mutual prejudice and to recognise a fact that does not offend each of our political faiths , but simply leads us to recognise the basic grain of truth that is the only foundation for discussion .
We must not avoid discussions with Cuba , but must instead insist that any true discussion should stem from the truth , in other words , its failure to recognise the central importance of the individual .
What we need , more than handshakes and friendly gestures , are appropriate measures , causing Castro 's government to give up any hope of achieving compromises that would attach no importance , or at least only secondary importance , to the question of human rights .
Parliament has , quite rightly , seized this opportunity , unlike the High Representative , who I will again remind , as I did this morning , that Cuba libre is not the name of a cocktail : it is a rallying cry that we carry in our hearts , because we want democracy , and we want Cuba to be free .
( ES ) Madam President , the Spanish Members from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament deeply regret the death of Orlando Zapata , and the situation of the prisoners of conscience , and we very firmly call for their release .
The death of Orlando Zapata is regrettable , but it might also be a trigger for us to stop talking about human rights in Cuba and start working for human rights with the Cuban authorities , to promote human rights in Cuba .
In order to do this , we need to begin thinking about changing the common position that is preventing us from having any dialogue with the Cuban authorities , who have the capacity to change the human rights situation on the island .
The common position - which , incidentally , is not so common , because a large proportion of the European Union Member States have bilateral relations with Cuba - is an obstacle that is hindering any possibility of political dialogue .
It is an obstacle to the European Union implementing the principles that are behind its external action , which include promoting democracy and human rights in the world .
The common position is an outmoded , outdated instrument adopted last century by 15 Member States of the European Union .
Now we have 27 Member States .
The situation in the world has changed .
The United States is holding a dialogue with Cuba on issues as sensitive as immigration .
The Organisation of American States has admitted Cuba , on the basis of dialogue in the context of respect for the principles behind the Organisation .
In this new era for the European Union , we need a bilaterally negotiated instrument that will enable us to be effective at doing what the European Union is effective at , which is promoting democracy and human rights .
It is an oddity for the European Union to block dialogue with Cuba since , in its external relations , it has negotiated and is implementing agreements with countries that do not meet the minimum standards for civil and political rights and , of course , in terms of social rights either , which Cuba does .
Only dialogue , the mechanisms of cooperation and compromise through an international treaty will enable the European Union to demand anything from Cuba , and those who refuse dialogue are obstructing the search for a dignified way out for those that they claim to be defending .
By contrast , the foreign policy of the Spanish Government has set a good example , as through constructive , exacting dialogue , a considerable number of prisoners of conscience have been released .
As Don Quixote said , if someone is punished through actions , they do not need to be punished through words .
We are therefore going to stop talking and start working for human rights in Cuba , in cooperation with the Cuban authorities , which is what the prisoners of conscience need , rather than condemnations from this House .
( ES ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the 2003 ' black spring ' raids in Cuba , 75 dissidents were imprisoned , accused of being spies for the United States .
Orlando Zapata was arrested at the same time for disrespect , public disorder and disobedience .
The wives of the 75 dissidents formed the ' Ladies in White ' group , which was awarded the Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought by Parliament in 2005 .
Incidentally , I would like to point out that the Castro regime did not grant visas to the ' Ladies in White ' to come here to Parliament to collect their prize .
The Cuban Human Rights Commission recognises that there are around 200 political prisoners there , 22 of whom are journalists .
Cuba is third in the sad world ranking of imprisoned journalists , behind Iran with 52 and China with 24 .
Orlando Zapata , aged 42 , was declared a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International .
He began a hunger strike on 3 December 2009 due to the repeated beatings that he received and other ill treatment , and died on 23 February , 85 days after he began his hunger strike .
Parliament should express its support for the family and friends of Mr Zapata and express its great concern at the state of human rights in Cuba .
This House should send a clear message to the Castro regime , especially in the context of the Spanish Presidency .
The Spanish Presidency should , incidentally , be much more active in defending fundamental rights in Cuba .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to take this opportunity to call for the immediate release of all political prisoners in Cuba .

( ES ) Madam President , democracy and defending human rights have an important place among the Union 's principles and objectives for external action - I refer to Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union .
This Article also applies to relations with Cuba and with the Cuban people , who are very dear to us .
Unfortunately , in the last five years , the Council 's actions appear to have been essentially governed by a desire to correct the line adopted in previous years , especially in 2003 when there was an extremely harsh wave of oppression in Cuba .
In 2005 , the Council suspended the 2003 measures .
Subsequently , there were trips to the island by foreign ministers and commissioners .
In June 2008 , the 2003 measures were lifted and a global political dialogue was established - as Mr López Garrido reminded us - along with regular high-level meetings .
A Head of State of a Member State even recently visited Havana .
Unfortunately , the European political leaders who went to the island did not have any time to meet with the representatives of the dissidents , who therefore felt marginalised .
Over all this time , repression in Cuba has continued .
There have been no changes or reforms .
Nevertheless , political dialogue has been maintained .
Now we are all shaken up by the cruel death of the political prisoner , Orlando Zapata .
As is well known , ladies and gentlemen , some governments , such as the Spanish Government , have repeatedly said that they want to cancel the common position .
It says something very logical : support for democratic transition , essentially the same thing that is required by the principles and objectives of Article 21 of the treaty .
I will conclude with two points .
The common position has not hindered dialogue .
This is obvious .
What is more , it was reconfirmed recently by the 27 ministers , in June 2009 .
Secondly , the priority cannot be to change the common position - that would be the last straw !
The priority now is to ask for the immediate , complete and unconditional release of all political prisoners .
I see Cuba and Latin America as Western , and the symbols that identify the West are the dignity of human beings and respect for their fundamental rights .
I have a final thought : I would like to remind the Council that , in its own conclusions in June 2009 , it said that the future of political dialogue with the Cuban authorities was dependent on progress being made , in particular , on human rights .
Can anyone say that this progress is taking place today ?
Can anyone really say that ?
( ES ) ' History will absolve me ' was the famous statement of a young lawyer who stirred his people .
History does absolve him for his revolt against tyranny and then against the United States embargo .
However , it is with the same emphatic judgment , that Parliament , which represents the largest area of freedom and democracy in the world , condemns the dictatorship suffered by the people of Cuba , the violation of human rights on the island , the cruelty to political prisoners and the contempt for its nationals in exile .
The judgment of history is clear .
Through this resolution , Members from all ideologies are standing alongside the Cuban people in their struggle .
We need to do everything we can to prevent the brutal oppression that they are suffering , which includes cancelling the paralysing common position .
I will pay tribute to Raúl Rivero in the last verses that he wrote in his city of Havana , which say that they do not tax affection , emptiness , suffocation or bitterness .
The ruins of the homeland are safe .
Do not worry comrades .
Now we are going .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , once again , the choices and conduct of the Cuban communist regime create a dilemma for our Parliament : is it possible to carry on holding discussions with this regime ?
For years now , the European Parliament has been asking the Cuban authorities for democratic reforms that respect human rights .
But the handover of power from Fidel Castro to his brother , Raúl , has led neither to democratic reforms , nor to the release of political prisoners .
The death of Orlando Zapata in prison , after 85 days of hunger strike , demonstrates the ideological and oppressive nature of the regime .
For 10 years , the European Union has financed EUR 145 million of aid measures to Cuba : the results have been far from brilliant .
In fact , this funding has helped to keep tyranny alive .
If we want to be credible , we must demand that relations with Havana , including development aid , are tied in to specific and verifiable improvements in the human rights situation for all Cuban citizens , beginning with the immediate release of political prisoners and prisoners of conscience .
We should not throw down an ultimatum but call for change by one of the planet 's most oppressive regimes , a faint imitation of an ideology overtaken by history and fast becoming extinct .
( DE ) Madam President , we should make a tangible offer to the people of Cuba , and also to the island 's regime : in place of the political status quo , we will fund a transition to democracy in Cuba .
The first step must be the release of all political prisoners .
In parallel , the United States should end its sanctions , which have helped to cement the regime in place rather than to overcome it .
The next step should be for a round table composed of representatives of the regime and of the civil rights movement based in Cuba to draw up a schedule for the transition to democracy and for democratic elections .
Incidentally , Central Europe shows that there is still a future for the former State party - even for that party , then , there is life after the death of the old system .
We , as the EU and as Member States , should support this process in a similar way to how we did in Central Europe .
Doing so would help the Cuban people , stabilise the region and would also pave the way for a new kind of relations with the US that would not represent a repeat of the pre-Castro era .

( PT ) Madam President , regardless of the reasons behind it , the death of Mr Orlando Zapata Tamayo is regrettable ; it is regrettable that he took his protest to its ultimate conclusion .
However , we cannot accept any intensification of unacceptable political and ideological campaigns against Cuba and its people which use this sad and regrettable event as a pretext .
Regardless of the viewpoint of each person with respect to the choices of the Cuban people , those choices and their sovereign right to decide their destiny and the form of political organisation of their state must be respected .
For these reasons , we condemn all and every form of intervention or attack , including the criminal blockade to which Cuba has been subjected for almost half a century .
For these reasons , we also consider that the logical position of the European Union and the path to be followed must be to have a complete normalisation of relations with Cuba by means of the removal of the common position against Cuba , which represents an unacceptable form of discrimination exercised against Cuba and its people .
Above all , we do not accept the immense hypocrisy which affects many of those within Parliament and we strongly denounce the two-faced policy of the European Union .

( ES ) Madam President , I am addressing my speech to Orlando Zapata 's mother and to those suffering along with him in the fight for freedom in Cuba : they are not alone .
Today , through this resolution - for which , in my capacity as Secretary-General of my party , I would like to thank the authors , and especially all the parties that have signed it - Parliament is speaking out as one against this isolated and decrepit dictatorship .
Today , we are signing the beginning of the international death sentence for this regime .
I am convinced , based on the majority of the speeches that I have heard , that we are all united in firmly and clearly condemning the death of your son .
Many of us , however , are going further than this statement : you can rest assured that we will remain vigilant in order to secure the unconditional release of all political prisoners on the island .
We will remain vigilant regarding the situation of human rights violations on the island .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) will , of course , fight to maintain the European Union 's common position , and I am sure based on what I have heard that many others will do the same .
We will not give mixed signals , but rather a clear guide for achieving our dream of seeing a democratic Cuba .
The supreme sacrifice made by Orlando has produced a response in the good consciences of the whole world .
Let us ensure that the silent sacrifice of thousands of Cubans is celebrated in the near future in a free Cuba .
( DE ) Madam President , for us , it is relatively easy to talk , when human rights violations take place elsewhere and people are also dying for their beliefs .
It is important to make this point .
Mr Zapata really has lost his life as a result of his hunger strike , and there are also other prisoners who have now been prompted to go on hunger strike .
We need , therefore , to give specific thought to how we can move forwards in a targeted way .
Some have said that we absolutely should not talk to Cuba because the regime there is unacceptable to us .
Others - and I do not think this position is a good one at all , Mr Ferreira - have expressed the opinion that there is hypocrisy here and that the people of Cuba should be allowed the freedom to make their own political decisions .
I believe that the freedom to make political decisions really stops where human rights are violated and people die .
In those circumstances we , as the European Parliament , must do something .
Against that backdrop , it is absolutely right for the specific proposals that have been laid on the table - not least including a few new suggestions from Mr Gahler - to be discussed in detail and for us to consider what we can do to intervene against human rights violations all over the world and to help the people of the world .
( DE ) Madam President , as we are discussing our relations with Cuba here today in the shadow of the tragic death of Orlando Zapata , we must acknowledge that the view that we have had of Cuba does date from a time when our thoughts were defined by a friend-or-foe framework .
We had , on the one hand , the bad Cubans who were vassals of the Soviet Union intent on pursuing international revolution and , on the other hand , the good Cubans , who rescued the country from the grip of the sugar barons , the mafia , the CIA and US imperialism .
On one side were the bad Cubans , the Communist oppressors of the people , and on the other those who provided the population with education , medical care and an end to their hunger .
Today , if the death of Orlando Zapata is to make sense - if death can ever make sense - we should , at all events , take this legacy very seriously .
This death must not be in vain .
The other thing that must happen is that the EU must pursue clear routes , dedicated political routes , and must not allow us to be put under the yoke of the States ; we must be free of the old ideological encumbrances and we must be on an equal footing in the political dialogue and push for there to be clear improvements in the human rights situation so that we will soon be able to talk of a free Cuba and the people of the island will be able to live in democracy .
( SV ) Madam President , the USA 's trade embargo has been in place for almost 50 years .
The embargo has brought poverty and oppression to the people of Cuba , as many different speakers have highlighted .
Many people will be familiar with the report produced by Human Rights Watch in November 2009 entitled ' New Castro , Same Cuba ' which proposed that the embargo should be lifted and that Cuba 's dictators should have six months in which to release political prisoners .
If they were unable to do this , then a more intelligent embargo should be introduced .
This would be of the type which has been used on occasions recently and which involves freezing assets and foreign investment and putting in place a ban on travel .
The major democratic states and the EU should , of course , support this .
It would be interesting to know what the President-in-Office of the Council thinks of this proposal from Human Rights Watch .
( SK ) Engaging ourselves against human rights violations must be a priority for the European Union in all circumstances .
Orlando Zapata , a Cuban political prisoner , died having staged a hunger strike .
Another Cuban prisoner is staging a hunger strike as a protest on behalf of 25 prisoners who are in very bad health and whose lives are threatened .
It is not a solution to do what the Spanish Government suggested when they offered asylum to the starving prisoner .
I am wondering about the Spanish Government , which is chairing the European Union at this time , because their proposal does not address the situation .
The immediate release of political prisoners is quite difficult .
And so I ask Commissioner Piebalgs to have the European Commission enter into negotiations with the Cuban Government to allow the International Red Cross to visit Cuban political prisoners .
This would enable an objective assessment of their condition and help in further negotiations .
The Red Cross was allowed to do this at the Guantánamo prison .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , advocate compliance with human rights in Europe , as well as in other parts of the world .
Mr Zapata 's death is a cry for help from a person drawing attention in a very tragic way to what - at least for him - was a completely unbearable situation .
I want to see us , as Europeans , take a clear stand for compliance with the human rights enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations , irrespective of the political situation .
Madam President , I believe that the debate that we have had regarding the issue of the situation of prisoners of conscience in Cuba , due to the death of one of them , Orlando Zapata , shows that there is a high level of agreement between Members and political groups .
I am certain that this will be demonstrated tomorrow in the vote that is to take place on the resolutions resulting from this debate , which are basically in line with the position of the Council , the Commission and all the European Union institutions .
This undoubtedly strengthens the European Union in this essential dialogue with Cuba and in the objective of advancing and improving the lot of the Cuban people .
I think that we can agree that we need to speak out immediately in any place where there is a violation of human rights .
I think this is a fundamental principle that has been highlighted , and it should always be measured using the same yardstick .
The European Union must come to the fore as soon as there is a violation of human rights , because that is part of its very personality .
In this case , we are doing so in relation to Cuba , by saying and demanding that all the remaining prisoners of conscience in Cuba should be released and that human rights should be respected there .
That is not all , however : we need to work effectively and be effective , achieve results that improve the well-being and living conditions of prisoners of conscience or even make it possible for them to be released .
In some cases , this has been achieved , and in some cases , progress has been made .
This is because , amongst other things , there is a fundamental element of European Union policy in relation to Cuba , which is political dialogue .
This dialogue was resumed recently - which I believe is a good thing - and , by putting an end to the sanctions which were part of the European Union 's position , and which did not make any sense at all , and resuming this political dialogue , it has been possible to do something that had not been possible since 2003 : talking to the Cuban authorities about prisoners of conscience .
Naturally , the evaluation that some of you have mentioned , the evaluation of the result of this dialogue , will have to take place periodically , and there will have to be an evaluation of this process this year .

Many of you - I am referring , for example , to the speeches by Mr Mauro , Mr Yáñez-Barnuevo or Mr Michel - have highlighted the importance of this dialogue , of this cooperation , and of the moral authority that the European Union has to talk to Cuba and achieve progress , which is the ultimate aim .
We therefore welcome the majority agreement in this House regarding the human rights situation in Cuba , which I believe can be summarised in one message : although we continue to be open to dialogue with Cuba , the European Union is going to continue to demand that all political prisoners be freed there and that the civil and political rights of Cuban citizens be respected .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I believe that this debate again has proven that , on issues of human rights and democracy , Parliament is a lighthouse .
The Commission , too , will never tolerate the violation of human rights and democracy .
So that means that it will stay a cornerstone of our policy , not only because of its strength , but we also believe that if you have strong views , you should make them known .
As you know also , our basis for our work with Cuba will lie in continuing the Common Position from 1996 .
This provides the basis and it is very clear that there should be some basic changes in human rights in Cuba .
At the same time , constructive dialogues that started in 2008 are also giving positive signs .
I would not say that we have achieved major breakthroughs , but on a lot of issues , there has been progress .
I believe this is the way we need to continue .
And we should also continue meeting civil society .
The Commission will follow the Council conclusion that says that , when appropriate , meetings with the democratic opposition will form part of high level visits and we will seek them actively .
I have received seven motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Orlando Zapata Tamayo , arrested in 2003 with a group of 75 other dissidents during a crackdown on opposition groups carried out by the authorities , died following a two-month hunger strike in a Cuban prison .
I hope the tragic death of one of Cuba 's best known political prisoners has reminded everyone that the question of human rights in Cuba has not been settled .
I fully agree with the demands of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and many human rights organisations that the governments of European states should put pressure on the Cuban authorities for the unconditional release of political prisoners , with the threat of blocking every attempt at improving EU-Cuba relations .
I am of the opinion that the complete lifting of sanctions against Cuba by the European Union , without negotiating the actual release of all political prisoners , was premature .
At the same time , I would like to stress that the citizens of Cuba should not pay for the mistakes of the people who make such decisions .
It is high time the country took specific steps towards democratisation , building civil society and respecting human rights , in particular , freedom of speech and association .
I would like to echo the words of the former Prime Minister of Spain , José María Aznar , and say it is unacceptable that , during visits to Cuba , European politicians refuse to meet representatives of the opposition .
We must find tools to support the development of a democratic system in Cuba , and pass on to the Cuban nation the universal values associated with building democracy and a democratic society .
in writing . - The premature death of Orlando Zapata Tamayo , after seven years of illegal imprisonment against which he was left with only one means of protest , must be seen as the responsibility of the repressive Cuban regime .
It is our responsibility to keep in mind the words of Orlando Zapata 's mother : ' You should not have to go through what my son had to experience ' . During the last four years of Raúl Castro 's leadership , expectations that the Communist dictatorship in Cuba could become more human have clearly been disappointed .
People there continue to risk their lives when voicing their opinion .
There are still about 200 political prisoners in Cuba .
Both the USA and the EU Member States have condemned the death of Mr Zapata , yet this protest has not been strong or timely enough .
In cases like this , one cannot , like the Spanish Presidency , waste any time in reacting .
The moral of Zapata 's case is that one cannot ignore the harsh realities of the Cuban dictatorship .
Our policy towards Cuba must remain conditional on genuine changes there .
The EU has to take the side of the Cuban people rather than cherish hopes that Zapata 's murderers can be trusted .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0017 / 2010 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : Cooperation between the EU and Turkey over illegal immigration
Most illegal immigrants to the EU arrive in Greece from Turkey across the maritime borders .
From Greece , they then move on to the rest of the EU .
Given that Turkey quite justifiably wishes to become a member of the European Union , what initiatives does the Spanish Presidency intend to take to put pressure on Turkey to cooperate , since cooperation is indispensable ?
How does the Presidency judge progress in the negotiations between the EU and Turkey on the readmission agreement and between Turkey and Frontex on the agreement for exchanging information and involving Turkey in joint operations ?
Is Greece being notified of progress in these negotiations ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , increased cooperation with third countries - with countries of origin and transit in migration - is a key element for the European Union in terms of combating illegal immigration .
This has been one of the major changes , developments and advances that have taken place as a result of what is known as the global approach to immigration and the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum .
Cooperation with countries that are the source of migration is one of the most important elements of the new immigration policy - before 2004 , there was practically no immigration policy in the European Union - and one of the prime elements of the policy that arose following the Hampton Court meeting in 2004 is cooperation with countries of origin and transit for illegal migration .
As I said , this is part of the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum , and in this respect , in its conclusions in December last year on enlargement , the Council welcomed the initiation of strengthened dialogue on migration with Turkey , and asked for specific measures to be adopted , for example readmission , border controls , etc .
The Stockholm Programme has reaffirmed the need to act against illegal immigration , and , furthermore , it is clear from the Stockholm Programme and from the Council 's conclusions of December 2009 , that we need to conclude readmission agreements with Turkey and , in the meantime , apply the existing bilateral agreements .
I can tell you that the last round of negotiations on this readmission agreement took place only last month , on 19 February in Ankara , and the Council is going to continue to support the Commission in its efforts to secure the most favourable conclusion possible to these negotiations .
I must also cite the collaboration and cooperation between Frontex and Turkey .
Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2007 / 2004 facilitates this operational cooperation between Member States and third countries , and it should also be said that negotiations are taking place on an agreement such as that mentioned in this Regulation between Frontex and Turkey .
This is an operational task involving exchanging information , analysing risks , research and coordinated joint Frontex operations .
This is the framework in which operational cooperation is now developing between the Agency and the Turkish authorities .
We hope that these negotiations end as soon as possible , in a fruitful way , and , in any event , the Member States will be kept informed of any future developments .
( EL ) Thank you very much for your reply .
I should like to make a further two comments .
The first is that , today or tomorrow , in tandem with today 's debate , the Greek Parliament will be voting on a legislative initiative by the Greek Government which makes it easier and more flexible to acquire Greek nationality than in the past .
Of course , this makes Greece even more attractive to immigrants , especially illegal immigrants , who believe that at some point in the future , they will be able to regularise their status .
I should like , from a strategic point of view , to hear if the Presidency thinks this is a good move .
Secondly , it was announced in February that Frontex is to create its first outpost in Piraeus , in order to strengthen its presence in the Aegean .
Is there any specific timetable for this ?
Honourable Member , I cannot tell you now precisely what the timetable will be for these negotiations that are taking place .
What is certain is that the political will for them to succeed is there .
The information that you refer to regarding Greece highlights the need and the opportunity for the fight against illegal immigration to be strengthened through these readmission agreements .
We need to support these conversations , these negotiations , which are basically conducted by the Commission .
I must remind you that before the end of last year , there was a visit by Minister Billström , on behalf of the Swedish Presidency , and Mr Barrot , Vice-President of the Commission , to Turkey , on 5 November 2009 .
This visit was followed by contact from the Commission .
With regard to the new Commission , this case is essentially under the remit of Mrs Malmström , who knows the Stockholm Programme very well because she was involved in making it a reality and putting it together .
I am optimistic that the information that you are referring to can be compensated for through much stronger regulation of readmission agreements , real readmission agreements with Turkey .
I cannot give you a precise timetable for them at the moment , but I can tell you that the Presidency of the Council and the Commission have a strong desire for these readmission agreements with Turkey to be achieved .
We do not only want agreements with Turkey , but also with other countries which are sometimes countries of origin or of transit for illegal migration .
I must also tell you that the Frontex agreements , in this case with Turkey , are directly managed by Frontex .
In many cases , they are technical and operational conversations , and although the Council as an institution is not involved in those negotiations , it is kept informed of them and will , of course , inform the rest of the Member States in any case , which naturally includes Greece .
( EL ) Mr President , you said that talks are under way between Frontex and Turkey and that the Commission is reporting to the Council on these talks .
I should therefore like you to tell us , I should like to know if the basis for these talks between Turkey and Frontex is respect for the border between Greece and Turkey , in other words , recognition of , and respect for , the external borders of the EU .
I would remind you that , to date , the harassment of Frontex aircraft by Turkey has been based on this dispute .
I should also like to ask if Turkey has laid down any other conditions in order to reach agreement with Frontex .
I would like to congratulate the Minister on his excellent answer and the fine work which we in Europe are doing to protect the rights of immigrants .
My fear is that sometimes we fail to protect the rights of our own citizens when they move from one country to another .
I think particularly of some of my East Midlands constituents who have spent their retirement savings on a home in Spain only to find , after living there for two or three years , that they have the bulldozers at the door and their rights of property , their rights to the enforcement of contract , are simply ignored by the Spanish courts and the Spanish authorities .
I should be grateful if the Minister could explain to us why this is and what action Spain will take to resolve this problem for European citizens in his country .
Madam President , with regard to the question on Greece , of course , the borders of the Member States of the Union are to be respected .
The very objective of these agreements is for those borders to be respected .
When there is an agreement with a third country through which illegal immigration may pass , and there is a readmission agreement - which is the objective - and therefore the European Union 's agreements with that third country are strengthened - which is the global approach and the philosophy of the European Pact on Immigration - what is happening is that the borders of the Member States of the Union are being strengthened .
That is the effect .
If we do not have this effective control of illegal immigration because there is insufficient cooperation with other countries , because there are no readmission agreements , those borders are weakened in practice .
The objective of these negotiations and readmission agreements is therefore clearly to strengthen borders , which of course includes Greece 's borders .
With regard to the question from the honourable Member about British citizens that have moved to Spain and invested some of their savings there , I must say that I am obviously not here representing Spain as a country in its judicial relations with citizens who are there , but rather I am representing the Council of the Union .
Those relations or any problems that there may be are settled in the independent courts of the Spanish State .
I will therefore refrain from speaking on behalf of a specific country on specific matters that are not relevant to European Union law .
Subject : Domestic violence
In the Spanish Presidency 's statement at the plenary session in January 2010 , the Presidency highlighted its firm intention to combat violence against women , to propose draft legislation to fight violence against women , and to establish a European Observatory of Domestic Violence .
Can the Presidency elaborate on what exactly its plans are in this area and when we can expect such initiatives to be put in place ?
Madam President , it is well known that one of the priorities for the Spanish Presidency of the Council of the Union is the fight against gender violence , in other words , equality between men and women in the European Union , which has not been fully achieved 50 years after the birth of the Union .
Violence against women is , above all , the greatest form of discrimination , the greatest scourge in European society and other societies in the world , in fact , unfortunately , of practically all societies .
This is an essential objective for the Presidency , because we believe it is an essential objective for Europe .
For this reason , as it is an objective for Europe , a problem with a European dimension , in order to combat this phenomenon , we also need a European strategy .
This has been included not only in the programme of the Spanish Presidency , but also in the 18-month programme of the Trio of Presidencies , with Belgium and Hungary .
We are glad that Parliament is an institution that has always played a very active role in this field and has made repeated calls for measures in this respect , against gender violence .
For example , in a resolution that it adopted in November last year , Parliament urged the Commission to draw up a general directive on measures to prevent and combat all forms of gender violence .
Parliament also urged the Member States to produce more detailed statistics on gender violence .
Echoing Parliament 's position , the Spanish Presidency , as I said , considered this to be a crucial issue .
More specifically , it has initiated the creation of an observatory on gender violence by the Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs Council ( EPSCO ) , which adopted conclusions on this on 8 March , International Women 's Day , which was on Monday .
The directive on the protection order against gender violence is also being drawn up .
These are two very important , fundamental issues which we hope can be developed and finalised before the six-month Spanish Presidency of the European Council comes to an end .
Thank you , Minister , and I congratulate the Spanish Presidency on highlighting the issue of gender-based violence .
Too often , that issue is literally kept behind closed doors , because that is where most of the violence happens : in the family home .
I believe that your initiative will certainly lead to greater public awareness across the EU .
You spoke of the resolution adopted by the European Parliament in November 2009 .
One of the things that resolution asked for was the possibility of establishing a clear legal basis in this area .
I wonder whether you would be supportive of the Commission drafting a comprehensive directive on action to prevent gender violence , and what your view is on establishing a clear legal basis .
Madam President , Mrs Harkin , as you know , the Treaty of Lisbon changes the legal bases for European law - for regulations and directives - because it brings together in the Community pillar what was previously three different pillars : the Community pillar , foreign and security policy , and justice and home affairs .
These things have been brought together in a single pillar and a single legal personality , and this means that the normal , traditional Community method is being introduced for foreign policy and for the more specific area of judicial affairs - judicial cooperation on civil and criminal matters - and for police cooperation .
This means the Commission and also Parliament having a greater presence at the Court of Justice in Luxembourg .
In the area of cooperation in criminal matters , there is a possibility that still remains , which is that a quarter of European Union governments can take initiatives in this area .
This is what happened with the directive on gender violence : Twelve governments have presented an initiative on which the Council and Parliament will have to adopt a final decision , because it is an ordinary legislative procedure matter .
This directive is already being prepared and is in response to the possibility established by the treaty for governments to take this initiative , and which , in our view , has a correct , adequate legal basis , because it concerns judicial cooperation on criminal matters .
We are talking about crimes involving ill treatment , violence against a person , something which is a crime in all the countries of the Union .
This is therefore about protecting the victims of that crime .
Its legal basis is in cooperation on criminal matters , and we understand that it is therefore perfectly possible - as the legal services of the Council have said - for it to be implemented through this legal text , which will have to be examined and debated in this House .
I hope that this will happen quickly , because I believe that it is what millions of women , and also men , in the European Union are waiting for .
They are waiting for this protection , which - as you rightly said - now needs to come out from behind closed doors , not only at national level but also at European level .
It needs to become part of the European agenda .
This is the aim of the initiative presented by 12 European Union governments .
I wish to join Mrs Harkin in congratulating the Spanish Presidency on putting violence against women at the top of its political agenda .
I wonder if the Presidency would look at an experience 20 years ago .
Edinburgh City Council , financed by European Social Fund money , conducted a campaign called ' Zero Tolerance ' in relation to violence against women .
Its conclusion was that you need a holistic approach to this issue .
You need information policy , you need housing authorities involved , you need the police involved and you need the judicial authorities involved .
Will the Council examine that project to see what lessons can be drawn ?
( DE ) Mr López Garrido , you did briefly mention that domestic violence is , of course , not only directed against women , but also against children , and domestic violence is also an issue in relation to the care of the elderly , as a result of excessive demands .
To what extent will these areas of domestic violence , too , be included in the remit of the planned European Observatory of Domestic Violence ?
Madam President , Mr Martin , of course , the underlying philosophy behind this initiative - which is supported by Parliament , with regard to regulation , in this case through legal channels , through the most effective channels possible , the judicial channels of a democratic state - is what was rightly called ' zero tolerance ' of gender violence .
It involves seeing gender violence as something which , for centuries , has been very deeply embedded , including from a cultural point of view , in the social structures of our societies .
We therefore need a global approach , a comprehensive approach to combating gender violence in order for it to be effective , because it is a form of violence that is very difficult to eradicate , extremely difficult to eradicate .
This is why , despite the progress that has been made in the fight against this type of violence at national level , we are still systematically dealing with this scourge , which is often only the tip of the iceberg , because only a small percentage of the violence that actually occurs is reported , so it continues to exist .
We therefore need a global , comprehensive approach , using all of the legal tools available to us , raising awareness in the media and ensuring that education systems are taking the problem into account .
On Monday , the Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs Council ( EPSCO ) adopted this comprehensive , global approach in the fight against gender violence ; in other words , ' zero tolerance ' .
With regard to the question put by the honourable Member regarding the existence of violence against children and the elderly , I think that we are talking about violence against the vulnerable ; the most vulnerable .
As in the expression ' survival of the fittest ' that we have in many of our countries , in my country , it is , of course , manifested in this violence that is linked to the vulnerability of the weaker person , which in turn demonstrates and expresses the cowardice of the person who is violent towards someone who is more vulnerable , whether it be women , children or the elderly .
This is the phenomenon that relates to this situation .
The Council and Parliament did invite the Commission to consider the possibility of an initiative for a European year for combating violence against children , young people and women .
This is raised in the Daphne III Programme .
It is an expression of the need , honourable Member , for this protection to be extended to all vulnerable people , which certainly include children and the elderly , the two groups to which you referred .
Subject : Danube Strategy
What steps will the Council take to ensure that it can submit a draft Danube Strategy before the end of the year as planned ? What is the timetable and what are the main points of the strategy 's content ?
Madam President , Mr Posselt , the strategy for the Danube region is one of the elements on the programme of the Trio of Presidencies of Spain , Belgium and Hungary .
As you can imagine , it was at the initiative of Hungary that the strategy was introduced into the programme .
The three countries are therefore committed to helping to develop this European Union Strategy for the Danube region and , in this respect , in June last year , the Council urged the Commission to present it before the end of this year .
We are waiting for it to be produced by the Commission .
What the Commission has done is to initiate a public consultation .
A public consultation that is going to last until March of this year , and subsequently , looking at the results of the consultation , the Commission will propose the strategy , which we hope can be formally adopted in December of this year in the form of a communication from the Commission .
We have to wait for this communication to be produced .
In any case , I do want to say that there has been an important meeting in which progress has been made on the possible content of this strategy , which was held on 25 February in Budapest with the governments of Austria , Bulgaria , the Czech Republic , Germany , Hungary , Romania , Slovakia and Slovenia , in which important conclusions were adopted , suggesting what the essential elements of this future strategy should be .
It is about these countries joining forces , within the European Union and with the coverage of the European Union , using European funds , but in a financially neutral way , to achieve objectives of progress and significant economic , social and tourism-related development .
We are therefore - I repeat - awaiting a communication from the Commission on this , once the consultation has concluded .
At that point , the Council will adopt a position as soon as it has the communication from the Commission .
( DE ) Thank you , Minister , for that sound and exhaustive reply .
I just have two brief follow-up questions .
Firstly , to what extent does the Danube Strategy relate to the fields of transport and culture ?
I think both of these are particularly important when it comes to cross-border cooperation .
Secondly , is there already a final list of the countries included or is that still to be decided , as Parliament has proposed an expansion ?
Madam President , this list of countries is not - as you will understand - something that the Presidency-in-Office of the Council can decide .
The governments that I mentioned a moment ago are interested in developing this strategy , and we need to wait for the Commission to publish its communication .
I do want to say that these countries consider that the European Union needs to play a leadership role in this strategy , especially the Commission , by facilitating cooperation in the Danube region .
The statement that I referred to previously , made on 25 February , says how the strategy for the Danube region should be used to increase prosperity , security and peace for the people who live in the region , through trans-regional and trans-national cooperation , as well as coordination at that level .
It also considers the following to be strategic policy areas to be included in the strategy : infrastructure , innovation , cultural and artistic activities , sustainable economic development , tourism , food safety , the economy , cooperation in relation to small and medium-sized enterprises , research and development , migration , sport , education , employment , health , social affairs , along with other areas that the document covers extensively and ambitiously .
I think that the strategy for the Danube region is an important document , and therefore I thank you for your question , which has given me an opportunity to mention it .
I think it is an ambitious objective , and we are currently waiting - I repeat once again - for this consultation to take place and for the communication from the Commission , but the political will does , of course , exist .
The three members of the Trio of Presidencies and the Presidency of the Council have the political will to launch this strategy for the Danube region .
( DE ) The Danube is a river , and with rivers you also have to pay attention to how clean they are .
I would therefore consider it important to find out what purification plants and what wastewater treatment plants are being considered in order to improve the quality of the river water accordingly .
For us , the goal would be for the Danube to be of drinking water quality from its source to its end .
My second question is how can hydropower be better utilised for energy generation , but also , and above all , for the storage of water , so that we obtain greater security of supply in Europe in relation to energy ?
( RO ) The success of the European Union 's strategy for the Danube will depend on an ambitious action plan , as well as on identifying certain specific projects which will improve the lives of citizens in the Danube region .
I would like to know whether the process has started for identifying these strategic projects for developing the Danube region and which criteria will be used as the basis for selecting these projects .
Madam President , naturally , I am convinced that the objective to which Mr Rübig referred is going to be included in this strategy for the Danube region , the dimensions of which I have already talked about .
The objectives of this strategy are really important , and relate to a large number of issues that affect the daily lives of the people who live in the area .
They therefore relate to the economy , cultural dimensions , and protecting the environment and natural resources , which obviously includes water .
As has been said , this natural environment is something intrinsically linked to the region , and I am convinced that it is going to be clearly included in this strategy , which must be led by the countries that are promoting it .
They are the countries that I listed , which met a few days ago in Budapest to make progress on setting objectives and clarifying the strategy more precisely , as it is not yet sufficiently defined .
I therefore think it is premature - and I am referring to the speech by the second Member who spoke - to talk about the selection criteria for projects or the eligibility of projects , some of which I have mentioned .
Others could also be added , for example , the subjects of navigation , energy security , combating climate change , the effects of changes in the financial markets and , in general , all areas which this strategy and its implementation could undoubtedly improve .
I think that we all need to work together in the European Union , because we are talking about something on a European scale that affects the whole of the European Union and its main policies .
I am certain , for example , that cohesion policy is going to be the focus of attention , not only social cohesion but a new aspect included in the Treaty of Lisbon , which is territorial cohesion .
This is a form of cohesion , a dimension of cohesion that appears in the Treaty of Lisbon and which fits in very well with this initiative regarding the strategy for the Danube region .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Subject : The European Social Model and combating poverty
At times of economic recession and crisis , the unemployed , low wage earners and pensioners on small pensions find it hardest to maintain a decent standard of living .
The mobilisation of the European Social Fund and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund has not had the desired effect , since 80 million of our fellow citizens are living below the poverty threshold .
The European Social Model is based not only on good economic performance but also on a high level of social protection .
In view of this , how does the Spanish Presidency intend , as part of a joint policy in cooperation with upcoming Presidencies , to support the lower economic and social strata so as to help them survive and , at the same time , protect groups of our fellow citizens who are at risk from poverty and social exclusion , thereby safeguarding the core of a social Europe ?
Subject : European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion
EUR 17 million has been provided for 2010 - European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
Although this European Year will promote greater awareness of these particular issues , there is a need for an effective joint action in order to make a substantial difference to the millions of people in the European Union who are suffering because of poverty and social exclusion .
What action does the Council intend to take which would lead to the adoption of concrete measures during this year ?
Would the Council explain how this European year , and its associated budget , will be used effectively to attain long-term results ?
Madam President , the Presidency shares the Member 's opinions on the objective of providing a high level of social protection - in particular , in relation to groups threatened by poverty and social exclusion - which is one of the cornerstones of the European social model .
This is especially true at a time when we are in an economic recession .
Unemployment : it is currently believed that there could be more than five million more unemployed than at the start of the economic crisis .
This has meant that many homes have seen their incomes fall , and many are exposed to poverty and excessive debt .
It is also probable that unemployment will continue to be high , and therefore , that this long-term unemployment will result in social exclusion .
Therefore , the social consequences of the economic crisis are going to be an important item on the European political agenda in the next few months , and of course on the European agenda of the Trio of Presidencies , without any doubt whatsoever .
We have an instrument , a tool for this purpose , which is the declaration of 2010 as the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , which has four specific objectives : recognising people 's right to dignity and to play an active role in society ; a commitment from public opinion to social inclusion policies ; a more cohesive society ; and , of course , a long-term effort at all levels of government to combat poverty and social exclusion .
This effort is to be especially aimed at protecting the most vulnerable - a concept that I used when answering a previous question - who are ultimately the ones that suffer most from both poverty and social exclusion .
This is the case with children , women and the elderly .
We are therefore , of course , going to support the various initiatives that there may be in relation to poverty and social exclusion and to combating them , and I must say that I hope this is going to become a central objective of the whole of the European Union 's growth and job creation strategy .
One of the objectives set out in the document presented by the Commission on 3 March is to reduce the number of people at risk of falling into poverty by 20 million .
( EL ) Thank you , Minister , for your reply .
However , given that , as you yourself said , unemployment reached 10 % in 2009 , 45 % of unemployed Europeans remain out of work for more than a year and flexible forms of employment have mushroomed in the absence of a clear institutional framework , with the result that there are 19 million poor unemployed , we should like to know , because you have always been very precise and I welcome that , what specific , immediate measures and active and passive employment policies you intend to adopt at European level , in accordance with the principles and spirit of the European social model , in order to address the question of poor workers and unemployed persons , especially the long-term unemployed , who face problems of immediate survival .
Can the Council outline how it will ensure that the active inclusion recommendation , which is a tool for fighting family poverty and which has been endorsed by the Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs Council , is integrated into the EU 2020 strategy and implemented so as to ensure progress on poverty reduction ?
Madam President , I must say once again that this is the first time that there has been the intention to have such an ambitious European strategy for this problem .
In other words , a strategy for combating poverty and social exclusion , and especially for actively including the long-term unemployed and the elderly , so we are once again returning to the concept of the most vulnerable in society .
To begin with , in response to the economic crisis that we are experiencing , the European Union has implemented a coordinated policy , an immediate , short-term shock treatment involving injecting public money into the financial system .
This triggered what economists call the automatic stabilisers , which is the social protection provided for in welfare states .
This meant that there was a reaction that had at least a palliative effect for those people who had become unemployed and those for whom it is difficult , at least in the short-term , to find new employment .
In other words , there has been a reaction that should be taken into account , because it is an existing , current , immediate , short-term reaction by the European Union .
In addition to this , the European Union is considering a strategy for combating the poverty resulting from long-term unemployment , based on training , specialisation , retraining or education - which does not end when a person is young - in order to create the conditions for employability .
This is a very important part of the EU 2020 strategy that I mentioned before , and it was included in the conclusions of the meeting of the Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs Council that has been mentioned so many times here and took place this week .
It is a European strategy , included among the objectives that the Union is going to prioritise , which is those established in the EU 2020 strategy .
One of these quantified objectives - and we will see if they are adopted on 25 and 26 March at the European Council , which has to examine the Communication from the Commission - is a 25 % reduction in the number of people who are at risk of entering poverty .
Let us recall that Europe has 80 million people at risk of entering a situation of poverty ; reducing this figure by 20 million and , at the same time , increasing the active population are medium-term objectives that are part of the strategy and which will therefore shape a whole series of coordinated European strategies .
Ultimately , ladies and gentlemen , the key is to coordinate our employment and social policies .
The Treaty of Lisbon states this quite clearly : we have to coordinate our employment and social policies .
This is what the European Union , hastened by the crisis , is beginning to do .
This is the best way to respond to this situation , obviously using the tools that we have in the European Union , which are elements of the European Union , such as the internal market or the European Structural Funds .
The economic effects are obviously worse in some Member States than others .
Thank you for talking about pensioners .
My understanding is that the Commission has the ability to withhold structural funds if Member States are not complying with EU legislation .
Could the Presidency undertake to investigate whether the recommendations of the Auken Report , voted through this Parliament last March , have been complied with ?
These are regarding property owners in Spain .
This has had a devastating effect on European pensioners , driving some of them into poverty and exclusion .
( HU ) I have only one question .
Poverty affects two social groups most particularly : the low-skilled and those living with disabilities .
In the question , it is stated that two budget facilities were not sufficient to address the problem of these two groups effectively .
My question is : does the European Council wish to address how they could help these two social groups and their situation more effectively ?
Madam President , the first question , on pensioners who own property in Spain , is very similar to another question put to me previously , and the response is very similar to the one I gave previously .
This is a question of clarifying the application of internal legislation in a Member State , which is what I must refer to .
I cannot speak on behalf of the Council on this issue , which has legal channels within a Member State .
If it had occurred in any other Member State , I am sure that it would have been dealt with in exactly the same way : through internal legal channels .
With regard to the question on vulnerable people , I absolutely agree that we should place a special emphasis on the two groups to which the honourable Member referred .
This is even more the case given that we now have one more tool that we can use : the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , insofar as it refers to the rights of especially vulnerable people , whether they be elderly or disabled , their dignity and their participation in social and cultural life .
In any case , it talks about protecting them , protecting their physical dignity and mental integrity against degrading or inhumane treatment .
The European Union has developed various instruments for combating this situation , including a detailed study of the situation .
I would like to mention an interesting result of Eurobarometer 2007 , according to which half of Europeans think that all elderly people , who are the most vulnerable people , are poorly treated , and even abused in terms of the way in which their needs are met .
Nearly half of Europeans think that the way society treats these people is negative , precisely because they are vulnerable .
The Member States and the European Union have applied the open coordination method for exchanging experiences between Member States on this issue .
On this subject , it should also be said that , in some cases , we are talking about matters that are dealt with in national legislation .
They are matters of national competence , and it is therefore the Member States that need to tackle them , on the basis of , among other things , the principle of subsidiarity .
The European Union can support these policies , but it cannot completely replace them .
It can support them , but I think that this is something that also relates to the social dimension , which has already been mentioned .
I am returning once again to this because I think it is important .
The social dimension of the strategy for growth and job creation features very heavily in the document presented by the Commission , and will be debated by the Heads of State or Government .
I think that this social dimension should have room for the problems that you refer to that did not feature so strongly in the previous strategy .
I think that in the future - given that we are experiencing a crisis that has a social impact - we need to take the social impact of the economic crisis very much into account .
What is the Minister representing the Presidency going to do to protect groups of our fellow citizens who are at risk from poverty and social exclusion as a direct result of Spanish policy towards British and other Member State residents in various areas of Spain whose properties are being expropriated and who are suffering under dubious planning policies ?
The Minister on behalf of the Presidency cannot evade this issue anymore ; he must pursue the Spanish Government and invite them to take the necessary action .
( ES ) Thank you very much for being here , Mr López Garrido .
My question concerns the poverty of the European citizens who are in some areas of Spain .
I understand that you are here representing the executive , not the Spanish judiciary , and that you are not a spokesperson for the Autonomous Community of Valencia , but we need an answer .
There is abuse that has nothing to do with the written law but rather relates to the implementation of the law , and that is a problem that has a solution .
I am not asking you for anything more than an investigation by the Spanish Government into the abuses identified .
Your Spanish is impressive , Mr Hannan .
I shall again leave it to the discretion of the Minister as to whether he wishes to deal with this .
Madam President , I do not wish to abuse my position as President-in-Office of the Council to defend a specific government or a specific piece of national legislation .
I do not wish to abuse this position , because I am sure I would be criticised for using this platform to defend the actions of a particular Member State or of a central or regional government of a specific country .
You are perfectly aware that this is a matter that is dealt with at national level , for which there are channels at national level .
Not only Spain , but all 27 Member States of the European Union , have the rule of law and have sufficient judicial channels to settle this type of alleged abuse .
These judicial channels operate in all European countries , and I am sure that - and I am not only referring to the case of Spain - other European countries where there must surely be abuse or violations of the law have the channels of the rule of law to resolve them .
This is what happens in any European countries where this occurs .
I do not wish to evade giving an answer , nor do I simply want to say that I will not answer , but you are well aware that if you ask a question in Parliament , it is possible that I will not wish to use my position as President-in-Office of the Council for a question that is internal to a Member State of the Union .
Question 6 has been withdrawn .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Subject : EU-Russia visa regime
The Spanish Presidency of the Council intends to work towards the future abolition of the visa regime for EU and Russian citizens .
This may be a long process , and one that will depend a great deal on Russia 's ability to implement successfully the action plan drawn up with this objective in mind .
Were the EU to open up to Russia 's province of Kaliningrad , or vice versa , this would demonstrate that the EU and Russia are moving towards ' demolishing visa walls ' .
Both Russia and the EU have an interest in the principle of cooperation on both sides of the border and in an anti isolationist policy regarding the Kaliningrad region .
To that end , neighbouring Poland and Lithuania have reached agreement on making it easier for people living in border areas to cross the border , but this has yet to be implemented .
How does Council assess the specific situation of the province of Kaliningrad in terms of the dialogue between the EU and Russia on visa matters ?
How could this dialogue be used in order to sign local traffic agreements between EU Member States ( Lithuania and Poland ) and the Russian Federation in order to make border crossing procedures easier for people living in border areas ?
Subject : EU-Russia relations : Spanish Presidency agenda
The Spanish Presidency of the EU has set out an ambitious agenda when it comes to EU-Russia relations - it would like to see the conclusion of negotiations with Russia on the new partnership and cooperation agreement ( PCA ) , an agreement with Russia on a visa-free regime , as well as progress on a free-trade agreement between the EU and Russia .
In order to conclude a free-trade agreement with the EU , Russia first needs to become a member of the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
Are there tangible prospects that Russia will join the WTO any time soon ?
Does the Council have a particular strategy on how to compel Russia to join the WTO ?
Does the Council see any substantial progress as concerns the negotiations with Russia on the new PCA ?
Does the Council consider that the idea of a free-trade regime with Russia is timely considering the disagreements within the EU on the issue ?
Does the Council consider Russia to be more prepared for a visa-free regime than other partners of the EU , such as Ukraine , Moldova or Georgia ?
Madam President , I understand that there are two questions , one of which refers to visas , to the visa requirement for Russian and European citizens , and the other refers to relations between the European Union and Russia following the Stockholm Summit and to Russia joining the World Trade Organisation .
These are the two questions as I understand them , Madam President .
With regard to the matter of visas , I would like to point out that in 2003 , the Council adopted regulations establishing a specific transit document and a facilitated rail transit document .
Three years later , the Commission concluded that the entry into force of this system was going smoothly and that both partners were satisfied .
From a long-term perspective - we are talking about the Kaliningrad region in relation to the rest of the Russian Federation - the facilitated transit regime , as it is called , would depend on the future implementation of agreements on visa policies between the European Union and the Russian Federation .
In a joint declaration following the meeting of the EU-Russia Permanent Partnership Council on justice and home affairs on 2 December last year , the participants decided to debate possible changes to the European Union 's agreement with Russia on granting visas in order to make travel for European and Russian citizens more accessible , specifically for the residents of the region of Kaliningrad .
In turn , according to the same joint declaration , the European Union and Russia hoped to negotiate and conclude local border traffic agreements between Russia and the neighbouring Member States of the European Union that might be interested in doing so .
In this context , Regulation ( EC ) No 1931 / 2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down rules on local border traffic at the external land borders of the Member States and amending the provisions of the Schengen Convention authorises the Member States to conclude bilateral agreements with third countries in order to apply the local border traffic rules .
The negotiation of these agreements is , in this case , a matter that is the responsibility of the Member States concerned and of the Russian Federation .
The Council , in any case , notes that negotiations are also under way between Lithuania and Russia and between Poland and Russia .
With regard to the question relating to strategic relations between the European Union and Russia , the Council can inform Parliament that following the summit held with Russia in Stockholm in November , there will be another summit during the six-month Spanish Presidency .
It will be held in Russia , between the European Union and Russia , which means that there is fresh impetus for relations between both sides .
There is obviously always the possibility of there being complex difficulties in these relations , and there can also be disagreements , but the relationship between the European Union and Russia is a broad and multifaceted one .
We have growing economic and trade links , and - we have to admit - a high level of interdependency with regard to energy , common interests in other areas that relate to problems that go beyond even our respective countries , and challenges , including global challenges , which we need to tackle and which we should tackle as jointly as possible .
It will therefore always be beneficial for us to seek opportunities to strengthen our relations with Russia , while always standing firm on our principles and on the values on which the European Union is founded .
With regard to Russia joining the World Trade Organisation , the European Union , supports it , but it is Russia that has to adopt the measures in order to make progress on this .
With regard to the new agreement between the European Union and Russia , both parties agree that it would be good to have a broad new agreement .
The agreement on partnership and cooperation between the European Union and Russia , which was negotiated in the 1990s , is outdated in many respects .
A great deal has happened and a great deal has changed since the 1990s , and we need to move forward towards this new agreement , in which we are ambitious .
We have set the bar high and , if possible , we want to cover all the areas of EU-Russia relations .
Progress has been made in some areas of these negotiations .
Other areas are going more slowly , which is the case for trade and investment .
In any event , it is very important to us that there are solid clauses and solid agreements with Russia on trade , investment and energy .
With regard to the free trade arrangements , we agree with a free trade agreement being negotiated once Russia has joined the World Trade Organisation , if and when this happens .
With regard to the liberalisation of visas , this is an issue of major political importance that affects Russian and European Union citizens very directly .
I think that on this matter , we share the intention of visas being facilitated when this is possible .
What would be ideal would be the liberalisation of visas , in other words , removing the visa requirement , but , of course , there is still a great deal left to do in this respect .
Furthermore , we need to balance the assets that are at stake , which concern security , and , furthermore , this always has to be done on a reciprocal basis .
With regard to Ukraine , Moldova and Georgia , each of these countries has a particular situation as far as visa policy is concerned , and we cannot currently predict how much progress is going to be made in those three countries in comparison with the dialogue on visas that we are conducting with Russia .
( DE ) I would like to bring up the two most critical points one more time .
The first concerns democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
These are the biggest deficiencies .
How intensive is the dialogue on these critical points ?
We have the feeling that developments in this regard are going backwards rather than forwards .
My second point concerns energy security .
How , specifically , do things stand in the energy negotiations ?
Madam President , honourable Member , as you know , one of the Union 's priorities or strategic central objectives is energy security .
In the European Union - especially since many European Union countries suffered very directly from the gas crisis between Russia and the Ukraine at the beginning of 2009 - we place an extremely high value on energy security , and we definitely consider it to be one of the European Union 's major objectives , an objective that is naturally linked to the major objective of combating climate change .
The strategy of the Council and the Presidency of the Council regarding energy and energy security is the need to move towards a greater differentiation in terms of suppliers and sources of energy and its distribution .
We therefore need to expand the possibilities , avoiding oligopolies or excessive dependency .
Some European countries have a level of energy dependency on Russia that is clearly excessive , and which also relates to the fact that Europe was divided for a long time during the 20th century and to the fact that in some cases , direct interconnections between European countries do not exist .
When that crisis occurred , we saw that some countries that were not affected by it could not help the countries that were affected , because the interconnections did not exist .
Therefore , energy objectives in Europe are extremely important , in the medium and long term , and we are therefore in favour of diversifying energy sources and of promoting projects such as the Nabucco project or the Nord Stream or South Stream projects , which relate to Russia , and of achieving something that currently does not exist in Europe : a single energy market .
In order to achieve these objectives , which are facilitated by the Treaty of Lisbon , which introduces this competence over energy , which did not exist before , it is fundamental and essential to establish a strategic relationship with Russia on energy and other matters .
Moreover , we have other instruments in the Treaty of Lisbon that relate to external policy .
The Treaty of Lisbon strengthens European foreign policy : there is a President of the European Council and a High Representative , and there is going to be a European External Action Service .
In other words , the European Union 's external vision has been strengthened , which will strengthen our negotiations in all areas , including the economy and energy , with other countries .
This is therefore the vision that I can give you on relations with Russia .
We are negotiating an agreement in which the subject of energy is essential ; these negotiations are beginning , and we have the best prospects for them , but obviously , like all agreements , it is something that depends on very complex negotiations that are , in turn , part of a series of negotiations on this cooperation agreement that we want to update - as I said - because a great deal has happened in Europe in the past 15 or 20 years .
One of these things is the essential relationship that we need to have with Russia , which is , as everyone knows , one of the countries that has experienced the most changes in recent years .
( PL ) Madam President , in reference to Question No 9 , which I was to ask on behalf of my fellow Member , Mrs Morkūnaitė-Mikulėnienė , and which is related to the previous question , Russia intends to locate a nuclear power plant near the eastern border of the European Union , in the province of Kaliningrad , and Belarus has similar plans .
Bearing in mind the experience of Chernobyl , these plans are causing misgivings over the danger involved .
Does the Council intend to take up the question of environmental safety in the next round of talks with Russia ?
From our point of view , this is rather important .
( PL ) I would like to go back to Questions Nos 7 and 8 , and to relations between the European Union and Russia .
Mr López Garrido rightly said that those relations should be based on values , but if this is so , then the Union has particular obligations towards defenders of human rights in Russia .
In relation to this , I would like to ask the following question : should the policy of EU Member States , and of the whole EU , not include special rules concerning visas for human rights defenders in Russia ?
This would be to enable such people to obtain visas relatively easily .
With regard to the intervention on the subject of nuclear security , I must say that the responsibility , which in this area is national , is provided for in the international agreements of the International Atomic Energy Agency , in other words , in the Convention on Nuclear Safety to which Belarus , Russia , Euratom and the majority of the Member States of the European Union are parties .
The Council understands that contracting parties that are located close to a proposed nuclear facility should be consulted , as they could be affected by it .
Therefore , the agreement that is currently being concluded between Euratom and Russia , in relation to the peaceful application of nuclear energy , will have to contain provisions on the verifiable requirements on nuclear safety and protecting the health and safety of workers .
I would also like to remind you that this issue is dealt with periodically in the context of the dialogue between the European Union and Russia on energy .
With regard to assessing the consequences in an international context , the Council observes that Belarus is a party to the Espoo Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in a Transboundary Context , which contains binding obligations aimed at assessing the environmental consequences and possible environmental risks .
In this case , however , the Council says that the responsibility for organising environmental assessment lies largely with the developers of the projects .
The Russian Federation is not a contracting party to this Convention .
We would like Russia to apply the Espoo Convention voluntary in any case .
It has also been doing so for some time in relation to existing nuclear power stations .
Finally , with regard to the question put by the honourable Member regarding human rights in relation to Russia , there was a previous debate in which questions were raised in relation to human rights , and I think that the criteria for defending human rights or reporting human rights violations apply wherever they take place .
Therefore , no country is exempt from violations being condemned by right - and I would even say out of moral obligation - and we do condemn and should condemn these violations when they take place within the European Union or in one of its countries .
Linking this with visa policy is a leap that is currently very difficult to establish or specify .
General negotiations are in progress on visas .
I think that it is in the context of these general negotiations on visas that someone could suggest another type of specific channel for facilitating visas , but as I said , at the moment , we are in very broad negotiations on visas with Russia , and I think that this is what we need to focus on : on the organisation of visas in general terms .
This is because it is what could really have the best impact in terms of the free movement of people , and even , I would say , offer the best opportunity as regards Europeans and Europe as a whole for their values to be lived and shared by other members of the public and in places outside of the European Union .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 19.20 )
Opening of the sitting
Investing in Low Carbon Technologies ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Council and Commission - B7-0011 / 2010 ) by Herbert Reul on Investing in the Development of Low Carbon Technologies
Madam President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , this question relates to the fact that , in 2007 , the Commission brought forward a plan with the objective of promoting technologies in the field of energy with low CO2 emissions so that they could come into use quickly .
Proposals were made for very specific measures : European industrial initiatives , above all in the fields of wind energy , solar energy , bio-energy , carbon capture and storage , electricity grids and nuclear fission , the creation of a European Energy Research Alliance , the sustainable conversion of European energy infrastructure networks , constantly updated European energy technology systems and the establishment of a steering group on strategic energy technologies .
At that stage , one crucial question was left unanswered , namely the issue of funding .
The Seventh Framework Programme for Research provides for EUR 886 million per annum for energy research .
It is clear to all , however , that that is not enough .
In 2009 , the Commission brought out its communication on the funding of low-carbon energy technologies , in which it described the need to treble the funding for energy research over the next 10 years .
That would mean that EUR 50 billion would have to be invested .
The communication described how the money for the most important low-carbon technologies should be apportioned so that Europe can move away from its heavy dependence on fossil fuels to a stronger reduction in CO2 emissions .
The final plan estimates EUR 6 billion for research into wind energy , which , according to the Commission , could make up a fifth of EU energy provision by 2020 ; EUR 16 billion for solar energy , in order to develop new photovoltaic concepts and a major industrial concentration of solar energy facilities ; EUR 9 billion for bio-energy research , in order to cover 14 % of the EU 's energy needs .
In order to integrate renewable energy sources into the energy market , electricity grids would receive EUR 2 billion so that half of the grid would be able to operate on the basis of a ' smart grid ' principle .
Apart from renewable energy sources , a further EUR 13 billion is envisaged for up to 12 projects in the field of carbon capture and storage , while nuclear research would receive EUR 7 billion .


The funding proposal also envisaged a further EUR 11 billion for the ' smart cities ' programme so that appropriate answers can be found in this field , too .
The Commission suggested at the time that public-private partnerships are the most credible way of funding energy research but was unable to spell out precisely how the funding burdens in such arrangements would be split between the two sides .
At present , the split in the field of energy research is 70 % private and 30 % public , excluding nuclear research .
The EU argues that there is a need for a significant increase in public funding .
In projects in which the risks are higher , public funding should play a major role , the Commission stated .
In order to optimise the level of the intervention , the Commission called for the institution of EU programmes particularly in areas where there is a clear added value at EU level , such as where programmes are too expensive for the Member States individually .
At present , 80 % of public investment in non-nuclear energy research is funded at national level .
This communication , too , ultimately leaves open the question of where the money is to come from .
The Commission calculates that there is a need for an extra EUR 75 to 80 billion .
That is the reason why we concentrated , in our committee , on obtaining a little more clarity on a few issues in this area of funding .
I would like to just remind you of the questions .
Firstly , how does the Commission intend to set its priorities for the 2010-2020 roadmap to support the financing of low-carbon technologies ?
When will industrial policy initiatives to that effect be introduced ?
Secondly , how does the Commission intend to make additional EU budget resources available ?
How , specifically , is the Commission committed to ensuring that funds will start flowing in advance of resources from the Eighth Framework Programme ?
Will the Commission ensure that the budgets identified for the various industrial initiatives will be respected ?
Last but not least , how will the Commission - and , of course , this will also always apply to the Council - make additional funding from the EU budget available for the funding of technological options other than those specified in the communication , including storage technologies , ocean energies and so on .
There is no need for me to read out all the questions .
We have introduced the questions here , and we ask for answers from the Council and the Commission .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( ES ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin my speech by stressing the importance of the strategic energy plan and the necessary contribution it will make to speeding up the development and application of technologies for clean , sustainable and efficient energy .
Without this plan , it will not be possible to achieve the goals we have set for 2020 , nor to carry out the transition to a low-carbon economy on the scale we would like for 2050 .
I am pleased to see that there is broad consensus between Parliament and the Council with regard to the importance and necessity of both the objectives of the plan and the resources that need to be made available .
The Transport , Telecommunications and Energy Council intends to adopt conclusions on the Strategic Energy Technology ( SET ) Plan in its meeting this coming Friday 12 March .
These conclusions will be an important point of reference for the spring European Council meeting to be held on 25 March , since the subject of climate change will feature on the agenda .
The draft conclusions to be debated at the Council meeting will include the subject of financing , although this matter will be approached with due caution .
We do not want to preempt the negotiations that will have to take place on this subject within the context of the next financial framework .
I will now set out the main elements of the draft conclusions .
Firstly , the time has come to move from technological roadmaps to the operational implementation of European industrial initiatives .
We should do so step by step , but as quickly as possible .
Secondly , our approach to future cooperation in energy research within Europe should focus on using public resources effectively and building flexible , public-private partnerships with industry .
We therefore urge the Commission to establish a platform that includes all of the interested financial organisations so that they can share information and best practices and , at the same time , coordinate their actions as deemed necessary .
Thirdly , given the scale of medium-term public-private financing needed in order to support major demonstration projects in particular , it may be necessary to increase the proportion of public investment at EU level .
We will therefore need to take that into account both when revising the budget and when negotiating for the next financial framework .
Fourthly , we should support the governments of the Member States and encourage them to give adequate incentives and consistent signals in order for this policy to be implemented .
If necessary , they should also make significant increases to public financing for the development of low-carbon technologies .
The fifth point to mention is that the European Commission and the European Investment Bank are already working together to improve the coordination and continuity of financing for demonstration projects in the sector of energy involving high technological risk .
They are also working to mobilise and make available other sources of financing , both public and private .
Finally , the Commission and the European Investment Bank are looking into optimum financial packages for major demonstration projects , and so we also urge the Commission to analyse new ways of combining resources from different sources and to develop an ad hoc tool for financing the commercial launch of low-carbon technologies .
Ladies and gentlemen , all of these elements constitute a clear message on future investment for the development of low-carbon technologies .
Despite the severe budgetary restrictions we currently face , the message that the Council will send out in its meeting on Friday will be one of commitment , using positive terms to express the significance of this matter at European level and the vital importance for each Member State to invest in low-carbon technology .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , although I am replacing my colleague Günther Oettinger today , it is a real pleasure to discuss with you the future of low-carbon technologies .
I personally was closely involved in the development of the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan ( SET Plan ) in the last Commission and I believe strongly that the development of these technologies is one of the cornerstones of the energy policy we have to develop jointly in the years to come .
Parliament 's report on the SET Plan of June 2008 was very clear in proposing an appropriate level of ambition .
We should not now lower this ambition .
Today you have asked three clear questions and I will respond to them in turn .
First , regarding our priorities for 2010 to 2020 and the launch of the European industrial initiatives , those six initiatives really match our priorities - wind , solar bio-energy , sustainable fission , smart grids , and carbon capture and storage are priorities that were strongly endorsed by Parliament and the Council .
At your request , we have also prioritised energy efficiency by developing a new dedicated initiative - ' Smart Cities ' - to unlock the market potential of energy efficient technologies in cities and regions .
To prioritise activities within this initiative , the Commission has developed , together with the stakeholders , technology road maps for the period 2010-2020 .
These road maps establish concrete objectives as well as the activities needed to achieve them .
The initiatives are mature for launching this year , 2010 .
Smart Cities are planned for the following year .
Your second question concerns the need for predictable , stable and adequate budgets for the SET Plan in the current financing period and post-2014 .
Our estimate of the public and private investment needs for the development of low-carbon technologies in the SET Plan is EUR 8 billion per year .
Today about EUR 3 billion are being invested annually in the European Union , which means that a further EUR 50 billion is needed for the period 2010-2020 .
Bridging this gap should be one of the key institutional discussions over the coming years .
Effort must be focused where intervention is most efficient , avoiding duplications and fostering the greatest potential impact in the market .
It is clear that EU level investments - coming either from the Seventh Framework Programme or the European Energy Programme for Recovery - will not be enough .
Nor will the potential funds from the 300 million emissions trading allowances set aside for the demonstration of carbon capture and storage and innovative renewable technologies .
At current prices this is approximately EUR 4 billion .
Major efforts are therefore required , both by the private and public sector ; the public sector includes both the European Union and of course also the Member States .
To be blunt , the bulk of the money will have to come from where the bulk of the money is .
Thirdly , you asked if the Commission intends to finance other technology avenues and propose additional industrial initiatives .
Other technologies that deserve European-level intervention will certainly emerge over time , so the SET Plan must remain flexible , as we have already shown with the new initiative on energy efficiency - Smart Cities - which we expect to launch , as I said , in 2011 .
We will closely monitor the most promising technologies through the SET Plan information system .
SETIS , as this is called , is already working on storage and ocean technologies to assess their potential and identify the best opportunities for European intervention .
We have also encouraged the establishment of a new technology platform on renewables , heating and cooling , that should help the sectors involved better to define their technology transfer .
I am very pleased to see this file getting the support it deserves .
It is a key file for achieving our energy policy goals , a key file for Europe and for our future .
Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , I am delighted to see you back here , Mr Potočnik , in your post as Commissioner for the Environment .
You are standing in for our Commissioner for Industry - thank you for that , and thank you also for your speech .
I welcome the question put by my colleague , Mr Reul , who is right , Commissioner , to question you on how the Commission views this crucial issue of noncarbon energies and of the financing of new technologies .
The world 's population is growing .
We will need 40 % more energy in 2030 , and I would add that 80 % of this consumer demand will come from countries outside the OECD .
In the face of these major challenges , the solution is not to adopt the ideology of decreasing our energy use or to take refuge in thoughts of the past .
The European Union therefore has a duty to intervene , and I would like to say a word about an issue that may divide us , within our political groups , and that is nuclear energy .
When it comes to nuclear energy , we have Member States that have a long tradition in these matters .
That does not make the European Union privileged , but it does mean that we have a duty to contribute to the debate and to the financing .
Nuclear energy , as we know , is a noncarbon energy , and we need financing , Commissioner , and particularly that accrued from carbon credits , to invest in research , development and training on all these areas .
We are proposing some amendments to you with the specific aim of improving the resolutions that have been tabled , and I will conclude by saying a word about nuclear byproducts , which are a source of great concern for our fellow citizens .
There are two options in the world : longterm storage , which is the United States ' chosen option , and we , the European Union , have to choose a different approach , which is recovery by means of recycling .
That is the option chosen by Russia , Japan and France .
It is in this context that we who are responsible for safety and security must put our faith in science and in knowledge where all these subjects are concerned .
Madam President , Secretary of State and President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , we are all aware that there is already clear consensus over the idea that the faster we establish a green economy , the faster we will emerge from the economic crisis .
A number of studies have calculated that if we achieve the goal of a 20 % share of renewable energy sources , it will mean that 2.8 million European workers will be employed in the sector by 2020 .
Furthermore , it is estimated that two thirds of the new jobs will be created within small and medium-sized enterprises .
The key to this , ladies and gentlemen , lies in the development of green technologies .
In order to make this a reality , my Group is in favour of three main objectives .
Firstly , we need a real commitment to earmarking resources for the Strategic Energy Technology ( SET ) Plan .
It is not enough to simply regroup and rename the support programmes we already have .
We agree that we need to transform our goal into a real increase in the resources devoted to research into renewable energy and energy efficiency .
We should do so straight away , in the next review of the financial perspectives and , of course , in negotiations over the new financial perspectives .
Secondly , if we want to create the jobs our economy needs in order to emerge from the crisis , it is vital that we boost the demonstration stage of innovative technologies and make it easier for them to be put into operation in the market .
Finally , the potential creation of green employment cannot be steered in the right direction if we do not have a highly qualified workforce .
We need to invest in education and awareness in order to strengthen the ties between the business world and the academic world , and we should promote qualifications of excellence in research and development and in innovation so as to be able to cover any potential gaps in the renewable energies job markets .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , we can set all the targets under the sun for tackling climate change but we will not reach them , especially the longer-term targets for 2050 , unless we invest deeply and systematically in developing and improving sustainable low-carbon technology .
The US is rightly criticised for its failure to sign up to greenhouse gas reduction targets , but the EU is nowhere near the level of investment that the US is at at present .
Without proper investment , the EU 's sustainable low-carbon investment programme will stall , and that means that hundreds of thousands of jobs which could be created here in the EU , and in regions like my own , the North-East of England , which are already starting to make that transformation to a low-carbon economy , without investment those jobs will go elsewhere to the US and China .
I am disappointed that the Commission drew back from an earlier draft of the SET Plan , where the sources of the identified necessary investment were clearly indicated .
Will the Commission now be more explicit , especially about the EUR 1 billion per annum shortfall that the Commissioner has just mentioned ?
Finally , it is , of course , important to achieve improvements in nuclear technology , especially with regard to safety of operation and waste management , but my Group takes the view that ' sustainable nuclear fission ' is a contradiction in terms .
Will the Commissioner rename the sixth European industrial initiative simply the ' nuclear energy initiative ' ?
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I think this SET Plan is basically an empty box because there is no money behind it .
We really have to think about where the money could come from .
What is worse is that the instruments the Commission had - the NER300 , the Recovery Plan and certain funds available today at the European Investment Bank - are more prioritised for those so-called low-carbon technologies that are the least efficient and present the highest risk .
In 2008 and 2009 , more than 70 % of all investments on the market in Europe were already in renewables : wind , solar , biomass .
So how can it be that we are designing a SET Plan - and earmarking money at EU level - that basically gives a lower share to renewables than the market is already uptaking today , while diverting the money to carbon sequestration and to nuclear fusion , which is not addressed in this paper but which receives by far the largest share of EU money ?
Our problem is that , because of certain lobbies , we do not have the courage to set the right priorities , and I think that even the IEA , which is not a green grass-root organisation , is extremely clear about the priorities .
Fifty-five per cent of all CO2 reductions will come from energy efficiency .
Why did we allocate zero euro to energy efficiency in the EU recovery package ? Thirty to thirty-five per cent of CO2 greenhouse gas reductions will come from renewables , while at best only 10 % will come from carbon sequestration and 10 % from nuclear .
That is according to the IEA , not a green grass-root organisation .
So , even in Europe , in terms of how we allocate money we are behind what the IEA is telling governments .
The only way out is to set clear priorities .
Number one : energy efficiency ; number two : renewables , because they reduce carbon without posing a risk ; and then the other technologies .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I have to express some regret at the obsession on the left side of this Parliament with nuclear energy , which has meant that we have two resolutions before the House today , most of the content of which has much in common except for this issue of nuclear energy , particularly when it is the only proven technology to supply large volumes of ultra low-carbon electricity in Europe .
If we are to wean ourselves off fossil fuels - especially oil and coal - we will need all the low-carbon energy technologies we can get .
Many of them are still more potential than production , and we must be realistic about how successful we have been in achieving target levels of energy from renewable sources .
The EU has a record of setting very ambitious targets and a 100 % record of failing to achieve them .
We must do better .
In the mean time we must lose no time in increasing the share of European electricity supplied by nuclear energy .
It already produces the largest amount of electricity , but , as we switch to and develop alternative and new technologies , we will need base-load electricity to keep the lights on and , for example , to power electric vehicles .
There is huge potential in new green technologies such as solar thermal from the Sahara and wind farms from the North Sea , not to mention carbon capture and storage and basic improvements in energy efficiency , where - at least on that point - I agree with my Green colleague across the floor , but all of this requires massive investment , and that is the fundamental point about these questions today .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , we are here to discuss the reinvention of a European energy system through investment in low-carbon technologies .
I think it is one of the most important challenges , as mentioned in the communication .
It is one of the challenges we must focus on , but there is no clarification here , so it is important to ask these questions and to seek clarification .
It seems that not only is there no financial clarification , but there is also no political clarification .
We speak of energy efficiency , of carbon capture , nuclear energy , bio-fuels , solar energy , and we speak inclusively of energy efficiency as the cheapest way to reduce emissions .
It strikes me that there are other , much cheaper ways to reduce carbon emissions which are not even mentioned in this communication , such as , for example , reducing energy consumption , micro-generation , distribution and different forms of distribution , and different projects , which do not just have to be large structures , and access to energy .
I believe that here we would certainly contribute towards enhanced financial clarification to select the cheapest plan .
Therefore , as part of this political clarification and this financial clarification , we need to discuss what , in my view , is a vitally important matter , which is that the emphasis is always on public-private partnerships , as if they were the solution to everything .
When we ask where the money comes from , the Commission tells us it comes from wherever it is .
I confess that I do not feel more enlightened by being told that the money will come from wherever it is , without saying exactly where it is .
Therefore , in terms of counting on public-private partnerships , which is what systematically happens when we talk about low-carbon technologies , we surely have one certainty : not knowing where the money comes from and knowing that there are public-private partnerships , we know , from the outset , who will pay .
It is taxpayers who will pay in the beginning , consumers who , incidentally , are ultimately taxpayers , too .
We also know that those that pay less are institutions and private organisations - that they are those who make investments , are paid for it but , in the end , keep the profits for themselves .
Without this clarification , it seems to me that , once again , we are systematically leaving future generations to foot the bill for changing the European energy model .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in principle , we all agree that the SET plan is to be welcomed .
We agree about large tranches of the content , but we have two problems .
On the one hand , we will not be able - and I very much address this point to Mr Turmes - to build up pressure together on the Member States and on the Commission if we continue to hold an ideological debate where the subject is always nuclear energy .
That is the sticking point in today 's votes .
We have reached a compromise on the SET plan , and that compromise is that we have specified the criteria according to which we want to support this , and those criteria are clearly defined , namely sustainability , competitiveness and security of supply .
We have said that we want to work without limitation to specific technologies and we are again having an ideological debate about nuclear power , which is a discussion that can be held , but which ultimately makes no sense in the context of the SET plan .
I concede to you in respect of the question of what the SET plan can actually achieve .
Has the question of to what extent the Member States are prepared to find a coherent energy policy approach actually been resolved ?
What the Council has put in place today is a series of platitudes .
The problems , really , are not so much what we lay down in the SET plan , but how the assorted funds for research , innovation and the money from the SET plan , the issue of demonstration facilities , the issue of the transposal of European directives at national level - how all of this interacts .
We are currently at a point where we have to say really clearly that we can produce another SET plan and that we can adopt another SET plan , but what we need now are tangible measures .
That being the case , we should not always be arguing over the details .
We should increase the pressure on the Commission and the Member States so that something happens in terms of implementation .
( SV ) Madam President , wishful thinking is not enough to bring about a changeover to sustainable , renewable energy sources and to a climate-friendly society .
Substantial investment is also needed .
The private sector must , to a large extent , share the responsibility for funding the basic research and the Member States must also make a greater commitment .
In addition , more money needs to be made available from the EU budget .
The budget must quite simply be adapted to conform with the political priorities relating to solar and wind energy , energy efficiency and so on .
We need to reprioritise and redistribute funds within the EU budget .
This is the only way in which the SET plan and the Members of this House can maintain their credibility .
- Madam President , it is three years since the Council set itself a target of having up to 12 CCS demonstration projects in operation by 2015 , and we have not got much to show for it yet .
Yes , we have identified a source of funding and we have now got a draft decision from the Commission , which is awaiting confirmation by Parliament , as to how to use that funding , but it will not be until the end of next year before we are able to identify a project which will qualify for this funding .
So the timetable is very tight and meeting that 2015 deadline becomes more and more difficult .
There is slippage at every step of the way .
Can I ask the Commission to consider these things .
First , that timetable needs to be examined .
Can days , can weeks be shaved off it at all ?
And , in particular , can we put as much pressure as possible on the European Investment Bank to keep within the allocation it has been given in the draft decision ?
Second , once Parliament 's comitology procedure has been concluded , the Commission should make an announcement about the timetable .
It should publish this .
That will help ensure that there is a minimum amount of slippage .
It will keep everyone working towards a series of set deadlines .
Finally , remember that the biggest single delaying factor is likely to be the application that project developers have to go through to get planning permission for the pipelines and the like to take away CO2 .
That could be very lengthy .
It could blow the deadline completely out of the window .
So can I ask for a statement from the Commission , insisting that developers seeking European funding start applying for planning permission now .
Let them put their money where their mouth is .
( PL ) Madam President , the resolution which has been presented illustrates very well the dominance of climate policy over energy security in the European Union .
It also illustrates clearly the antinuclear prejudice of part of this House .
It so happens that nuclear energy is the only commercially proven low-carbon energy source , but in spite of this it is very severely criticised in the resolution .
The European Union 's limited financial resources are to be invested in select energy sources just because they are sustainable , and this represents a strong market intervention .
This policy will certainly limit expenditure on strategic large infrastructure projects which are already needed today , and on support for interconnectors .
There simply will not be enough money for energy security .
This is why we cannot endorse this resolution today .
- ( DA ) Madam President , we have reason to be pleased with the SET Plan .
Without the EUR 59 billion which are now being invested in sound energy projects , we will not reach our renewable energy target of 20 % by 2020 .
Investment in real and sustainable renewable energy accounts for two thirds of the SET Plan funds .
This applies , for example , to photovoltaics , wind turbines and biomass .
However , the SET Plan is not only important and right because it ensures us cleaner energy .
The SET Plan is also critical to our attempts to put the social and economic crisis behind us .
With these massive investments in modern energy technology , we will be able to create hundreds of thousands of new green jobs .
We will also be able to make the EU a centre of knowledge when it comes to green and sustainable technology .
Let us not forget , however , that these investments come with a responsibility : a responsibility to ensure that many of the people who are currently employed in the energy sector are given the opportunity to retrain and upskill themselves .
That is why investment in technology must go hand in hand with investment in people .
- Madam President , there are two brief points I wish to make .
The first relates to the importance of investment in low-carbon technologies and the second to carbon capture in agriculture .
Firstly , in realistic terms , it is essential that the EU focuses its attention and budget towards the Strategic Energy Technology Plan .
For the EU to reach its 2020 target figures , there is no doubt that increased targeted investment in low-carbon technologies is essential .
Secondly , there must be increased research and investment in carbon capture and storage as a practical way of combating climate change .
Here agriculture can play a key role in carbon sequestration and can contribute to the 2020 targets .
Soil biomasses and natural carbon sinking - carbon in soil - could bring added benefit for farmers by reducing erosion and fertiliser inputs .
Further research and investment is required in order to fully utilise agriculture and agricultural land to capture carbon and assist in reaching 2020 targets .
For measurable results to be delivered , innovation and research in low-carbon technologies must be adequately and effectively supported .
- Madam President , I welcome the initiative to talk about investment in low-carbon technology but more specifically about energy-saving and providing more secure and diversified energy supplies .
I would like to look in particular at the use of EU funds .
The region I represent already has an EU fund of over EUR 250 million for low-carbon economic growth .
Whilst its ambitions are worthy , the performance of this fund in actually making meaningful investments has fallen well below expectations .
The East of England , including Cambridge University , is also home to leading research facilities , and over 250 contracts have been signed in my region for Framework 7 grants .
I have seen some excellent innovative research , but there are great questions about complexity , especially for SMEs , bureaucracy , and inflexibility when adapting to developments and science .
In some cases there are appalling stories of late payments by the EU itself .
When considering how taxpayers ' money is invested in the future , we should look at the lessons of what has already happened and make sure we spend it better in the future .
( PL ) The discussion on investing in low-carbon technologies is a discussion about methods of adapting the economies of Member States to the requirements for limiting greenhouse gas emissions .
Regardless of how climate and weather conditions for the last few months in our continent have been tending to supply arguments to those scientists who are calling into question the influence of man on climate change by CO2 emissions , we should , none the less , when talking about low-emission technologies in this context , ask the following question : how can the means necessary for the development of clean technologies be ensured , to achieve the maximum effects in the shortest possible time ?
I think the system which is being created for support of research and development should be as flexible as possible , to enable resources to be managed in a way which is appropriate to the dynamics of scientific research .
The question arises as to whether , and in what way , it is planned to create suitable mechanisms of support for investment in low-emission technologies ?
Finally , I would also like to add that no matter what significant arguments can be found in favour of investing in the development of low-emission technologies , this should not take place at the expense of cohesion policy .
( PL ) Madam President , in the Communication from the Commission of 23 January 2008 entitled ' Supporting early demonstration of sustainable power generation from fossil fuels ' , which is part of the climate and energy package , it was stated that the European Union would support the construction of 10 to 12 carbon dioxide capture and storage demonstration plants .
At the end of 2008 , the European Parliament took up this matter , too , in a resolution .
Item 11 of this document stated that the measures which had been unveiled by the Commission were not sufficient to provide the desired incentives for constructing at least 12 demonstration facilities by 2015 , while in item 18 it was considered imperative that at least the 12 demonstration facilities earmarked for assistance should cover all possible combinations of the three carbon dioxide capture and storage technologies .
The financial means are supposed , however , to come from the sale of 300 million allowances for CO2 emissions in the New Entrants ' Reserve , or what is known as NER300 .
Consequently , the sum intended for support of construction of the demonstration plants is going to depend on the market price of the allowances .
It is estimated that this will be from EUR 7-12 billion .
From the proposed decisions of the Commission contained in the motion it can be gathered that support under NER300 will cover six carbon dioxide capture and storage projects in power generation and two in industry .
Does the Council , in cooperation with the Commission , want to support the construction of a further two to four plants , and if so , how ?
- Madam President , we have heard a lot of nonsense today about green jobs .
The fact is that our obsession with renewables is already driving up the cost of electricity and forcing European citizens into fuel poverty .
Higher energy prices mean that energy-intensive businesses in Europe will simply give up and go away , to more favourable jurisdictions .
Higher energy prices mean lower growth and higher unemployment , and they cost jobs .
I have only seen one formal study into this question of green jobs .
That was in Spain , and it demonstrated that , for every single job created in the green sector , 2.2 jobs were lost elsewhere .
If we are really serious about low-carbon electricity , there is only one solution and that is nuclear power .
Across Europe we are starting to talk about new nuclear capacity , and that is good .
If we want to keep the lights on , we need a nuclear renaissance , and it we need it fast .
- ( PT ) Research and technology play a fundamental role in the development of a low-carbon society .
It is crucial to invest in radical social change based on the sustainability of cities , decentralised energy production and the competitiveness of industry .
This is an essential policy for a prosperous and sustainable society that is prepared for the challenges of climate change , energy security and globalisation , and that is a world leader in the sphere of clean technologies .
The Strategic Energy Technology Plan aims to contribute to precisely this goal .
I welcome the essential guidelines presented in the communication on how to organise the logic of intervention between the public and private sectors , between Community , national and regional financing .
It is , however , essential to increase public funding for scientific research into the field of clean technologies .
Europe also needs to create conditions that foster greater private investment in this field .
We urgently need to move from words to deeds .
The priorities of the future Financial Perspectives of the EU and the Eight Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development will have to be energy security , the fight against climate change , and the environment .
This is the only way we will be able to maintain the competitiveness of our industry , promote economic growth and create jobs .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is not just a routine debate but it is supposed to be very specific and to ask clear and precise questions - what resources are there and where to get them - and I hope that Parliament is expecting equally clear and precise answers , today and at the forthcoming Councils on 12 and 25 March .
We want to tell the Commission and the Council firmly that the European Union , which has flown the flag for the fight against atmospheric emissions and climate change in front of the world , now has to be consistent if it does not want to lose credibility .
It must do everything it can to achieve these goals .
We must be well aware that talking about a low-emission economy means a kind of Copernican revolution for the production system ; it means changing many things , having clear priorities and political will but , above all , sufficient resources and instruments .
We also know that this Copernican revolution is vital for our production system , European industry , to remain competitive .
In many countries , in many research centres and in many universities , the intellectual resources are ready , the capabilities are there and the will is there : it is now time to set things in motion .
Everyone has to do it , as the Commissioner and the Council have said : the Member States , entrepreneurs and the private sector have to do it .
I believe , however , that the vital task of putting this complex partnership together belongs to the European Union .
- Madam President , we all agree that greater energy efficiency is the first step in the chain , but I want in my contribution to draw your attention to the political confusion and anxiety surrounding bio-energy .
I think that this House in particular and the Commission , and Europe in general , ran away from parts of bio-energy when we had the food price hikes of 2007 and 2008 .
Few of us are talking about the realities for most farmers across Europe now , which is a crisis of confidence because prices have collapsed .
Yet there is no coherent political message to them on land use and using their land to grow energy crops .
In Ireland in particular we have the Government running away from this area .
Look , what industry needs is political certainty ; what politicians fail to deliver is that certainty , and we have reaped the reward for it .
If we are talking about investing in research and there is no uptake of the research because we will not make the right political decisions , we are wasting our time .
( HU ) Madam President , Commissioner , financing the changeover to green low-carbon technologies will be particularly difficult in the case of the new Member States .
One potential and very important source for Central European and Baltic States would be the use of the emission credits accumulated under the Kyoto Protocol 's emissions trading system , thereby profiting from these countries ' climate resources .
The condition for doing so , of course , would be the creation of a post-Kyoto system or support from the European Council and the Commission in our efforts to get proper value for our remaining climate resources .
As rapporteur for biogas , I am well aware of the cost of new technologies , and thus that technological development would be very important .
It is very important to pursue this point within the framework of the common agricultural policy , for instance by altering the composition of livestock feed , by introducing ploughing methods other than deep tilling and introducing new , innovative technologies .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the debate on the European Union 's energy choices , one thing is certain : the most significant , cheapest and most sustainable energy source available to us is saved energy .
For natural , historical , cultural and economic reasons , mountain regions are a model for reducing energy consumption , in line with the demands of modern life , and they lend themselves to large-scale experimentation with the use of renewable energy sources with low-carbon emissions .
Mountain regions produce almost all of Europe 's hydroelectric energy .
To give an example , the province where I come from in Italy alone produces 12 % of the hydroelectric energy of the entire country .
Furthermore , in mountain areas there is historical experience of constructing buildings that are more efficient in terms of saving energy .
We have managed to build homes that are completely self-sufficient in terms of both electricity and heating and that even supply more energy than they use , obviously with the use of advanced technologies .
The mountains are often a testing ground , and so are the ideal environment for experimenting with better use of biomass , solar energy , geothermal energy , heat pumps and , above all , for overhauling energy distribution systems .
Commissioner , the mountains are full of energy , clean energy : we just need to take it .
For this reason we ask the Commission to involve mountain regions in its strategy , to look carefully at their experience and to recognise their right to receive fair compensation for all the renewable energy already supplied by these regions .
Article 174 of the Treaty of Lisbon recognises the role of mountains , which is why we are anxiously waiting for an initiative from the Commission to implement this article and for a European mountain policy also in the field of energy .
I therefore call on the Commission to follow the recommendations of the Durnwalder report , in the Committee of the Regions , and to include in the assessment of European territories the energy issues and the production capacity of mountain regions in terms of renewable energy and passive construction .

Mountains , which make up 40 % of European territory and are home to 90 million people , have , up to now , been seen as disadvantaged areas : by implementing innovative and consistent energy policies , these regions can overcome this handicap and provide a vital stimulus to achieve the objectives set in the 20-20-20 strategy , showing that energy selfsufficiency is possible , at an acceptable cost , if the firm political will is there .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , I am speaking on my own behalf , and I would like to say to my opposite number : in my view , nuclear technology is no solution and is also not , as far as I am concerned , a renewable energy source .
Our job here is to put in place measures that will benefit our children and our future over the long term .
It is therefore very important for us to reduce CO2 emissions , although such a reduction must not be at the expense of the environment - in other words we must pay very close attention to which measures are funded and which measures are invested in .
We must not save CO2 whilst at the same time ruining our environment .
2010 is the Year of Biodiversity , and it is very important that we also put on record in these papers that all investments , all measures , must also be seen in the light of conserving our environment for our children , for our future and for biodiversity .
- ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , the debate on the transition to a low-carbon economy must not allow us to forget this fact .
The transition will hardly be a smooth process . In a few years we will be confronted with the effects of the shortage and the progressive depletion of the primary source of energy on which we depend : fossil fuels .
These fuels also serve as raw materials for many extremely important industries , such as the chemical and pharmaceutical industries .
It is absolutely necessary for mankind that the world 's remaining oil reserves be managed very wisely , which means , first and foremost , very sparingly .
It is in this context , that the adoption of the plan called the Oil Depletion Protocol , presented in Uppsala in 2002 and in Lisbon in 2005 by a group of scientists and specialists from several countries who are part of the Association for the Study of Peak Oil and Gas , would be crucial in introducing a plan that prioritises a good and fair management of these resources , the mitigation of their shortage and a controlled transition to other primary sources of energy .
( HU ) In my opinion , nuclear energy has not received the place it deserves in this report .
The solutions aimed at developing alternative , bio- , wind and solar energy are all lengthy and not at all certain to pay off in the end .
Yet we have to move fast in our energy strategy if we recall the effects of last year 's gas crisis and the threat of climate changes .
Nuclear power is the greatest carbon-free energy source within the European Union , and currently provides one-third of our electricity needs .
Its further safe development is simply unavoidable .
It would be helpful if we all realised this .
( GA ) Madam President , I listened to the debate and it was very interesting .
I have read everything I could about this subject .
I just want to make two points .
Number one : the question has been asked , where is the funding going to come from ? Number two : how is the research and development to be coordinated ?
It seems to me there is an opportunity here for the three institutions of the European Union - experts from Parliament , from the Council , from the Commission - to come together as a steering group .
Number one : to source the funding that is required in the public / private partnerships , with possible targets for each country ; and number two : to oversee and coordinate research .
It should be R & D & D - research , demonstration and delivery - and with some of the funding certainly dependent on a successful outcome , otherwise every professor around Europe will be trying to do research , and it will be uncoordinated at the end of the day .
( HU ) We have heard beautiful words from the representative of the Council and the Commission about low-carbon technologies , but he failed to address the key issue : where will the financing come from ?
A certain group of Member States does have a ready source : the former socialist countries have by far exceeded their Kyoto commitments . That is why the European Union could hold its head high at the Copenhagen conference .
These countries are entitled to cash in on their carbon dioxide quotas . Yet the Commission and the 15 original Member States want to prevent them from doing so .
In the case of Hungary this amounts to several hundred billion forints .
In Copenhagen , Hungary and Poland agreed to use these sums for green infrastructures .
So these , then , are the sources .
So far , this proposition has fallen on deaf ears , indicating that it is true after all : new Member States do indeed count as second-class members of the European Union .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we completely agree on a couple of points , going on what I have heard this morning : efficiency , savings , renewables and new technologies .
It is not enough though , ladies and gentlemen , if we do not decisively deal with another two issues .
The first is nuclear : just the word , merely broaching the subject , frightens us .
Let us conduct research and try to be responsible in this research .
The second is funding : we are afraid to talk about PPPs , as I have heard this morning .
The mere thought that the private sector could play a part in any initiative with the public is almost seen as something alien , shameful and suspicious .
It is unavoidable , ladies and gentlemen , with the financial resources to which we have to refer .
Furthermore , it is important for the public to interact with the private sector , since the public must learn to act in a business-like way and in accordance with a sustainable policy .
( DE ) Madam President , I will keep my question short .
In the groups , we had hackneyed debates - but justified ones - about ideological issues in the context of technologies .
Let us for once , however , come up with a question together that the Council and the Commission must answer .
We discussed the SET Plan for a long time .
What are the instruments to implement it ?
What are the time frames ?
What undertakings are there from the Member States ?


( DE ) Madam President , I am not going to deal with the issue of ideology at this point - we can do that another time - but I do think that the ideologists , really , are on the other side of this Chamber .
The Commission will have two tangible instruments in its hands over the next few weeks .
The first is the Risk-Sharing Finance Facility , which still has some money in it .
This money could now be used for a renewed push for renewable energies and energy efficiency .
I have been told that the Commission 's Directorate-General for Research is blocking the money - it does not want to spend this money on energy but would rather spend it on ICT and other areas .
Perhaps the Commissioner has something to say in this regard ?
The second instrument consists of the 15 % - at least - of the funds that are apparently still left in the Economic Recovery Plan , and we , as Parliament , have established that this money must be spent on energy efficiency , in particular on Smart Cities .
Can you also tell me anything about this , Commissioner ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( ES ) Madam President , I have taken due note of this morning 's debate and I am pleased to confirm that many of the concerns voiced by Parliament are shared by the Council .
I trust that the conclusions we will adopt tomorrow will allow us to establish a solid basis that meets the concerns expressed and enables us to make immediate progress in the launching of industrial initiatives .
I think we have clear consensus over the fact that those initiatives are fundamental if we are to reduce our energy dependence , improve our efficiency , continue to make technological progress - thereby giving a further boost to European technology - and , of course , meet the challenges of climate change .
These initiatives are also necessary to maintain European competitiveness and create employment .
I think I can reassure Mr Helmer : there are other studies apart from the one he has read , some of which were carried out by the Commission itself , showing the positive impact on employment - an effect that will be even greater in the long term .
We therefore propose that a set of common principles and practices be applied , giving direction to existing industrial initiatives .
This will , of course , among other things , require us to establish financial tools and public intervention criteria that are needed to support the development of these technologies .
A great deal of emphasis has been placed on financial aspects , and this is also a concern shared by the Council .
However , the Council cannot commit to reassigning funds without respecting the Commission 's right of initiative and the powers shared by Parliament in this area .
Therefore , in the meantime the current financing agreements will have to be applied .
Nevertheless , we need to insist on the importance of increasing our budgets in order to develop these new technologies , and on the fact that prioritising those increases must be a fundamental element in future discussions within the European institutions , particularly this Parliament .
I can also assure you that the Council has done and will continue to do everything it can to guarantee that the Strategic Energy Technology ( SET ) Plan has proper funding , within the context of both the current financial framework and future frameworks .
As the Commissioner has already said , I would like to recall that , in general terms , private initiatives - private sources of funding - also have an important role to play ; this is an area in which we need to work hand in hand in order to maximise the impact of public financial resources .
We need to achieve a large-scale , multiplying effect that enables us to successfully implement these initiatives which are vital to the future of Europe .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all I would like to thank you for this discussion .
I followed it very closely and there are many things which we will certainly take into consideration when developing our future work .
Let me start with a short story .
After the 1970s oil crisis we saw enthusiasm for innovation adding a competitive edge , even respecting the environment , on an unprecedented scale , but this was short lived .
After oil prices had fallen consistently for long enough , investment in R & D and deployment was dropped , market case for new technologies removed , shifting consumption patterns , and we were pushed into a period of tricky comfort where we depended on cheap foreign energy .
It was a period with the illusion of sustainability .
By the way , energy R & D investment immediately after the oil crisis was approximately four times higher than currently or some years ago .
And where are we today , after that period of reluctant and irresponsible development lacking a proactive approach ?
Reacting to climate change threats and trying to solve energy security dependence , so I do believe that a proactive vision is a realistic and necessary approach and not a daydream .
In this context - the things underlined in the paper we adopted a few days ago : the European Union 2020 Strategy - we see no alternative to green growth .
We need more clean industries , not more cleaning-up industries .
We need incentives , prices , costs and the right signals .
We need to focus on energy efficiency ; we need to focus , if you like , on resource efficiency , which is one of the major things included in EU 2020 .
I shall turn now to the second issue , which is the SET Plan that we are discussing .
All the estimates presented in the SET Plan for the financing required are based on technology road maps .
This was a very serious piece of work .
If you look at the proposals , what we envisage , how we estimate the financing needed for the future , you will find the following figures : wind : 6 ; solar : 16 ; bio : 19 ; CCS : 13 ; nuclear : 7 ; smart grids : 2 ; fuel cells and hydrogen : 5 ; Smart Cities : 11 ; European Energy Research Alliance : 5 , and basic research : 1 .
If you add that up , it comes to 75 .
I would remind you that there is a figure of 7 for nuclear . I have to be fair .
Fusion is not included , and fusion is , again , a serious figure which should come , but if we look at this picture I think that our message from the Commission side on where we should put the bulk of our investment is pretty clear .
The next issue is the sources of finance and the road maps .
The main sources , as I said in my introduction , will have to come from where the main sources are , and that is industry and the Member States .
This means the European Union budget , current and future financial perspectives , the European Energy Programme for Recovery , the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme and , of course , use of the other instruments that exist , and the European Investment Bank especially should be considered in this respect .
There is a serious question of the structure of the investment for the various initiatives proposed .
I think it is obvious that the internal structure of public and private investment will not be the same because of the market proximity , because of the market failures you face in various types of technologies , which would need to be addressed , but I do believe that what is in front of you is a serious case , especially when you start discussing the next financial perspective , and that we have to rethink what our priorities are and how we should invest in the future .

The next thing I would like to mention is that we will start all but one initiative - the Smart Cities , which came later , on your initiative , and which talks predominantly about resource efficiency - during 2010 , but do not think that the things we are talking about here are not ongoing already : they are , especially in research .
The Research Alliance has been working for a few years on this item already .
The last thing I would like to mention is that , with the SET Plan , we are actually starting something very specific at European Union level .
You know that , during my previous mandate , I fought very hard for a European research area .
At European level we deal with approximately five per cent of research money , so unless we join our forces at EU level - meaning Europe level - and avoid duplicating our efforts , we cannot count on real success .
Do not look only to the European budget .
We should put the money together to step up our research capacity .
The SET Plan is the best example we currently have of joint programming at EU level .
Other activities are also coming , and rightly so , but I think we should not underestimate what is happening here .
Here we are talking about public-public-private partnerships , which are very necessary and one of the issues to which I would draw your attention for the future .
There is also the Financial Regulation where you will discuss it .
It has to allow risk-taking if we seriously want these questions to be addressed .
I think we are behind one of the major new developments in Europe when we talk about the SET Plan , about joint programming , which is behind this .
We have here the European Energy Research Alliance - the best research organisations opened outward - which is already working together today on all these major issues .
My final message is that I think it is our major duty to put our political weight behind this programme .
I have received two motions for resolutionin accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure to wind up the debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.00 on Thursday , 11 March 2010 .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
Although I acknowledge that this Commission communication aims to speed up the development of new technologies with higher potential for low-carbon emissions through greater energy efficiency and the utilisation of renewable energy , I regret that the European regions still lack a more defined role in this strategy .
It is necessary to guarantee regional authorities the correct financing , for example ensuring financing during the testing phase of pilot projects , or investment during the research and testing phase of renewable energy projects .
I believe that it is important to include , for example , geothermal energy .
This is a renewable energy source with great potential for expansion in volcanic regions , that is particularly important for remote and island regions of the Union , and for which no goals have been set .
In this context , public and private investment must be increased by developing energy technologies so as to reach the desired goals of a low-carbon economy and also to help overcome the market failures referred to in the climate and energy package .
, in writing . - ( HU ) I think it is significant that the European Commission , when drawing up its Strategic Energy Technology Plan , took into consideration the amount of support needed for research and development of green technologies .
This is all the more true because , at the present stage , solar energy , bio-energy and hydrogen technology are in most cases not yet commercially profitable .
As Steven Chu , the United States Secretary of Energy rightly pointed out , research advances of Nobel Prize calibre are needed in order to make green technologies competitive with traditional fossil fuel technologies .
However , the serious flaw of the green technology plan is that we have no idea what EU funds will be used to carry it out .
Looking at the cost of EUR 16 billion deemed necessary for solar energy research , or the EUR 5 billion estimated for hydrogen-related technology , this cannot be a minor consideration .
At this point there are no indications that the next seven-year financial framework will provide increased resources for research in green technologies .
We are well aware that support from public funds is no substitute for the efforts of private investors .
Nevertheless , the European Union and Member States must boost the funds devoted to green technology research .
The eventual revenues from an emission trading system may serve as a good basis for this .
The stakes are not negligible .
We cannot allow the plans for energy policy and climate protection to suffer the same fate as the Lisbon Strategy with its contradictory outcomes .
in writing . - To make Carbon Technology a practical reality we need to address the shortage of engineers and other high-skilled personnel designing and producing advanced technologies .
We can do this by setting up or intensifying training schemes or scholarships to ensure that workers ' skills are upgraded in time for economic recovery .
We need to ensure a supply of highly qualified and well-educated workers with the right combination of both theoretical and practical skills.We also need to tackle persisting barriers to mobility within the EU , in particular for researchers and highly skilled people and to address the issue of EU-wide recognition of engineers ' qualifications .
Financial markets & institutions tend to be cautious about investing , particularly where SMEs are concerned number of EU schemes supporting innovation , although they need to be better synchronised and coordinated from both supply and demand perspectives .
We need to facilitate cooperation between SMEs and research institutes , promoting IPR ( Intellectual Property Rights ) and technology transfer .
EEI businesses themselves need to become more proactive in supporting cluster initiatives and joining clusters .
We also need to stimulate research and innovation through tax incentives or innovation vouchers , and by improving the conditions for risk capital investment , for instance for business angels or cross-border venture capital .
Global climate warming caused by human activity is a fact . Combating this process and its negative effects is the need of the hour .
One way of dealing with these problems is to use clean and renewable energy sources .
However , for these energy sources to play a significant role in the European energy system , two conditions have to be met .
Firstly , we need an increase in funding available for research into their development .
Secondly , we need an increase in funding for investments which implement the latest low-emission technologies .
Investing in the development of the low-emission technologies contained in the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan is important from the point of view of the entire EU .
In particular , however , it is important for countries whose energy industry - for historical reasons - emits large amounts of CO2 .
One such country is Poland .
Improving and developing technologies for carbon dioxide capture and storage ( CCS ) is a matter of vital significance for the whole of the Polish economy .
Effects of the Xynthia storm in Europe ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the effects of storm Xynthia in Europe .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , only two weeks after the dreadful disaster on Madeira , the Commission was again shocked and saddened by the death and devastation caused by storm Xynthia in France and other European countries .
I wish to express my personal sympathy to all those that are suffering as a consequence of the disaster .
The Commission 's condolences go in particular to the families and friends of those that have lost their lives .
Through the monitoring and information centre for civil protection , the Commission has been monitoring the events caused by storm Xynthia closely and has offered to set the mechanism for EU assistance in action .
Fortunately , the French rescue services were able to respond to the disaster with their own means and did not request the activation of the mechanism .
Together with the relevant authorities in the Member States , the Commission is now exploring all the possibilities and instruments that could be available at EU level to assist financially in overcoming the disaster and to help return to normal living conditions as soon as possible .
Two days ago , Commission President Barroso met French President Sarkozy to discuss the situation .
Yesterday he also met with a number of Members of this House from different countries .
One week ago my colleague , Mr Hahn , Commissioner responsible for regional policy and the Solidarity Fund , visited the most hard-hit regions in France - La Rochelle and l 'Aiguillon-sur-Mer - and met with national and regional authorities .
On Madeira , where disaster struck two weeks earlier , the authorities and rescue services have been able to make enormous progress in combating the effects of the flooding disaster .
Commissioner Hahn visited Madeira during the past weekend to get a first-hand impression and to discuss with the local authorities the way forward .
The European Union Solidarity Fund was set up in 2002 specifically as the instrument at EU level to financially assist EU Member States affected by major natural disasters , if certain conditions are met .
France has already declared its intention to apply for assistance from the Solidarity Fund .
I should point out that the Regulation governing the Solidarity Fund normally allows its mobilisation only for what are known as ' major disasters ' , where the damage at national level exceeds the threshold of 0.6 % of gross national income , or EUR 3 billion at 2002 prices .
For France this currently means the damage would have to exceed approximately EUR 3.4747 billion at current prices .

However , in exceptional circumstances and if specific criteria are met , the fund may also be used for smaller ' extraordinary regional disasters ' , in particular where they concern outermost regions like Madeira .
The French authorities are currently carrying out an assessment of the damage and of its repercussions for the economy and the living conditions of the population .
These are the essential elements for the application , which has to reach the Commission within 10 weeks of the disaster . That means before 9 May .
After it is received it will be examined by the Commission as quickly as possible .
The Commission services , in particular DG Regional Policy , are granting all possible assistance and guidance in preparing the application .
Contacts at expert level are well established with the French authorities , thus allowing effective progress .
Please be aware , however , that aid from the Solidarity Fund cannot be paid out immediately .
The Solidarity Fund should not be misunderstood as an emergency instrument .
It is a financial instrument to help bear the financial burden of emergency operations .
As such , a possible grant could be used retroactively for emergency operations from day one of the disaster .
The funding for the Solidarity Fund is raised through an extra effort of the Member States outside the normal European Union budget .
It has to be approved by Parliament and the Council through an amending budget procedure .
As you know , the whole procedure - from the moment the application is made to paying out the grant - inevitably takes several months .
The Commission is , however , making every effort to keep this time span as short as possible .
As regards the Structural Funds , in particular the ERDF , this can of course not be used for immediate emergency operations .
France and the Commission have , however , started discussing the options and possible necessary programme modifications which might be instrumental for longer-term reconstruction and for investment in businesses affected by the flood .
One last point , which Members of this House already raised during the debate on Madeira two weeks ago .
The Commission will use the current political momentum to attempt to unblock the proposal for an amended Solidarity Fund regulation at the Council .
Parliament widely supported this proposal , and I feel this is the right moment to take common action vis-à-vis the Council again .
Madam President , Commissioner , during the evening of 27-28 February , storm Xynthia hit the coasts of Charente-Maritime and Vendée , my region , particularly hard .
Fifty-three people died , a dozen people are unaccounted for , and hundreds of people have lost their homes .
These are significant losses , and they are compounded by serious problems in relation to infrastructure .
I am referring in particular to the dams , to the railway lines , to the sewage networks , to the electricity networks , to the telecommunication networks and to the entire system of small and medium-sized enterprises , in particular in the maritime sector , in the aquaculture sector and in the agricultural sector , with 45 000 hectares submerged by salt water , since this was a flood that originated in the sea .
This is damage on a significant scale . This is damage of which the consequences will continue to be felt over time , since some farming land will now be unfit for use for several years .
I therefore call here for the European Union to show solidarity and , of course , for this European Union Solidarity Fund to be made available in the best possible conditions and in the quickest possible time , because we cannot tell our fellow citizens that the funds will wait and that the problems cannot be resolved here and now .
Together , we need , after the visit by the Commissioner - whom I sincerely thank for going and seeing for himself the scale of the disaster , and I know that he too has been deeply affected by it - unite our efforts to improve the use of this fund , so that progress can be made more quickly .
We are always complaining that Europe is too far removed from our fellow citizens ; let us show them here , today , that we are capable of reacting quickly .
I regret that the Council is not here to help us with this regulatory amendment .
In any case , rest assured that we need it and that our fellow citizens are expecting it .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , I would like to extend our heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims of the natural disasters that have hit Portugal , Madeira , France and Spain .
Last week , a delegation from my Group went to Madeira , visited the areas most affected by the catastrophe and met with the regional and local authorities and business , industrial , trade and farmers ' associations .
We retain striking images and messages from what we saw and heard .
We learnt of entire families who died in their own homes ; we heard dramatic testimonies about people being pulled under the water , never to be seen again .
Entire houses moved from one side of the street to the other , and cars still containing their passengers were swept away from the streets into the sea .
However , the courage of Madeira 's people in overcoming adversity was equally striking .
I will never forget the pictures of determination of those who , despite losing their businesses , their homes and their possessions , refused to give up .
On the contrary , they got straight to work , ready to start again from scratch .
In just a few days , tonnes and tonnes of stone , earth and other debris were removed from the centre of the city of Funchal .
The national , regional and local authorities joined efforts so that life on the island could go back to normal .
Therefore , it is important to announce that tourists can return to Madeira .
Its natural beauty and the warmth of its people await us .
The people of Madeira are now also awaiting the solidarity of the European institutions to be able to rebuild the roads , bridges and public buildings that were destroyed .
The tradesmen , industrialists and farmers also need our support in rebuilding their lives and contributing to the economic development of the region .
I am greatly pleased , Commissioner , to hear that the Commission , as well as Parliament and the Council , is determined to unblock the Cohesion Fund - the new proposal that has already been adopted by Parliament - so that new rules that are better adapted to the real needs of the public can be implemented .
As you know , Commissioner , it is also necessary that the other structural funds are restructured and redeployed to the most affected areas , because special situations require special solutions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe would like to join with the declarations of sympathy for the victims of storm Xynthia , which has affected several areas of Europe .
We must take action and in this regard I appreciated the serious declarations made today by Commissioner Potočnik , whose expertise I value and whose commitment I must acknowledge .
In this regard , I call on him to make the necessary amendments to the Solidarity Fund , reminding him though that Parliament already adopted the measure by a large majority in 2006 .
Given these situations and given these deaths , we can only reiterate how critical it is to adopt measures such as this .
However , at the same time , Mr President , we must act on several fronts and firstly review all the development and regional planning programmes and update them in view of their environmental impact , also including an assessment of the effects on the ground .
We also need to invest substantial sums to establish long-term action aimed at implementing a disaster prevention strategy .
This is not an optional or fanciful choice , but a necessary choice if we want disasters such as those we are discussing today not to have such tragic consequences .
However , there are also economic reasons , if we want to limit ourselves solely to this aspect , which oblige the institutions to take action in terms of prevention .
While we are claiming in the resolution that it is necessary to pledge substantial amounts to repair the damage , we must shift our attention and our action to investments and initiatives for environmental protection , reforestation and the protection of vegetation , given that these will reduce the costs of repairing environmental damage .
We must learn from disasters of this kind - modern man must learn from them - that not everything can be controlled but that everything can be limited if adequate precautions are taken .
We must do it , Mr President , also in memory of victims such as those who , in recent days and in recent weeks , unfortunately , throughout Europe have characterised the reality of our regions .

Mr President , I would also like to express my deepest sympathy - my own and that of my Group - and my solidarity with the affected regions , while regretting the serious economic consequences of these disasters and offering in particular our condolences to the families of the victims .
It is also important to emphasise the need for national , regional and local authorities now to focus on effective prevention policies and to pay more attention to adequate practices and legislation relating to land use .
It is precisely for this reason that there are two amendments that we tabled as a group , because , in our view , they are missing in the joint resolution .
The first states : whereas in France construction has been authorised on flood plains and on natural wetlands ; whereas building speculation has encouraged the construction of buildings in vulnerable areas .
For us this is a vital aspect to make progress .
The second amendment calls for cofinancing by Community funds for implementing these plans , in particular the Structural Funds , the EAFRD , the Cohesion Fund and the European Solidarity Fund , to be subject to sustainability measures .
For us this is vital in ultimately deciding whether or not we will vote in favour of the resolution .
Mr President , our first words can only be of condolence and solidarity for the families of the victims of this catastrophe .
We welcome the European Union 's words of solidarity for the affected regions and towns .
It is important now to make this solidarity tangible , by quickly mobilising the necessary means and resources to relieve the damage caused by bad weather .
In the past years , the Member States have been hit by a considerable number of catastrophes , as demonstrated by the 62 requests to mobilise the Solidarity Fund , made by a total of 21 countries , in only its first six years of existence .
The damage caused by these catastrophes is hard to assess , particularly because of the loss of human life .
In any case , the economic and social costs are almost always very significant .
It is in this context that prevention will have to play a more important social role , and become an increasingly important phase in the catastrophe management process .
It is important to develop cooperation and solidarity in this area within the European Union . First of all , by creating a financial framework suitable for prevention that will support the implementation of protection measures for the public , the environment and the climate by the Member States .
The recipients of special aid must be , amongst others , such actions as the correction of potentially dangerous situations , the protection of the most risk-prone areas , the reinforcement of early warning systems in the Member States and the establishment and reinforcement of existing connections between the various early warning systems .
As it has already been said here , the sensible utilisation of land , economic and social development that is in harmony with nature , and strengthened cohesion in the European Union are also vital factors for the prevention of catastrophes .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , several European regions have been hit by some exceptional natural meteorological phenomena , which have resulted in huge material , economic , agricultural and environmental damage , and have sadly claimed too many human lives .

I dare to hope , Commissioner , that beyond your due condolences , the European Solidarity Fund , a European activity that in this case is useful , will be able to be implemented quickly and flexibly in both France and Madeira , just as it has been - as someone said - in other European countries , to help my compatriots in Vendée and Charente-Maritime restore their vital infrastructure and services .
It is my understanding from what you have said that the French Government has not yet referred this matter to you , and I am very surprised at that .
However , I must say that there are some aspects to the way in which certain people are exploiting these events that I find quite intolerable .
Firstly , this compulsive need to link the natural disasters that we are suffering to socalled global warming .
No matter what political or pseudo-scientific claims we may be fed , they will not dictate the weather and the tides any more than they will prevent earthquakes .
The second is the systematic search for culprits and easy scapegoats .
The Xynthia disaster in the west of France is due to the very rare combination of two events : the storm itself , of course , and some unusually high tides , which led to the collapse of the dams .
Controversy has erupted over the building permits granted by the mayors , who have been made personally responsible for the deaths that have occurred in their municipalities .
However , no one - not the département , the region , the public services , the town planners or the architects - objected to these building permits requested by individuals .
The elected representatives of the region , and in particular in the small municipalities , are quite rightly held in high regard by their fellow citizens .
They shoulder a great deal of responsibility for virtually nothing , they have a remarkable sense of the general interest , they are coping with ever more complex duties , for which Europe is partly responsible , and they have also been completely abandoned by the public authorities , and I was anxious to point this out here .
- ( NL ) Mr President , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) endorses the resolution and advocates that we convey appropriate expressions of condolence and solidarity and take direct action .
There are a few points I would like to add to that .
First of all , I think it is excellent that the Commission has stepped into the breach and that Mr Hahn is also considering how he might be able to alter his operational programmes .
That also bodes well for the short term .
However , the actual problem lies in the Solidarity Fund .
How has the Council been able to get away for years with holding up action by Parliament to make the Solidarity Fund more flexible ?
In my opinion , it is really a very good thing that Mr Potočnik has been so unambiguous about the fact that the Commission will now be taking the initiative .
The Spanish Presidency really ought to be here today in order to confirm that .
Now is the time to act and Parliament is extremely unhappy about this hold-up .
However , there is also a second dimension to this issue .
I come from the Netherlands . Most of the Netherlands is situated below sea level .
As the spring flooding of 1953 is still very vivid in our memories , we know that it is vital to look ahead .
We know that safety and preventative measures have to go hand in hand with development in these regions , that is , development of any activities that have an impact on the coast .
And that is definitely an achievable aim .
We in the Netherlands have now come up with a plan , a delta plan , to reinforce our coastal defences and we are also looking into other matters where it is imperative that we link safety with economic development .
By way of conclusion , let me add that in 2008 an initiative was taken in the French coastal town of Saint Malo to assemble all coastal regions under the auspices of the United Nations , in conjunction with the OECD .
The United Nations now has a disaster prevention plan for coastal regions and it is that world-wide perspective that is so very important .
The European Parliament has a pilot project for the 2009-2010 period and we have supported our regions ' participation in it , by providing funding , amongst other means .
The world-wide dimension is something that we have to get on the agenda here in the upcoming period .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by expressing my deepest sympathy and solidarity with the victims of the Madeira floods and of storm Xynthia .
The necessary questions must be asked about the worrying increase in these destructive meteorological phenomena , and about the role played by climate change and the urgent need to find solutions .
For now , it is a case of providing urgent solutions to the populations rocked by these disasters .
Of course , public and private insurance providers must be responsive but , when it comes to the destroyed infrastructure and rebuilding the areas concerned , European solidarity must be expressed .
That is why the French Government has requested aid from the EU Solidarity Fund , created in 2002 , which I hope will be granted quickly and meaningfully .
This is the thrust of the two letters that I have sent to the Commission since 1 March in my capacity as an elected representative for the west of France region and which I had the opportunity to discuss , last Thursday , in La Rochelle , with Commissioner Hahn , whom I sincerely thank for being so responsive .
Commissioner Hahn agreed that the mechanism was complex and difficult to implement .
Well , we have to conclude that it could have been made more flexible if the Council had not incomprehensibly blocked the review of the operation of this fund as adopted by a very large majority of MEPs in May 2006 .
I therefore hope that the Spanish Presidency will break the deadlock on this text so that the system can be made more effective .
In more immediate terms , I call on the Commission to authorise a oneoff increase in cofinancing via the ERDF and ESF regional funds for projects in the regions affected , within a time frame that will enable their economies to recover by summer .
Lastly , this aid should not be used to rebuild in such a way that the same tragic environmental and town planning mistakes are made ; rather , it should be used in a considered way , so as to prevent as far as possible a repeat of such tragedies .
( FR ) Mr President , following the disaster that has struck the French coast only a few weeks after Madeira , our group has tabled some amendments so that our Parliament , as well as expressing its solidarity , will denounce those responsible .
For European citizens have not died and others have not lost everything in these disasters simply because the elements were unleashed .
This also happened because some very grave mistakes were made in allowing the coastlines and riverbanks to become builtup .
These mistakes are the fault of the Member States , of their laws , which are very inadequate , of their authorities , which are too lax , and of their governments , which are too unaccountable .
Having allowed building to take place in flood zones is no less serious than having permitted and encouraged the consumption of tobacco or asbestos over the years , even though people were dying and it was very clear that that was the reason why .
Before Xynthia there was Madeira , and before Madeira there was Sicily ; tomorrow , there will be other disasters .
If the European Parliament does not raise its voice , it in turn will be accountable for the disasters of the future .
The European Union must show its solidarity , but it must also demonstrate a sense of responsibility .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , like everyone here , our thoughts are first and foremost with the populations , with the bereaved families and with those who have lost everything as a result of storm Xynthia .
One of the lessons to be learnt from this disaster will have been , once again , the usefulness of the services of the Member States , of the municipalities , of the departments , of the regions , including the public services and the civil protection services , which have demonstrated their effectiveness .
As we all agree , today we must urgently help the families to repair and to rebuild , but we must rebuild in a different way , by taking account of nature and of human beings .
To do so , we must encourage the insurance companies , which are swimming in profits , to reimburse people for the damage caused .
On the other hand , given the exceptional nature of the disaster that has hit these regions , the European Union , in cooperation with the Member States , must take action on a much greater scale and more quickly , not least by harnessing the European Solidarity Fund , and it must do so in a more flexible manner than the one you have certainly just described , Commissioner .
Indeed , the destruction of homes and businesses , and the sterilisation of farming land are probably impossible to quantify using our traditional criteria .
On the other hand , we will also have to combine the regional funds and the ESF Fund to help the regions get back on their feet .
Beyond that , it is important to learn every lesson from what has just happened and to take action to prevent such disasters or to limit the damage of such climatic phenomena .
The issue of building in flood zones and of combating real estate speculation along the coastline must be completely reexamined in connection with the balances of nature , farming activities , aquaculture , oyster faming and fishing , which European policies all too often destroy .
That is why I propose that the European Union , in cooperation with the Member States and the regions , should establish a consistent sustainable reconstruction and development plan that takes account of the geography , environment , biodiversity and activities along the coastline .
Lastly , there must be an opportunity to establish a common prevention , monitoring and warning system by which swift , solidarity-based assistance can be provided to the populations .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as my colleague Mrs Morin-Chartier and the other Members have said , on 27 and 28 February the violent storm Xynthia battered several French regions , claiming 53 lives and causing huge material damage .
The storm was exceptionally intense ; it caused devastating floods along the French coast .
After Madeira , Europe has once again been affected .
Brittany , the region of my colleague and friend , Mr Cadec , has been severely affected .
A state of natural disaster has thus been declared in three French regions : Brittany , Poitou-Charentes and Pays de la Loire .
In the face of these disasters , the European Union must demonstrate its responsiveness and express its solidarity .
Words and a resolution alone will not enable us to support the victims of these disasters ; we must also and above all provide financial aid .
I therefore call on the European Commission - and my colleague Mr Béchu supports my request - to swiftly release the EU Solidarity Fund so as to help the disaster areas cope with the damage .
This disaster shows that Mr Barnier 's proposal to create a European civil protection force is relevant .
Europeans must take action together , since more and more disasters are occurring and they are affecting our European territories and , in particular , our most isolated and vulnerable regions , such as the islands in the Indian Ocean and the Caribbean islands .
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to express my solidarity to the families of the victims affected by storm Xynthia .
Last week , I had the opportunity to visit Madeira with a delegation from the Committee on Regional Development of Members from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
It was the first time that a European delegation had had the opportunity to be there on the ground and to meet the authorities and people from the island .
The storms that hit Madeira killed more than 40 people and wounded or displaced hundreds more .
Economic losses are estimated at EUR 100 million with 900 businesses and more than 3 500 workers directly affected .
The priority now is to rebuild infrastructure , ensure that the situation returns to normal and , above all , rebuild Madeira 's image abroad and regain people 's trust in its tourism industry , thereby stimulating its economy and development .
A number of adverse weather conditions , particularly storm Xynthia , have also affected Spain , especially the areas of Andalusia and the Canary Islands , as well as western France and other countries .
These major disasters have caused enormous economic damage and require an urgent , speedy and efficient response from the European Union ; we therefore need to mobilise the necessary tools in order to tackle this kind of disaster .
Commissioner , this is an extraordinary situation that requires extraordinary measures .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , in October last year I had the opportunity , as part of a delegation from the Committee on Regional Development , to see all the wonderful things that are being done with EU funds on Madeira , for which reason I , too , feel personally very affected by this disaster .
I want to express my sympathy to the family members affected , but also to those who , in the space of just a few hours , lost everything that they had spent their lives building up .
At this time in particular , the European Union is under the microscope , and the Solidarity Fund was set up for precisely this kind of difficult situation , as the people of Madeira and France now need not only our sympathy but also , more than anything , our financial assistance .
The disaster in France and on Madeira has also been intensified by the fact that people have perhaps been too ambitious in their attempts to control the natural world and have attempted to lead their lives by overruling the laws of nature .
The fact that that is not possible in the long term has been demonstrated very painfully here again .
What this means is that all funds must be used in such a way that they guarantee security , prevention and sustainability , and there must be special attention paid to this .

( ES ) Mr President , firstly I would like to express my solidarity and condolences to France and Portugal , particularly to La Rochelle and Madeira ; secondly , may I express my solidarity with my own country , particularly Andalusia and the Canary Islands , which have been affected by these major storms .
However , I must make a severe criticism of the European Union Solidarity Fund .
The Solidarity Fund is obsolete and has not taken account of this Parliament 's resolution of 2006 .
It no longer has any value whatsoever .
The figures given - 0.6 % of GDP and EUR 3 billion - do not correspond to what this situation demands , for this is no longer just an emergency but also a reconstruction effort .
We have faith in the Spanish Presidency and we therefore call on it to provide the impetus needed to reform the Solidarity Fund .
( PT ) Mr President , I will start by expressing my most heartfelt condolences to all the families of the victims of Xynthia , especially in France and Spain .
Nobody would have expected that just a week after what happened in Madeira this storm would hit the coasts of France , Spain and , especially , the Canary Islands with such violence .
Last Saturday , I had the opportunity to accompany Mr Hahn , who was in Madeira visiting the most affected areas and was able to see for himself the level of destruction that took place on the ground .
Tomorrow , the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , will do the same .
The fact that they are doing this , and personally witnessing the level of destruction , makes them privileged witnesses of what happened and focuses people 's attention on what is most important now : urgent aid .
It is essential that Parliament be able to commit itself to working quickly to review the structure of the Solidarity Fund , simplifying it and sending aid faster so that we can quickly provide relief to people from whom we cannot request more time .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I come from a small village , with approximately 500 inhabitants , which was severely hit by floods just two years ago .
It was actually a pure miracle - or , if you wish , lucky - that there were no human casualties .
At that time we benefited greatly from the same Solidarity Fund that we are talking about .
I fully understand the feelings of the people on the ground .
They are also looking for solidarity from all around the European Union - solidarity which is fast and efficient .
That is why I think it is of the utmost importance that we focus on the Solidarity Fund Regulation .
As you know , the Commission proposal for an amendment to the European Union Solidarity Fund Regulation dates back to 2005 .
This proposal concerns mostly the extension of the fund to disasters other than natural ones .
However , it also includes elements that might have been relevant in the case of Xynthia as well - a proposal to lower the thresholds and the possibility of paying advances of the expected aid .
There have been signals from several Member States lately - including from France - that they may reconsider their negative position .
Together with Parliament , the Commission intends taking a new initiative very shortly vis-à-vis the Council and its Spanish Presidency , to unblock the dossier .
I also agree with the remark that we should do our utmost to be better prepared .
The frequency and intensity of disastrous events is clearly increasing , and this is worrying .
So I think that being better prepared is of the utmost importance .
In this context , the Cohesion and Structural Funds should play their role also .
There are also other possibilities which can be explored .
I have already mentioned the Structural and Cohesion Funds .
Also the Rural Development Fund can be redirected but of course only at the request of the Member State .
I would like to thank you for your support and I would also like to thank you in the name of my colleague , Johannes Hahn , who has responsibility for this area .
The debate is closed .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
On 27 and 28 February , the violent storm Xynthia battered several French regions .
It claimed 53 lives and caused huge material damage , including , in particular , serious flooding .
After the disaster in Madeira , Europe was hit once again .
My region , Brittany , has been severely affected , and a state of natural disaster has been declared in three departments , just as it has in the Poitou-Charentes and Pays de la Loire regions .
I should like to express my full solidarity with the families affected and with the victims of the disaster .
The European Union as a whole must show its responsiveness and its solidarity by means of a financial aid package and support measures aimed at reconstruction .
Mr Béchu joins me in requesting emergency aid .
Today , the financial resources of the Solidarity Fund seem difficult to implement .
It must be acknowledged that Parliament has been calling for more effective and swifter use of the EU Solidarity Fund since 2005 .
The Commission and the Council must facilitate the swift release of this fund for the affected regions .
This disaster shows that the Barnier report on the creation of a European civil protection force - EuropeAid - makes perfect sense and would enable us to develop a more effective response to disasters .
In recent weeks , two natural disasters of tragic proportions hit Europe and its Member States , leaving behind a trail of death and destruction and causing damage costing tens of thousands of euro .
We will not forget the dramatic images from Madeira at the end of February - which I watched with particular sadness , because it was a tragedy affecting an island that I know well - or the dramatic report of the path of Xynthia through several areas in Europe .
On this occasion , besides expressing my sincere concern for all those who were affected by these tragedies , I urge the Commission to act swiftly in the relief effort to the most affected regions .
This must be done not only by mobilising the European Union Solidarity Fund as urgently and flexibly as possible and with the greatest possible funding , but also by utilising all the instruments and mechanisms made available by the Cohesion Fund to assist the affected regions in overcoming this terrible tragedy .
I would also like to take this opportunity to express my solidarity with all the efforts made by Madeira 's local authorities and its people .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately we are having to deal with this sad and now customary matter once again .
I would like to express my respect and gratitude to all the professionals and volunteers who have contributed to the rescue and reconstruction effort in the affected areas , and I would like to express my particular condolences to the families of the victims .
We need to provide help to the victims and pave the way so that the affected areas can recover quickly .
We also need to continue working intensively in the area of prevention .
Finally , and most importantly , I would call on the Spanish Government to use its current Presidency of the European Union to provide the impetus needed to modify the current European Union Solidarity Fund Regulation - a request already made on a number of occasions by the European Parliament - in order to achieve faster , more flexible and more efficient access to it .
in writing . - ( RO ) The incidence of global natural disasters is alarming .
We can see today the consequences of our irresponsible actions in the past as we are faced with a new challenge : combating the effects of climate change .
It goes without saying that the cost of the operations involved in rebuilding the areas affected by natural disasters are incomparably higher in relation to the efforts required for prevention .
At EU level we have instruments available for dealing with such situations , which supplement the projects carried out by regions .
For example , in the Western Region of Romania , which I represent , a project is being promoted for improving the capabilities and quality of the intervention system deployed in emergency situations .
The financial instruments available , including the Structural and Cohesion Funds , as well as the Fund for Rural Development , must be reviewed so that they offer greater flexibility in emergencies .
With regard to the Solidarity Fund , the lowering of the threshold for mobilising the fund and the possibility of making advance payments of the relevant amounts would speed up intervention and reconstruction efforts and make them more effective .
Last but not least , we will have to give due attention to an older initiative , namely the rapid reaction force , which will cover the entire territory of the European Union , because natural phenomena affect neighbouring regions , and this creates the conditions for solidarity and cross-border action .
in writing . - ( PT ) I would like to join with the many declarations of sympathy for the victims of the torrential storm that battered Madeira on 20 February , as well as the declarations of solidarity with all those who are suffering the pain of grief for lost family and friends and lost possessions .
I would also like to stress the constant need to consolidate the European Union 's capacity to provide help to populations affected by natural disasters .
By losing personal property such as their homes , their livelihoods and their jobs , these populations could fall into a desperate situation .
In these cases , social justice is only achieved through solidarity , not forgetting that all of society benefits from each of its citizens having decent living conditions .
Therefore , it is not too much to insist on the need to enlarge the European Union Solidarity Fund and make it more flexible .
In this context , I would like to declare my total support for the resolution on Madeira adopted today by the European Parliament .
in writing . - ( DE ) The recent storms across Madeira , parts of Spain and France took a heavy toll with over 40 deaths on Madeira , another 60 in France , countless missing persons and extensive property damage .
Managing natural disasters is an opportunity for Europe to prove its added value .
Rapid and uncomplicated cooperation between European partners is required in order to counter the dramatic consequences of the storm Xynthia and the devastating torrential rains .
The Solidarity Fund and other EU financial instruments can at least make it possible to tackle the economic damage of the disaster more quickly .
However , the organisation of disaster prevention must always remain in the hands of the Member States , who are best placed to deal with their national circumstances and thus to react most rapidly in emergencies .
In order to prevent future storm damage , the Commission should support the Member States in their efforts to produce effective emergency plans and tables of risks .
With the march of climate change and the dislocation of water cycles that that promotes , it will not be possible to completely fend off even fiercer storms in the future .
However , the damage that such storms cause can certainly be reduced with better prior planning .
Storm Xynthia is another tragic and painful demonstration of the climatic disturbances that are intensifying the violence and the frequency of what are , nonetheless , natural phenomena .
Nowadays , the European Union is confronted too often with such natural disasters to make do with its existing policies , and I believe that it should strengthen three areas of intervention in order to better protect its citizens : prevention , which is addressed in the 2009 White Paper on adapting to climate change , for which I was rapporteur for the opinion and which specifically emphasises the vulnerability of coastal and mountain areas ; rapid intervention , by finally creating this European civil protection force , about which we have done nothing but talk and which only needs a proposal to become a reality ; and repair , by permitting the emergency mobilisation of the Structural Funds - if necessary outside the regional framework of the planned areas of intervention - and of the Solidarity Fund , the regulation of which must be amended so as to speed up and simplify its mobilisation .
It is clear , then , that I endorse this resolution , but I regret that our House should be obliged once again to call for measures that could have been proposed following one of the too numerous natural disasters that have plunged Europe into mourning in recent years .
Major natural disaster in the Autonomous Region of Madeira and effects of storm Xynthia in Europe ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Situation in Chile and EU humanitarian aid strategy ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the situation in Chile and the EU 's humanitarian aid strategy .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I make this statement on behalf of my colleague , Kristalina Georgieva , Commissioner for International Cooperation , Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Response .
Why instead of her ?
It is pretty clear and obvious .
Commissioner Georgieva arrived in Chile yesterday , 10 March , to visit areas affected by the recent earthquake and to follow the work of European humanitarian and civil protection experts there on the ground .
Immediately after arriving in Chile 's capital Santiago , Commissioner Georgieva travelled to the area most affected by the earthquake and tsunami , including the coastal region around Constitución , Talca , and Concepción .
During her field visit she met representatives of ECHO partners working in the area , visited the monitoring and information centre base camp in Penco and had bilateral contacts with Chilean authorities in the region .
Commissioner Georgieva will also represent President Barroso during the inauguration of President Sebastián Piñera in Valparaíso later today .
The massive earthquake and subsequent tsunami that struck Chile in the early hours of Saturday 27 February are a terrible tragedy .
The latest official figures indicate that at least 528 people have been killed , and that number is expected to rise .
More than two million people are affected .
The damage to infrastructure has been enormous and half a million homes have been seriously damaged .
The High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the Commission , Cathy Ashton , called Chile 's Foreign Minister , Mariano Fernández , the same day to express our condolences to the families of the victims and indicate our readiness to provide assistance and support .
As soon as news of the earthquake broke , ECHO 's emergency response system was mobilised .
The EU civil protection mechanism immediately issued a pre-alert message to the participating states .
The crisis room of the monitoring and information centre ( MIC ) operated throughout that first weekend , obtaining reports about the scale and impact of the earthquake , identifying civil protection assets that could be available for rapid deployment .
Commissioner Georgieva went to the crisis room during the day to direct operations .
A number of European Union Member States have notified the MIC of assistance deployed or offered .
This includes personnel and equipment already sent to Concepción from Spain , Germany , France and the United Kingdom , funding pledges from Finland , the United Kingdom and the Netherlands , and offers of bridges , tents , field kitchens and generators from Bulgaria , Slovakia , Sweden and Austria .
The Chilean authorities have signalled their acceptance of offers of help made by the European Union Member States .
The Commission 's emergency humanitarian response system was launched simultaneously in Brussels and in ECHO 's Managua regional office covering Latin America .
Potential partners for fast-track funding with the capacity to provide immediate relief assistance were contacted and ECHO field experts were mobilised to travel to the earthquake zone at the first available opportunity .
A three million primary emergency decision was adopted early on Sunday morning .
Humanitarian grant agreements have now been concluded with four partner agencies : Telecom Sans Frontières from France to provide emergency telecommunications services ; the Pan-American Health Organisation and the Spanish Red Cross to help re-establish health services , and the German Red Cross to supply shelter , safe water and basic household essentials .
ECHO deployed a team of two humanitarian aid experts who arrived in Chile on the morning of Monday , 1 March to carry out needs assessments and to meet with the authorities and potential implementing partners .
Two more members of the team arrived the following day and they were joined by a fifth some days later .
An EU civil protection mechanism , a team of six experts , is also now in Chile .
Four are working in the earthquake zone near Concepción , while two are currently based in Santiago to liaise with authorities and coordinate the response of European Union Member States .
The ECHO humanitarian experts and the EU civil protection team are undertaking joint assessments with OCHA and several UN agencies in the most affected areas .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as has been said previously , the earthquake in Chile , which was more intense than the one suffered by the Haitians and which was also followed by a tsunami , was nonetheless much less deadly , thanks to an early warning system that worked , to populations that were better prepared for disasters and to a robust state that was able to react .
I welcome the rapid reaction of the European Commission and the Member States .
The European Commission 's Monitoring and Information Centre was activated immediately , an emergency humanitarian decision was adopted to allocate EUR 3 million to respond to the immediate needs , and experts from the DirectorateGeneral for Humanitarian Aid ( DG ECHO ) were deployed in the disaster areas to carry out a needs assessment .
I would like in particular to applaud the immediate public reaction of Commissioner Georgieva , who arrived in Santiago yesterday to visit the areas concerned .
Most natural disasters are unexpected events .
In order to preserve lives in areas vulnerable to natural disasters , it is vitally important to reduce the risks by being better prepared and having buildings that are fit for purpose .
It is also important to ensure that development cooperation incorporates disaster risk reduction , that is to say , preparation for disasters , the mitigation of their effects and , above all , their prevention .
Mr President , first of all , on behalf of the delegation within the EU-Chile Joint Parliamentary Committee , I would like to express our solidarity with the Chilean people , Parliament and Government following the disastrous earthquake that occurred on 27 February and the more than two hundred aftershocks that have taken place so far .
At least 500 people , including two Europeans , have been killed and 2 million Chileans have been affected by the earthquakes .
The Mapuche people have been the worst affected , for their lands lie in three of the four southern regions of the country .
I would also like to express our gratitude to all the people who have worked selflessly and to all the professionals who assisted the victims .
The Chilean people have shown themselves to be capable of meeting the challenges of a very complex situation .
I would like to congratulate President Bachelet for the immediate relief effort her Government launched in order to contain the situation caused by the terrible earthquake that has destroyed housing and infrastructure .
The Chilean Government acted quickly and showed seriousness and responsibility in identifying the specific areas in which support was needed ; there has also been a show of solidarity from the international community , which is a testament to Chile 's excellent relations with its neighbours and strategic partners .
I also wish to congratulate Sebastián Piñera 's new Government which takes office today , and to encourage him in the reconstruction efforts for which I hope he will be able to count on the European Union 's full support .
Chile , as well as being a friend and partner of the European Union , is a developed country and member of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ; even so , the cost of the reconstruction effort will be considerable : it is estimated that this will be as high as USD 20 million , which represents 15 % of the Chilean GDP .
For this reason , I call on the European Union to make every tool available to the Chilean authorities in order to help with the task of reconstruction .
Chile is going to need international loans , and the European Investment Bank , with which Chile has just signed an agreement , should help with the financing of the reconstruction projects .
The European Union , under the Spanish Presidency , has established a mechanism for coordinating aid with the United Nations , and a post-disaster task force ; the European Commissioner for International Cooperation , Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Response is also expected to arrive on the ground in the next few days .
We hope that the Commission , without overlooking other equally urgent commitments such as the situation in Haiti , will also rise to meet the Chilean people 's expectations .
Mr President , we should use more than just words to show our solidarity with a country that has suffered a disaster , as Chile has , and we have heard this today from the Commission representative .
Chile has been a source of protection and asylum for us in the past .
For example , a large community of Basque people lives there , having emigrated to the area for economic reasons in the 19th century and for political reasons in the 20th century .

That is why , in this case , words should be backed up by actions , and I am satisfied by the swift action taken by the European Union , which immediately sent EUR 3 million in aid in order to fund operations ; I am also pleased by the reaction of the High Representative , Mrs Ashton , and I congratulate Commissioner Georgieva who acted swiftly and , as of yesterday , is in Chile providing encouragement and establishing what is needed on the ground there .
I am satisfied by the way in which the new European Commission Humanitarian Aid civil protection system is operating , by the help provided by the European institutions , and by the collaboration that has been established through the different agencies .
At times like these Europe has had , and continues to have , an opportunity to consolidate its leading role on the international stage , working directly with those affected and helping to coordinate the aid that is being organised from the Member States and from the regions .
I would like to highlight President Bachelet 's actions , for she has demonstrated once again how politics should be conducted , displaying great humanity and working closely with Mr Piñera , who takes over as President today ; I also wish to congratulate him for the exemplary way in which he has put politics to one side in order to rise to the challenge as his country needs .

On behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I should like to express my solidarity , my support for all the operations being carried out , and my condolences to the families of the 528 people killed and all those missing , and to the people who have been left homeless .
We recently visited the area on a pre-election observation mission for the delegation within the EU-Chile Joint Parliamentary Committee .
We had an opportunity to observe the projects developing there and we saw that Chile is a model for economic and social development in the Southern Cone region .
We need to ensure that this earthquake does not interrupt that progress towards economic and social development .
Mr President , I would like to begin by echoing what has been said by Mrs Muñiz and Mrs Bilbao , because I believe the first thing we need to do is show the European Union 's solidarity with the Chilean people and Chilean institutions , which are very well represented by President Bachelet and President-elect Piñera .
Secondly , I think it is also important to remember that , as is usually the case in these situations , natural disasters are indiscriminate and entirely oblivious to people 's wealth or poverty : they punish everyone equally .
However , it is also clear that the poor suffer the most , and it is particularly difficult to rebuild poor areas .
I therefore think it is important to consider not only the recovery and reconstruction measures needed after a disaster has occurred , but also , in many cases , to re-examine certain structural elements , and my question relates to that point .
If I may , Commissioner , I would like to ask about a very specific matter relating to the Country Strategy Paper that the European Union has with Chile .
Of the EUR 41 million earmarked for the 2007-2013 period , how much is going to be used specifically to strengthen infrastructure such as roads and transport ?
How much is going to be used to improve housing construction in order to ensure that , in the event of potential , unwelcome disasters in the future , people are better prepared for this kind of situation ?
Finally , what proportion of these resources has already been set aside for these purposes ?
The earthquake in Chile has claimed several hundred victims , and over one and a half million people have lost their homes .
Let us , however , show solidarity with Chile , today , and remember that the people there are still suffering from a lack of hygiene supplies and a lack of access to drinking water , as well as a lack of food , medicines and blankets .
In addition , the people are being harassed by criminal groups , who are plundering abandoned shops and houses .
We , as the European Union , must do all we can to prevent people who have lost all their belongings , and in many cases members of their family , from falling victim to thieves who prey on their suffering .
It is good that we have decided to send EUR 3 million for the most immediate needs .
We should , however , remember that there are still places in Chile which have not been reached by aid , because of the damage sustained to roads and bridges .
The recent events in Chile and Haiti demonstrate that , as well as financial aid from the European Union , the mechanisms of giving aid to countries hit by disasters still need improvement .
Solidarity with Chile is a very beautiful thing , and it is good that the European Union is showing that solidarity .
Let us remember , however , not to stop at just solidarity , but to support Chile in the future , too .
Mr President , I wish you a speedy recovery .
First of all I would like to express my solidarity with all those who have been affected by this natural disaster .
Unfortunately , tragedies continue to happen because of large earthquakes .
In situations like these , with widespread destruction of buildings and infrastructure , and with thousands killed , it is important to constantly improve coordination of civil protection and emergency authorities to avoid overlapping of efforts and wasted resources .
The European Union intervened promptly in Chile but it needs to collaborate with local authorities to identify needs and to coordinate aid effectively .
This morning 's press carried the news that half of the aid provided by the United Nations to Somalia has been stolen by local partners , by some UN officials and by Islamic militants .
One aspect to consider , then , is transparency in the collection of public and private donations and the effectiveness of distribution of aid provided to populations .
Generosity must not be betrayed and a strict system of controls needs to be put in place to prevent money being squandered or stolen , particularly when aid is sent to very distant countries whose institutions may be weakened by crises .
Mr President , our people will be heartened to hear that there has been positive action in helping the people of Chile .
We have all been moved by their plight .
However , today I want to address my remarks to more general issues around the humanitarian aid strategy .
The European Commission is very proud to declare itself to be one of the world 's largest donors of humanitarian aid .
Its mandate , it declares , is to save and preserve life , to find sanctuary for the displaced and to help the world ensure preparedness for natural disasters .
These are truly worthy aspirations .
However , it is not the Commission 's money that is being donated .
It is British , German , French - it is in fact money from 27 nation states .
In a time of economic crisis every single one of these nations should be recognised for their worthy efforts .
Perhaps in their documents the Commission should reflect this and acknowledge the efforts of those who actually do make the sacrifices .
It is not the political elite and apparatchiks of the Berlemont , but ordinary people from ordinary communities .
Whilst it is true that developing countries need aid , it is also true that they need our support in establishing and maintaining credible democratic structures .
They need our help in building a strong and unfettered civic society .
They also need our help - and , most importantly , our honesty - in pointing out the wrongdoing from political regimes that ensures that ordinary people continue to live in poverty and in need .
( EL ) Mr President , the recent huge , catastrophic earthquake in Chile , shortly after the disaster in Haiti , cost the lives of hundreds of people and caused massive damage to the structures of the country , especially in the area of Concepción .
We need to stand by the victims and their families and make a frank declaration of solidarity .
We need to stand by a country with which we have close and friendly ties and which is one of the strongest economies in the region and a development benchmark for neighbouring countries .
This has been established within the framework of the Joint Parliamentary Committee .
I would remind you that the European Union and Chile signed an association agreement which entered into force in 2005 and which provides for political and economic cooperation and joint action on a global scale .
In addition , as already stated , the European Commission has adopted a six-year strategic development plan for Chile for 2007-2013 , which makes provision for the take-up of Community resources by this Latin American country for regional and sectoral programmes being undertaken by the country 's recently-elected government .
The immediate announcement of financial support and all the other things the Commission has mentioned today are encouraging .
However , I want to emphasise that we need to facilitate the release of the resources earmarked under the aforementioned EU-Chile strategic framework as quickly as possible , so that the consequences of this recent earthquake on the country 's infrastructure and for the further development of the country can be addressed promptly .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to begin by expressing my solidarity with the Chilean people , and that solidarity has also been expressed to the people of Haiti , Turkey and Peru , who have also suffered recent natural disasters .
Solidarity is one of the European Union 's distinctive hallmarks , and we have to strengthen that solidarity with regard to the future .
Fortunately , Chile is a country with a far-reaching capacity to respond in such times of natural disaster ; however , large areas of the world do not have that same capacity .
I would therefore like to mention the European strategy for humanitarian aid .
Our response could be even more efficient ; it could be faster and more effective , as long as we are moving in the right direction .
Which is the right direction ?
Firstly , in my view we need greater coordination between Member States , their respective humanitarian agencies and the institutions of the European Union .
Secondly , we need better coordination between the European Union and international humanitarian aid organisations , especially the United Nations .
Thirdly , we need greater coordination between military and humanitarian actors .
We have to maintain the safety of the civilian population and humanitarian groups while upholding the independence , neutrality and impartiality of humanitarian aid and respect for international law .
As far as the European Union is concerned , in order for humanitarian aid and crisis response to be a fundamental component of our external action , we need more human and financial resources .
We can take advantage of the Barnier report in order to establish a European volunteer corps and I would add , given that Commissioner Piebalgs is here , in order to strengthen and better coordinate the link between humanitarian aid and reconstruction and development policies .

Mr President , I agree with everything that Mr Guerrero Salom has said in relation to our response .
I have to say that I was initially shocked when I heard that what the European Union - Baroness Ashton - was going to donate was something in the region of EUR 3 million .
EUR 3 million is nothing in terms of the consequences and the fallout and the devastation caused .
Last time we were here - four weeks ago - we were discussing Haiti .
This morning we are discussing the Xynthia storm in Europe , and we are also discussing the fallout from the Chilean earthquake disaster , which happened just over two weeks ago .
Then you had the aftershock of 6.6 , which in itself was absolutely devastating .
The fallout is there .
The consequences are there .
The statistics are there .
We are talking about 500 000 - half a million - houses destroyed .
These have to be rebuilt , and that is where we come in with practical help .
There are approximately 540 people dead , and the dead are still being exhumed from the ruins .
That is a natural disaster in itself .
But we are talking about an overall bill of EUR 22 billion .
We really need to up our particular contribution in that regard .
One of the selling points in relation to the Lisbon Treaty - and we know that in Ireland we rejected Lisbon I - was that we were going to have an immediate humanitarian response to natural disasters .
I have to say that whether it be Haiti , southern Europe or from the point of view of the situation in Chile , we have not responded .
I know it is early days , but we really need to get our act together .
What we need above all else is practical help : ( a ) money , ( b ) clean water , ( c ) restore the electricity supply and ( d ) get the economy up and running as quickly as possible .
( ES ) Mr President , yesterday I spoke to Senator Pizarro , who became President of the Senate of Chile a few hours ago .
Today Mr Pizarro will present President Piñera with the presidential band .
I hope that President Piñera will undertake the reconstruction task efficiently and I would like to congratulate President Bachelet on her management of this crisis .
Mr President , may I express my solidarity and brotherly affection to the people of Chile after the terrible earthquakes and tsunami they experienced in Concepción , Biobío , Temuco and Valparaíso .
I am certain that the heroic people of Chile will be able to overcome this catastrophic situation , as they have done before .
May I reiterate once again my affection and deepest solidarity with Chile .
( DE ) Mr President , given the devastating consequences of the 8.8 magnitude earthquake in Chile , you have to concede to the mayor of Concepción that 24 hours is an eternity for anyone lying buried under rubble .
Even though the authorities and the rescue services in this Latin American country are undoubtedly well set up for possible earthquakes , the help for the more than 2 million people affected did not get to all parts of the affected area early enough because of logistical problems .
Troops who were already late in getting there were swamped by the chaos .
The population was forced to flee to its rooftops and set up roadblocks not only out of fear of aftershocks but also out of fear of criminals .
Chile may be prosperous enough to care for those affected by the earthquake by itself , but , thank goodness , it swallowed its pride and asked for help , including from the EU .
There will be lessons that we , too , must learn from this , however , namely that in emergencies the veneer of civilisation soon peels and that 24 hours can be too long .
In this spirit , emergency plans and the coordination of assistance efforts for emergencies should be made more effective , including within the EU .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , we were all shocked by the scale of the natural and human catastrophe .
Through the rapid mobilisation of ECHO 's emergency response system and the EU civil protection mechanism , we were able to offer coordinated and practical help soon after the earthquake struck .
As I have already mentioned , the assistance deployed or offered by a number of EU Member States was also important .
In addition to the humanitarian and other actions I have described , it is worth mentioning that on Tuesday in Luxembourg the European Investment Bank and Chile - this was mentioned by an honourable Member - signed a framework agreement to enable the bank to operate in Chile .
This development highlights the excellent state of relations between the European Union and Chile and our shared commitment to continuing to expand and deepen our partnership .
It is also extremely well-timed because the EIB can be an additional tool for the European Union to work with Chile in the medium- to long-term reconstruction efforts that are already getting under way .
Regarding the concrete question of the country strategy for Chile and the committed EUR 41 million .
EUR 25 million was spent in the first tranche ; EUR 15.6 million remains for the second .
Normally this should be divided 50 % for social cohesion , 50 % for innovation and competition .
We have offered to switch this to reconstruction under review .
No requests yet from the Chilean authorities , but of course it could be directed under both headlines to reconstruction .
The Chilean authorities have not yet made any specific requests for the European Union to help with reconstruction .
As I mentioned , President Piñera takes office today .
He will surely give top priority to assessing and quantifying the damage and planning the massive effort that will be needed .
The Commission stands ready to consider any request that may be forthcoming .
As I mentioned earlier , the fact that the European Investment Bank will now be able to operate in Chile adds an additional instrument to choose from among those which are already at our disposal .
It is also worth recalling what was mentioned too by some of you , that Chile is a good example of development .
It is actually a net creditor , unlike most Latin American countries .
The outgoing Finance Minister last Friday highlighted the fact that , unlike during other tragedies that have befallen the Chilean people , this time they and the Chilean state have their own resources as well .
So , to conclude , the European Union - the people , regions and countries of the Union - is standing shoulder to shoulder with Chile in the face of this disaster , and that is how it should be in a civilised and human world .
The debate is closed .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( PT ) After Haiti 's earthquake , we are confronted again with a terrible catastrophe , with 800 confirmed victims and damage totalling to approximately 15 % of Chile 's GDP .
According to the Chilean President , Mrs Bachelet , 80 % of the population was affected and the country 's infrastructure has been seriously damaged .
Once more , the EU has assumed its responsibilities as a privileged trading partner of that country , of which it is the primary trading partner and the primary market for Chilean exports .
The response from the EU was to provide EUR 3 million in emergency aid , while European civil protection experts are on the ground assessing the most immediate needs .
The natural catastrophes which have been blighting the world , such as the earthquakes and deadly storms that we have recently witnessed in the EU , make us rethink the paradigm of humanitarian aid and of emergencies , which require a swift , agile and concerted answer .
The EU has demonstrated effectiveness and the ability to react .
Parliament , as well as giving its heartfelt condolences to Chile , is also demonstrating through this debate its commitment to helping to rebuild the country , which was so severely damaged by the earthquake of 27 February .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , before proceeding to the vote , I would like to make a brief announcement , because today we commemorate the sixth European Day for the Victims of Terrorism .
Today we pay tribute to the more than 5 000 victims in Europe and we express our solidarity with the countless people wounded , who have suffered the barbarity of terrorism .
The bomb attacks carried out in Madrid six years ago , on 11 March 2004 , which killed 191 people from 17 countries , and the bombs detonated in London on 7 July 2005 can be counted among the worst acts of terrorism ever perpetrated on European soil .
Terrorism is an attack against us all : it attacks the very fabric of our democratic society .
That is why Europe will always be united in the fight against terrorism , be it separatist , religious or political .
Terrorism can never be justified , in any way and for any reason .
This European day gives us the opportunity to show that no terrorist or act of terrorism will ever be able to break or destroy our faith in key values , those of fundamental human rights and democracy .
( Applause )
Calendar of part-sessions : see Minutes
1 .
Cuba (
2 .
Investing in Low-Carbon Technologies ( vote )
3 .
Major natural disaster in the autonomous region of Madeira and effects of the Xynthia strom in Europe (
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
( FR ) Mr President , I would ask you to wait a little while longer because many Members are still stuck in the lifts .
Someone had the extraordinary idea of repairing the lifts during the one week of the month in which we are in Strasbourg , when it could be done in the other three .
Mr Goebbels , it is already after 12.00 .
We have already been waiting for five minutes .
I think that we can proceed to the vote .
( Applause )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
- ( SK ) According to government archives and available literature , the Communist regime in Slovakia sentenced 71 168 people in the years 1948 - 1989 for alleged political crimes .
There is no better way to honour the memory of those political prisoners and prisoners of conscience than to work actively to promote the expansion of freedom and democracy where it is deemed an unattainable luxury .
The European Union 's appeals have so far been met with no response .
However , I am deeply concerned about the situation of political prisoners in Cuba and I therefore urge the Council and the Commission to take effective measures necessary for the release of political prisoners and to support and ensure their work as protectors of human rights .
To the citizens of Cuba ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Mr President , I endorsed adoption of the motion for a resolution on Cuba .
Frankly speaking , I do not understand why Fidel Castro 's European friends are so doggedly defending the idea of a bankrupt and demoralised revolution .
Does it have to be the case that only the fatal victims of what considers itself to be a progressive regime will make people aware of the need for change in Cuba ?
Sometimes individual sacrifices contribute to historic changes .
I hope this will also be the case this time .
At the same time , I would not like there to be more victims caused by the dogmatism of the authorities or their inability to analyse their own position and change .
Neither can I accept the fact that many of the ACP countries take an entirely uncritical view of the character and significance of the social and political system which has been built in Cuba .
I am profoundly convinced that this is an erroneous understanding of solidarity .
It would be more honest to acknowledge what has been achieved in Cuba , but at the same time to condemn that which has not been a success and is anti-social , inhuman and destructive .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to speak on behalf of Mrs Muñiz to explain why the Spanish delegation within the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament has voted against Amendment 2 tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , even though the amendment requested that the Spanish Presidency be supported in its dealings with Cuba .
Firstly , may I bring to mind the fact that we cannot support amendments tabled by a group that has sought to distance itself from the resolution as a whole , and that our commitment to all the political groups who have signed the resolution would not allow us to support a partial amendment of the document .
Secondly , Amendment 2 tabled by the GUE / NGL Group is not in line with the position taken by the Spanish Presidency , which is looking to establish a consensus in the European Union in order to renew our framework for relations with Cuba , but not for a complete break with the Common Position , which is what the amendment was calling for .
That is our reason for rejecting the amendment .

- ( CS ) It was an honour for me today to support the resolution on prisoners of conscience in Cuba , not only as a Member from a former totalitarian communist state , but also because I have personally met Cuban dissidents in the past , in particular the physician Dr Darsí Ferrer , who has been imprisoned with others since July last year .
Following my return I informed Parliament about the sad situation in the health sector and I would like to emphasise again that people who are not Communist Party members and who do not have dollars , have no access to medicines .
Dr Darsí Ferrer was a significant personality in Havana , who was helping dissidents to obtain medicines .
Now he is behind bars .
I am delighted that we have adopted this resolution , which is a very strong resolution , and which also clearly challenges European authorities to continue their efforts for democratic change in Cuba .
- Mr President , who would have thought 20 years ago , when the air of Europe was thick with the brick dust of falling walls and with cries of freedom , that the red flag would still today be flying over Havana and that Fidel Castro would be dying peacefully in bed on that sultry Caribbean island .
Sola mors tyrannicida est , says my countryman , Sir Thomas More : death is the only way to get rid of tyrants .
Two things have kept the Communist regime in place in Cuba .
First , the wrong-headed American blockade , which has allowed Castro and his regime to blame all the privations of their countrymen on foreign imperialism rather than on the economic mismanagement of Communism ; and secondly the indulgence of some in Europe , including some in this House , who have a disgusting double standard whereby they excuse human rights abuses and the denial of democracy in Cuba on the grounds that it is good at producing doctors and ballerinas .
I hope that this House will grow up and that some in this House will see beyond their days as students wearing Che Guevara T-shirts .
The time has come for constructive engagement with the democratic forces in Cuba .
History will absolve us .
- ( NL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the Cuba resolution because it is , on the whole , fairly critical of the totalitarian regime in Havana .
At the same time , I would like to use this opportunity to call on the Council to bring to an end its attempts at normalising its relations with Cuba while we are still dealing with a communist dictatorship which violates human rights in a flagrant manner .
I would also urge the new High Representative not to follow the line taken by the Commission in previous legislation .
Here I refer , for example , to Mr Louis Michel , who has visited Cuba on repeated occasions without levelling any criticism whatsoever at the state of human rights and democracy there .
It is totally unacceptable for the European Union to curry favour with the communist regime in Cuba .
( PL ) Mr President , in endorsing the motion for a resolution , I wanted to express support for investment in the development of low-emission technologies .
The SET Plan can be effective and credible only if it is properly financed , and this includes finance from private sources .
Arguments in favour of the necessity of such measures are , principally , the current economic situation in which Europe finds itself , dangerous climate changes and threats to energy security .
Thanks to the latest research and technologies , an opportunity to overcome the crisis has arisen , which at the same time supports measures related to climate change .
It is also an opportunity for European agriculture , a way to create new jobs in rural areas in the non-agricultural sector , especially in the area of creating sources of renewable energy .
( CS ) I too have voted for the motion for a resolution on investment in the development of low-carbon technologies ( the SET-Plan ) , because in my opinion it is a key instrument for transforming the Union into an innovatory economy , capable of fulfilling demanding objectives .
In this regard I consider it essential that the Commission , in close cooperation with the European Investment Bank , submits an overall proposal on an instrument for investing in energy from renewable sources , energy-efficiency projects and the development of intelligent networks no later than 2011 .
Hand in hand with this there should be a strengthening of the role of the European Investment Bank in financing projects in the area of energy , and especially projects with higher levels of risk .
I categorically reject the exploitation of the topic of low-carbon technologies for below-the-belt attacks on nuclear energy in the presentations of Members from the left side of the political spectrum .
I maintain that nuclear energy is a clean energy which contributes to sustainable development .
( PL ) I could not support the resolution , although it is extremely important for the European economy .
It should be noted that the resolution provides for a huge concentration of money only in certain areas , only in certain branches of the energy industry - the ' green ' areas .
This clashes with the notion of energy solidarity with countries which rely mainly on coal .
Poland 's energy needs are based on coal , so a smooth transition to a green economy is extremely important for us .
As a result of such measures in Poland , instead of creating jobs we would have to close them .
During a crisis this is extremely difficult , and would be harmful to Poland .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 27 and 28 February storm Xynthia assailed France .
Almost 60 people died , and hundreds of thousands of people sustained considerable damage .
The European Union must set an example in the face of this tragedy .
That is why I personally had a hand in drafting this resolution calling on the European Commission to be extremely responsive .
We expect it to provide financial aid to the disaster areas by means of the EU Solidarity Fund .
If , as a result of this tragedy , the regions of Poitou-Charentes , Charente-Maritime , Pays de la Loire and Brittany request a change to their allocation of expenditure cofinanced by the European Regional Development Fund and the European Social Fund , the European Commission will have to examine these requests extremely favourably and very quickly .
Leaving this resolution aside , I , like my colleagues from the Union for a Presidential Majority , am convinced that it is time to create a true European civil protection force .
It alone will be able to provide vital additional aid in the context of a disaster such as this .
Mr Kelly , although you have not registered to speak before the first explanation of vote , you may do so by way of exception .
Next time please remember to register .
- Mr President , I just want to say that I think it is time that we had a conclusive paper on nuclear energy to outline the progress and the safety measures that have been brought to bear on it and how that will transpose itself in future into research that will be undertaken so that citizens can make up their minds .
There is a lot of scepticism about it - a lot of doubt - and that needs to be clarified , which will take a lot of the difficulties out of this debate on low-carbon technology .
Finally if I may say , on this , the anniversary of the declaration of independence of Lithuania and Estonia , I congratulate those countries on 20 years of independence .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - While we recognise that Cuba is a Communist tyranny and while we want to see Cuba transformed to a peaceful democratic state , we do not recognise the EU in this process .
The resolution by the European Parliament , the pretext for which is the death of the Cuban prisoner Orlando Zapata Tamayo , who died following a hunger strike , despite the efforts of the Cuban health services to restore his health , is a provocative and unacceptable attack on the socialist government and people of Cuba and forms part of the anti-communist strategy being directed by the EU and led by the European Parliament in a bid to overturn the socialist regime .
We condemn the hypocrisy and provocative effort on the part of the centre right , centre left and Green representatives of capital in the European Parliament to exploit this event .
The Greek Communist Party condemns and voted against the European Parliament resolution .
It calls on the peoples to express their solidarity with the government and people of Cuba .
To call for the common position against Cuba to be revoked .
To condemn efforts by the EU to use human rights as a pretext for exerting imperialist pressure and coercion on the people of Cuba and its government .
To demand that the criminal US embargo against Cuba be lifted immediately .
To demand the immediate release of the 5 Cubans being held in US prisons .
To defend socialist Cuba .
The European Union is the most democratic structure in the world and the fundamental value on which it has been built has been respect for human rights .
This is why I find it laudable and encouraging that all the groups in Parliament have been united in their condemnation of the abuses committed by the Cuban authorities against human rights , not to mention the constructive approach , receptive to dialogue , which the EU has decided to adopt towards Cuba .
We are living in the 21st century and crimes of opinion and conscience should be erased from the values of every state in the world , no matter how long its history of totalitarianism and dictatorship might be .
Conducting international dialogue rather than imposing sanctions can be used to change attitudes so that anyone who disagrees with their own authorities will not suffer abuses and injustices typical of regimes which lack respect for human beings .
Tragedies such as the one which has befallen Cuban dissident Orlando Zapata Tamayo , ' guilty ' of a crime of conscience , must never be repeated .
There are now other political prisoners too in Cuba who are in danger .
As a guarantor of respect for human rights , the EU must get involved and take prompt action diplomatically so that the Zapata tragedy will never be repeated in Cuba , or anywhere else in the world for that matter .
in writing . - I condemn unreservedly the ill-treatment of people in Cuba ( or anywhere else ) .
However , I abstained in the resolution , as a whole , against Cuba .
One reason was that the resolution purported to give authority to the European Union and its functionaries to speak and act on behalf of Member States .
The other reason was that many Member States of the European Union prosecute and imprison people for exercising non-violent freedom of expression , the holding of heretical opinions or taking part in dissenting activity .
It is utterly hypocritical for parties that favour political repression in Europe to point the finger at states such as Cuba that share their repressive and anti-democratic opinions and activities .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the situation of political prisoners and prisoners of conscience in Cuba .
We reiterate the need for the immediate release of all political prisoners and prisoners of conscience .
We believe that the detention of Cuban dissidents due to their ideals and to their peaceful political activity constitutes a violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats share the opinion presented in the amendment that the blockade against Cuba should be lifted .
However , we do not believe that the statement belongs in this motion for a resolution , as it concerns prisoners of conscience .
in writing . - ( PT ) Orlando Zapata Tamayo died of starvation because he demanded to be treated as what he was : a political prisoner persecuted by a regime that , despite the changes in leadership , continues to rule over its citizens with an iron fist and prohibits them from associating or freely expressing themselves .
The tragic circumstances of this death should put us all to shame .
Especially the political decision makers who , following the lead of Mr Zapatero and Ambassador Moratinos , have changed European policy towards Cuba .
All the European Union has achieved with its tentative attempt at appeasement has been to increase the feeling of impunity , whilst making the democrats - who deserved much more from us - feel more isolated .
I hope for a return to the firm democratic policy that has only recently softened .
I want the European Union to finally acknowledge that this change of policy has been a complete failure .
I also want Oswaldo Payá and the Ladies in White to be able to travel to Europe freely to reveal the circumstances surrounding the events that have been taking place in Cuba .
We voted against this resolution due to the political exploitation by the majority in Parliament of the death of Zapata Tamayo , following a hunger strike in a Cuban prison , despite having received medical treatment .
They want to thwart the intentions publicly expressed by the Spanish Presidency to end the common position on Cuba .
Once again they are attacking Cuba and its people , by seeking to meddle in its independence and sovereignty , its economic and social successes and its exemplary internationalist solidarity .
Capitalism is not the future of humanity .
Cuba continues to be an example that it is possible to construct a society without exploiters or exploited , a socialist society .
The representatives of capitalism in the European Parliament do not accept that fact .
They try to prevent a comprehensive political dialogue with the Cuban Government on the basis of the same criteria that the EU applies to all countries with which it has relations .
They do not condemn the US embargo on Cuba , the immediate lifting of which has been sought on 18 occasions by the General Assembly of the United Nations .
They say nothing about the situation of five Cuban citizens jailed in the United States since 1998 , without a fair trial , and they ignore that the US continues to shelter a Cuban citizen who was the instigator of the bomb attack against an airliner in which 76 people perished .
in writing . - ( PL ) In the vote , today , I endorsed the resolution on the situation of political prisoners and prisoners of conscience in Cuba .
As the European Parliament , we must unequivocally condemn the practices of the regime in Havana and speak up for the rights of independent journalists , peaceful dissidents and human rights defenders .
In the resolution which has been adopted we have expressed profound solidarity with all Cubans and have endorsed their efforts at achieving democracy as well as respect for and protection of fundamental rights .
I come from a country in which a popular movement arose in opposition to the Communist regime - the Solidarity movement .
Although Poland and other countries in Central and Eastern Europe , which today belong to the European Union , have now put their painful experiences of Communist regimes behind them , all the more we cannot forget those who are imprisoned and persecuted because they so much want democracy , liberty and freedom of speech .
The EU cannot have a romantic vision of the political regime in Cuba , which is a genuine communist dictatorship , based on the logic of a single party that violates human rights , oppresses its citizens , persecutes and eliminates political adversaries and imprisons countless people simply for the offence of having an opinion .
The death of Orlando Zapata was just one more case to shock the world that the European Parliament must condemn firmly , without hesitation and false justifications .
That is why I reject the attempts of some members of the far left to dress up this appalling crime in political terms , which are only intended to legitimise a regime that is neither tolerable nor acceptable .
I voted against Resolution on Cuba because I believe it constitutes an act of interference that violates international law .
With my vote I have expressed my condemnation of this exercise in political manipulation whose only aim is to express disapproval of the Government of Cuba .
The Members who voted in favour of this text are those who time and again refused to table a resolution in this Parliament condemning the coup that took place in Honduras .
This resolution urges the European Union to show unreserved support for the change of political regime in the Republic of Cuba and also proposes the use of European cooperation mechanisms in order to achieve that aim , which constitutes an unacceptable act of interference that contravenes international law .
For more than 50 years , the United States of America has maintained an economic , commercial and financial embargo against Cuba , in flagrant violation of international law and with severe repercussions for the economy and living conditions of Cubans .
In spite of that , the Cuban Government has continued to guarantee its citizens universal access to healthcare and education .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on Cuba , as it is important for the EU , too , to clearly express the idea that there is an urgent need for democratisation in the country , which is still under Communist rule .
The incarceration of dissidents and political opponents is a typical feature of Communist States , but it is excessively practised in Cuba .
The fact that the authorities are not even permitting the family of a prisoner who has died as a result of a hunger strike to organise a burial is a particular scandal .
It is to be hoped that a change of political system on the island will be achieved as soon as possible .
Irrespective of that , however , it is important for the EU and also the United States to apply the same standards everywhere .
It is unacceptable for the US to grant Cubans who are embroiled in bomb attacks ' political asylum ' .
You can only express effective criticism if you yourself meet the criteria set .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on Cuba because , as I said in the debate yesterday , regardless of our respective positions with regard to Cuba , the death of Orlando Zapata Tamayo is a regrettable occurrence in itself .
I also insist that we need to demand the freedom of all the political prisoners and prisoners of conscience , in Cuba and the rest of the world , but I nevertheless advise against taking action that has already proved to be a failure for Cuba 's progression towards democracy and liberalisation , such as the embargo and the blockade .
It is clear that changes are urgently needed on the island , and the European Union should monitor these so that the transition to democracy will benefit the Cuban people .
in writing . - ( SV ) The USA has had a trade embargo against Cuba for 48 years .
The embargo affects the Cuban population and is a constant and recurring excuse for the shortcomings of the Castro regime .
Everything is said to be the fault of the American embargo and , as a result , the people of Cuba cannot lay the blame clearly at the door of the Communist regime and distance themselves from it .
The democratic opposition in Cuba wants the embargo to be lifted .
On 29 October 2009 , 187 of the UN member states voted to lift the embargo .
Three voted for it to remain in place and two abstained .
None of the EU Member States voted in favour of keeping the embargo .
In the past the European Parliament has condemned the embargo against Cuba and called for it to be ended immediately , in line with the demands made by the UN General Assembly on numerous occasions .
( P5 _ TA ( 2003 ) 0374 ) The European Parliament has also stated that the embargo defeats its own object .
( P6 _ TA ( 2004 ) 0061 ) The current resolution refers to the situation of political prisoners and prisoners of conscience in Cuba .
During the debate before the vote , I tabled a proposal that Cuba should be presented with an ultimatum .
The embargo will be lifted and within six months all prisoners of conscience must be released and reforms must be introduced .
If the regime does not comply with these terms , the USA , the EU and Canada will bring in new and more intelligent sanctions which are aimed at the Cuban leadership , such as a ban on travelling to the country and a freeze on Cuban assets and on foreign investment .
The EU has undertaken to cut greenhouse gas emissions by 20 % , to reduce energy consumption by 20 % and to generate at least 20 % of the energy consumed from renewable sources by 2020 .
Furthermore , the EU is aiming to set an example globally in saving resources and protecting the environment .
These ambitious targets can only be achieved if the EU as a whole and each of the Member States individually make clear commitments to deadlines .
Investments in low carbon energy technologies are key to meeting the targets proposed for 2020 , which is not as far away as it seems .
Attaining these targets requires a considerable financial effort : EUR 58 billion , according to some meticulous calculations , from both public and private sources .
However , this financial , logistical and administrative effort will turn the EU into a global leader in innovation and will have a positive impact on its economy by creating jobs and opening up new prospects in the field of research , which has been unjustly underfunded for decades .
The investments in developing low carbon energy sources will yield results in the medium and long term , making a positive impact across the whole European Union .
It is vital to insist on a radical change in society based on the sustainability of cities , decentralised energy production and industrial competitiveness .
This is an essential policy for a prosperous and sustainable society that is prepared for the challenges of climate change , secure energy supply and globalisation , with global leadership in the area of clean technologies .
The SET Plan intends to contribute specifically to the development of clean technologies .
I welcome the fundamental guidelines that the communication presents on how to organise the logic of intervention between the public and private sectors and between Community , national and regional financing .
However , it is essential to increase public funding of scientific research in the area of clean technologies .
Europe still has to create conditions for there to be more private investment in scientific research , in technological development and demonstration in the energy field .
It is vital to move beyond words to action .
The next EU financial perspective and the 8th Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development should prioritise energy security , the fight against climate change and the environment .
Only in this way will it be possible to maintain the competitiveness of our industry , promote economic growth and job creation .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on investment in the development of low carbon technologies ( SET Plan ) , because , in order to effectively tackle the economic crisis , investing in those new technologies that have the greatest potential for job creation should be a priority .
I believe that these investments could create new opportunities for the development of the EU 's economy and competitiveness .
The SET Plan presented by the Commission proposes investment in R & D to develop efficient and sustainable clean energy technologies with low carbon emissions , making it possible to ensure the necessary reduction of emissions without jeopardising European industries , thus making a commitment , which we believe to be serious , to sustainable development .
New energy policies , particularly within the context of the general crisis , must not lose sight of economic efficiency and must not , in any way , jeopardise the economic sustainability of European nations , without this meaning poorer environmental performance .
For this reason I urge a new approach on energy policy , one that is based on clean energy , more efficient use of the natural resources at our disposal and heavy investment in research and more environmentally-friendly technologies so that we can maintain European competitiveness and allow job creation within a framework of an innovative and sustainable economy .
I welcome the objectives of the SET Plan ( Strategic Energy Technology Plan ) , which insist on the development of a low-carbon society .
The SET Plan seeks to accelerate the development and roll-out of low-carbon technologies .
This plan includes measures relating to planning , implementation , resources and international cooperation in the area of innovative technologies in the energy sector .
Several studies estimate that promoting the European target of 20 % renewable energy penetration will result in millions of new jobs by 2020 .
Furthermore , roughly two thirds of these jobs will be created in small and medium-sized enterprises .
The solution requires the development of green technologies .
Therefore , we need more funding for the SET Plan , which I advocate should be provided in the next review of the financial perspective .
We also need to promote green technologies and skilled labour through investment in education and research .
The sooner we begin to achieve a low-carbon society , the sooner we will emerge from the crisis .
The development and implementation of low-carbon technologies is extremely important not only for environmental reasons - which include the need to reduce atmospheric emissions of carbon dioxide - but also for energy reasons , considering the inevitable gradual shortage and eventual depletion of fossil fuel reserves , on which humanity is highly dependent .
Unfortunately , both the SET Plan and the resolution just adopted , do not just offer an incomplete approach to the problem - both in terms of the technologies and energy sources to be considered , and of the necessity to reduce consumption - but , above all , they still consider this investment as another good business opportunity ( in which some , a select few , will earn a great deal , to the detriment of many ) rather than an environmental and energetic imperative to safeguard the common good of humanity .
It is significant and revealing that in the vote on the amendments to the resolution , instead of promoting ' ambitious reduction targets ' of atmospheric carbon dioxide emissions , the choice was made ' to promote world-wide carbon emission trading ' .
The use of low-carbon technologies which naturally produce less carbon dioxide is positive and desirable .
However , we cannot accept that , at the expense of technological development and strengthening of the so-called SET Plan , yet another excuse is being sought to weaken national energy policies .
Reading the words of the Commission that ' the SET Plan is the technology pillar of the EU 's energy and climate policy ' , leaves no doubt as to the real intentions of the European Commission to weaken the sovereignty of Member States in such an important area as national energy strategies .
The motion for a resolution contains aspects , in more detail , with which we cannot agree , particularly the promotion of ' world-wide carbon emission trading ' , given that this solution has already shown not to offer advantages in reducing carbon emissions , as well as the creation of more public-private partnerships , emphasising a ' substantive increase in the portion of public investment ' , thus using public money to serve private interests and profit .
Our group therefore voted against .
in writing . - Mr President , Sustainable and effective low-carbon technologies are the core essentials in the huge task of decarbonisation we in the EU , and globally , are facing .
It is due to this fact that I welcomed the rapid process in which Parliament drafted a resolution on the topic , giving a clear indication to the commission and the council that the SET Plan is timely and important .
If we are serious with our mission , it is evident that we need all forms of low-carbon technologies , including sustainable nuclear power .
Therefore I am happy that we managed to delete the wording on recital i , which is yet another attempt to put nuclear in a light it nowadays does not deserve .
This recital may have had negative implications on the concept of ' sustainable low-carbon technologies ' suggesting that nuclear is not part of that .
The fact however is that we in the EU cannot afford not to use it if we want to take climate change seriously .
Until renewable energies really can deliver effective results and secure constant energy flow , it is such low-carbon technologies which we must rely on .
Investment in low-carbon technologies must be a priority , since it is one of the most effective ways to tackle climate change , preparing the EU for a green economy .
Intelligent low-carbon solutions should therefore receive special attention , not least with regard to their Community funding , to achieve the environmental targets set by the EU for 2020 .
in writing . - ( DE ) I abstained from the vote on the motion for a resolution on ' Investing in Low-Carbon Technologies ' as , although it contained a number of reasonable approaches , it supports the further development of nuclear energy , which is something that I reject due to the major risks associated with it .
The motion for a resolution rightly points out that research has had too little funding hitherto .
However , so that Europe remains competitive in respect of other global players , the funding of research projects must be massively expanded , especially in the field of the new energy sources .
The development of new , low-carbon technologies in the energy sector will , I hope , not only safeguard the existing jobs in this field but will also create many additional highly qualified jobs .
However , I believe that , in this respect , the investment should be made in the fields of solar energy and carbon capture and storage .
Given the potential for grave consequences , the investments in nuclear energy must be re-thought and redeployed .
This new policy direction in energy issues will also improve the security of energy supplies within the EU and institute a more robust independence from foreign suppliers .
in writing . - ( ES ) Like the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I have voted against the motion for a resolution on investing in the development of low-carbon technologies ( SET Plan ) for a number of reasons ; in particular , because the amendment requesting the deletion of recital I - which was key for us - was accepted ; in that paragraph it was suggested that the sixth European Industrial Initiative on ' Sustainable Nuclear Energy ' should be renamed simply ' Nuclear Energy ' .
We consider that the concept of ' sustainable nuclear energy ' is meaningless because , in the best of cases , it is possible to reduce the threat to the environment and to people 's health , and the risks of proliferation that stem from the development and use of nuclear energy , but not eliminate them .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , to express my grief for the victims and my solidarity with their families and friends in both natural catastrophes . These severely affected several Member States and regions .
I would therefore state that it is imperative for Europe to make a prompt response to these events , namely activation of the European Solidarity Fund , thus showing the EU 's solidarity with all those affected .
At this time it is important to have special consideration for the island and outermost regions which , in addition to their permanent obstacles , are now confronted with devastated infrastructure and personal , commercial and agricultural property , and , in many cases , not being able to resume normal activities immediately , particularly in the regions that depend almost exclusively on tourism , as the media portrayal of the events could deter potential visitors .
It is therefore necessary to call on the Commission and the Council to take prompt action , so that the Council reassesses the proposal to make implementation of the European Solidarity Fund simpler , quicker and more flexible .
Similarly , it is important to review with the respective Member States the European programmes and structural , agricultural and social funds , so as to improve the response to the needs arising from these catastrophes .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on the major natural disasters which have taken place in the autonomous region of Madeira and the effects of the storm Xynthia in Europe .
I believe that the European Union must show solidarity to those who suffer as a result of these natural disasters .
They have hit regions in Portugal , western France , various regions in Spain , in particular the Canary Islands and Andalusia , as well as Belgium , Germany and the Netherlands .
In western France the storm caused the death of roughly 60 people and the disappearance of a number of people , not to mention the destruction of several thousand homes .
The European Commission can provide financial support to the affected regions through the European Union 's Solidarity Fund .
It is of paramount importance that there is a sense of solidarity between Member States in the event of major natural disasters .
There must be coordination between the authorities at local , national and European level in their efforts to rebuild the affected areas .
Effective prevention policies must not be overlooked either .
We must ensure , both in this case and for the future , that European funds will reach the affected regions as quickly as possible in order to help those affected by natural disasters .
On 20 February , a unique meteorological phenomenon occurred on Madeira causing , at least , 42 deaths , with 32 people missing , 370 homeless and around 70 injured .
On 27-28 February , in western France on the Atlantic coast ( Poitou-Charentes and Pays de la Loire ) , another phenomenon caused 60 deaths , with 10 people missing and more than 2 000 homeless .
This storm also isolated several regions in Spain , particularly in the Canary Islands and Andalusia .
Besides the human and psychological suffering , these meteorological phenomena caused a scene of widespread destruction with an extremely serious social and economic impact on the economic activities of these regions , as many people lost all they had .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , calling on the Commission to immediately take all action necessary to mobilise the European Union Solidarity Fund ( EUSF ) , in the most urgent and flexible way and to the maximum possible amount to help the victims .
I would emphasise the need to draft a new EUSF regulation based on the Commission 's proposal , in order to deal with the problems caused by natural disasters in a more flexible and effective way .
The storm that devastated Madeira on 20 February caused enormous human and material losses in the region of Madeira .
The role of the EU is vitally important , as it has mechanisms and instruments at its disposal , such as the Solidarity Fund , the Structural Funds - the European Regional Development Fund and the European Social Fund - and the Cohesion Fund , which need to be activated and applied in a quick , flexible and simplified manner .
I welcome the motion for a resolution in which the European Commission is asked , as soon as it receives a request from the Portuguese Government , to initiate the action necessary to mobilise the European Union Solidarity Fund ( EUSF ) in the most urgent and flexible way and to the greatest possible extent .
I call on the solidarity of the institutions of the European Union towards the swift and flexible application of the Cohesion Fund , bearing in mind Madeira 's special status as an insular and outermost region of the EU .
I appeal to the good will of the European Commission as regards negotiating the revision of the regional operational programmes INTERVIR + ( ERDF ) and RUMOS ( ESF ) , as well as the section on Madeira of the Thematic Territorial Enhancement Operational Programme ( Cohesion Fund ) .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report and was very happy that it was passed by the parliament .
Following similar if less severe weather circumstances in Ireland involving flooding and the recent snow , I know how deeply these tragedies affect families and citizens of the EU , and it is important that this house acts to help in any way that it can .
The natural disaster that affected Madeira on 20 February has left a desolate scene , human suffering and widespread destruction , with devastating consequences for the respective economic and production structures .
One week later , another natural disaster - storm Xynthia - had devastating consequences on a region in western France and several regions of Spain .
I would like to join with the feeling of grief and express my solidarity with all those affected by this tragedy , in terms of both the human and material losses .
It is vital to provide aid to people , as well as to rebuild infrastructure , public facilities and essential services .
It is true that the Solidarity Fund can only be paid after the completion of the procedures to mobilise the Fund and the respective approval by the Council and Parliament .
However , in the current situation , it is very difficult to ask people facing immense difficulties in resuming their normal way of life to wait .
Therefore , we ask for the greatest urgency and flexibility both in making funds available and taking exceptional measures to help Madeira .
in writing . - ( PT ) On 20 February this year there was a tragedy in Madeira , characterised by unprecedented , torrential rain , strong winds and huge waves .
It left at least 42 dead , several disappeared , hundreds homeless and dozens wounded .
I would like to highlight the immediate efforts of the Regional Government of Madeira and its institutions in their rapid and coordinated response to this tragedy .
On 27-28 February 2010 in western France - in particular the regions of Poitou-Charentes and Pays -de -la Loire - there was a very strong and destructive storm , dubbed Xynthia .
It left more than 60 dead , several disappeared and thousands homeless .
In the face of these tragedies I wish to show my profound grief and strong solidarity with all the affected regions , giving my condolences to the families of the victims and paying tribute to the search and rescue teams .
I call on the Commission to begin taking , as soon as requested by the respective Member State , all the necessary steps to mobilise as much of the European Union Solidarity Fund as is possible .
When assessing these requests , the Commission must take into account the specific nature of the individual regions , in particular the fragility of isolated and peripheral regions .
I endorsed this motion for a resolution on the action to be taken in the wake of the devastating and deadly passage of storm Xynthia on our territory because , beyond trying to lay blame , we must above all show European solidarity so as to support the victims of this disaster , which struck several European countries .
Not only must we harness the Solidarity Fund , but this aid must also come from the Cohesion Fund , the European Regional Development Fund , the European Social Fund and the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development .
Lastly , we must encourage insurance companies to intervene as quickly as possible and subsequently learn lessons from such events when it comes to issuing planning permission .
in writing . - ( PL ) Ladies and gentlemen , I endorsed the motion for a resolution on the major natural disaster in the autonomous region of Madeira and the effects of the storm ' Xynthia ' in Europe .
Let us concentrate on Madeira , because it was there that the catastrophe took the heaviest toll .
We are creating a large and strong community for many reasons , but also so that we can help each other in times of need .
Today , Madeira and other regions are in need , because they have been hit hard by the effects of the storm .
It is our duty to help those who need our aid .
I hope the motion for a resolution will contribute to the effective elimination of the effects of the tragedy .
I sympathise deeply with all the victims and their families . Thank you .
In recent weeks , several EU regions have been hit by natural disasters : Madeira , then western France and various regions of Spain .
The human and material consequences caused by the violence of these meteorological phenomena have left a deep impression on us MEPs .
This explains the motion for a resolution on natural disasters voted on today in the European Parliament ; it expresses our ' deepest sympathy ' and ' solidarity ' with the victims of the devastated regions .
European solidarity must be reflected in financial terms by the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund and by means of other European-funded projects .
However , when it comes to the Solidarity Fund , I must point out that the current regulation does not permit a sufficiently flexible and rapid response ; the opportunity exists to amend this regulation , and it is now up to the European Council to make progress in this matter .
I also voted in favour of the amendment supporting the proposal made by Mr Barnier in 2006 to create a European civil protection force .
I regret that it has not been adopted ; implementing this proposal would improve the EU 's crisis response capacity .
The recent natural tragedy that occurred on Madeira has left the island in a state of chaos .
Other regions in Europe have been equally devastated by the impact of storm Xynthia .
The EU should unreservedly help in a joint effort to express solidarity , mobilising the European Union Solidarity Fund for this purpose .
The EUSF was established with the aim of delivering urgent financial aid to Member States affected by natural disasters .
in writing . - ( DE ) On 20 February , a serious natural disaster with torrential rainfall on an unprecedented scale , in conjunction with a powerful storm and very high waves , hit Madeira , killing at least 42 people , with many people still missing .
In addition , hundreds of people have been left homeless .
A few days later , the devastating storm Xynthia passed along the French Atlantic coast , causing nearly 60 deaths , in particular in the regions of Poitou-Charentes , Pays de la Loire and Brittany .
There , too , there are many people missing .
Thousands of people have also been left homeless .
I therefore supported the measures proposed in the joint motion for a resolution for the EU to come to the aid of these countries and regions financially , for which reason I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution .
In particular , it must be ensured that the Union 's Solidarity Fund is mobilised promptly and flexibly .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of adoption of European Parliament motion for a resolution .
Ecological catastrophes and natural disasters are an increasingly common part of our lives .
The dangers from changes in the environment have grown over recent decades , and we should do everything possible to prevent them .
The European Union , which has 27 Member States and half a billion citizens , must tackle not only the emergence of climate and environmental change , but must also look after its citizens and guarantee them the best possible conditions for survival after a crisis .
Our efforts , however , must not concentrate only on giving help after the event .
A fundamental reason for the European Union 's existence is to give its citizens a sense of security .
In relation to this , the appropriate EU institutions must take specific steps to supervise the regions and their abilities to undertake preventative action .
In order to tackle , as quickly as possible , the effects of the storm ' Xynthia ' , we should mobilise the European Union Solidarity Fund and help all those who have incurred losses in connection with this catastrophe .
Adverse and painful events which affect others should always prompt us to take effective action in solidarity with those who have suffered .
Let us show that it is the same this time .
in writing . - I abstained on the resolution on the major natural disaster in the Autonomous Region of Madeira and the effects of storm Xynthia in Europe because two of our key amendments were defeated .
More specifically , the one which made reference to the fact that in France buildings were allowed on floodplains and natural wetlands and that housing speculation caused the construction of buildings in vulnerable areas , and the one stating that all Community funds for the implementation of such plans , particularly from the Structural Funds , the EAFRD , the Cohesion Fund and the European Solidarity Fund , be conditional on sustainability measures .
I would like to begin by expressing my solidarity with the families of the victims of the natural disasters in Madeira and of the victims of storm Xynthia .
Natural disasters have been an ever-frequent occurrence recently due to climate change .
This is why we must ensure that the European Union is prepared to respond as quickly and efficiently as possible .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament motion for a resolution which calls on the Commission to consider the possibility of increasing the community cofinancing rate for regional operational programmes .
No Member State is able to cope on its own with natural disasters of great magnitude .
This is why the European Commission must adapt the European Solidarity Fund in order to guarantee that Member States hit by disasters will be able to access this fund quicker and in a more efficient manner .
This motion for a resolution expresses the need to provide aid to those European regions that were recently the scene of natural disasters , such as the Autonomous Region of Madeira .
The heavy rainfall on Madeira on 20 February has , in addition to the serious human consequences , with 42 people killed , several injured and made homeless , had countless repercussions and serious material damage .
In this context , it is vital to mobilise assistance for affected regions to recover from the economic and social consequences of disasters .
I would stress particularly the fragility of insular and outermost regions , as in the case of Madeira , where the specific nature of its economy and social situation makes it all the more vital to provide the best aid possible .
I would repeat the need to call on the European Commission to mobilise the Solidarity Fund in a flexible manner , as well as to revise the regional programmes financed by the Cohesion Fund , with a view to adapting them to the requirements arising from the tragedy .
It would be equally apt to review the financing planned for 2010 earmarked for specific projects , in accordance with the general rules on the Structural Funds for 2007-2013 .
In view of the size of the natural disaster on Madeira , and its indelible consequences , and the effect of storm Xynthia , I voted in favour of the tabled document .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
The case of Gilad Shalit
The next item is the debate about cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( Rule 122 of the Rules of Procedure ) , initially the case of Gilad Shalit ( four motions for resolutions ) .


author . - ( NL ) Mr President , at around 8 o 'clock this morning , here in Parliament , I visited the website dedicated to Gilad Shalit and a painful fact immediately caught my eye : for 1355 days , 3 hours , 12 minutes and 37 seconds , Gilad , who has been abducted , has been denied any contact with his father , mother , brother and sister .
However , on the same website I also came across a passage from the Book of Jeremiah : ' So there is hope for your descendants , declares the Lord .
Your children will return to their own land ' .
Noam Shalit , who is with us here today , is placing his hope and confidence in you , as well as in the God of Israel , to obtain the release of his precious son .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are debating the case of Gilad Shalit .
During a special meeting with the Israeli delegation yesterday afternoon , I already assured Noam Shalit that his cause - the release of Gilad Shalit - is our cause , too .
Let this debate and this resolution be clear signs of that , which obviously call for follow-up by the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs .
Yesterday morning , I spoke to Baroness Ashton personally about this .
The case of Shalit is our cause , a European cause .
Ladies and gentlemen , please remain loyal to this cause in the coming period as well .
I am counting on you .
Let Europe make a difference in the Middle East .
Together with Noam Shalit and his family , we are looking forward to the fulfilment of the rabbinic prayer for Shalit , psalm 126 , verse 1 : ' When the Lord brought back the captives to Zion , we were like men who dreamed ' .
Mr President , Commissioner , Gilad Shalit was 19 years old when he was kidnapped in a Hamas attack near Gaza .
Not in Gaza , but in Israel , in a kibbutz where his unit was stationed .
For nearly four years , this young man has been living in a cellar ; there is no right to receive visitors , no doctor , no lawyer , no mail , no trial and no Geneva Convention for Gilad , nothing .
He who is known - wrongly , in fact - as soldier Gilad Shalit was carrying out his military service like all young people in his country .
He is a rather shy young man - like his father for that matter , whom we have met on several occasions and whom we have the pleasure of welcoming today again in this Chamber - a young man who loved maths , who loved football and who would have returned to civilian life , of course , had he not been living , for four years now , in a hole , cut off from the world and cut off from his family .
Commissioner , I do not want to talk to you about politics this afternoon ; I do not want to talk to you about the Middle East , conflicts , bargaining or prisoner exchanges .
Our Parliament is unanimous today in calling for you to help a young man - a young Israeli , a young Frenchman , a young European - return home .
That is why I , together with my fellow authors of this resolution and members of six political groups , Mrs Essayah , Mr CohnBendit , Mr Howitt , Mr Tannock and Mr Belder , who spoke just now , am writing today to Baroness Ashton .



We call very strongly for Baroness Ashton , who will travel to Israel and Gaza next Wednesday , to exert all her influence in order to demand the release of Gilad Shalit , the influence with which she is endowed by the mandate of our resolution today , the influence of 500 million European citizens whom we represent in this House .
( Applause )
author . - Mr President , I welcome this cross-party resolution calling for the release of Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit held captive since 2006 by the military wing of Hamas .
I agree with Gilad 's father , who has asked that his son 's case be addressed as a humanitarian issue and not be turned into a political football .
In the cut and thrust of political debate we must never lose sight of the suffering of both Israeli and Palestinian families whose loved ones have been taken from them in this conflict .
The Geneva Conventions must be respected by all sides .
It is totally unacceptable that Gilad Shalit has been denied his rights as a prisoner of war to which the Goldstone Report categorically states he is entitled .
His family have no information on the state of his health , either physical health or mental health .
At the same time , amongst the 7 200 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails , also held in breach of the Geneva Conventions , 1 500 are held for an indefinite period and 13 have already served 25 years .
Forty-four are children while 23 members of the Palestinian Legislative Council are detained in retaliation for the capture of Gilad Shalit .
Again , Goldstone is clear : these detentions of PLC members are contrary to international law .
I will raise these issues at the Euromed Parliamentary Assembly in Jordan this weekend .
I urge Catherine Ashton during her upcoming visit to the region to press the Israeli and Palestinian authorities , including those in Gaza , for the release of Gilad Shalit and of Palestinian children and PLC members and to ensure their safe and early return to their families .
author . - Mr President , Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit has now been held hostage by the Jihadi fanatics of Hamas for over three years .
Hamas claims it is a legal actor observing the Geneva Conventions and therefore he is a prisoner of war , but Israel , in my view rightly , regards him as an abductee from the moment he was seized .
Irrespective of his legal status and international law , he has been cruelly kept incommunicado in Gaza , deprived of any contact with the outside world and even denied Red Cross access , which the Geneva Conventions mandate .
His family has no information about his well-being beyond one video and sporadic indication from Hamas that he is still alive and well .
If Hamas has any claim to be taken seriously by the international community , it should at least now show unequivocally that the conditions of his incarceration adhere to international humanitarian laws .
But we demand more than that .
We demand his immediate and unconditional release .
I make no secret of my opposition to dialogue with the terrorists of Hamas , an organisation committed to Israel 's annihilation , but , if we are ever to deal with Hamas , it must only be after Gilad Shalit has been liberated from his squalid captivity .
author . - Mr President , usually when this House makes a resolution which has even a slight connection with the situation in the Middle East , it is hard to find mutual understanding .
That is not so in this case , thanks to the colleagues who have made it possible .
The situation of Gilad Shalit is a humanitarian issue and our joint resolution underlines the fact that , since being taken hostage nearly four years ago , he has been kept in an unknown place in Gaza , where he does not enjoy basic rights according to any humanitarian standards , including the third Geneva Convention .
It is from this humanitarian perspective that we demand the immediate release of Gilad Shalit .
Meanwhile , the minimum requirement is that the Red Cross and Shalit 's parents may be allowed to be in contact with him .
The value of a human person cannot be measured .
It is immeasurable .
Gilad Shalit should not be made a bargaining chip by the terrorist organisation Hamas but should be released immediately .
This is the message that we would like the High Representative , Baroness Ashton , to take with her to Gaza during her forthcoming visit .
author . - ( EL ) Mr President , yesterday I and other members attended a meeting at which Shalit 's father was present and I should like to say that it is impossible not to be affected by this family 's tragedy .
That is why our position is that Gilad Shalit , a member of the Israeli armed forces arrested in Israeli territory on 24 June 2006 , meets the criteria for him to be considered a prisoner-of-war under the Third Geneva Convention .
As such , he should be given humanitarian treatment and be allowed to communicate .
The International Red Cross should be allowed to visit him and his family should have every right to be informed of his situation and , of course , to visit him .
At the same time , we express our belief and our desire that this person will be released .
However , without wishing in any way to detract from what I have said so far , I believe that our position that this issue can be differentiated from a series of other Palestinians in gaol is somewhat apolitical .
Their presence in these gaols is also a humanitarian issue .
I believe that we are giving false hopes to this family if we think that , by focusing , as a Parliament , solely on the release of this particular person , for whom I repeat our demand that he be released , we shall achieve something .
Is the fact that dozens of 16-year-old Palestinian children are in gaol not a humanitarian issue ?
How can you differentiate between these two issues ?
We cannot not mention the fact that Gaza itself - as someone said earlier that he is living in a hovel and indeed he is living in a hovel - that Gaza itself , I repeat , is an immense hovel .
One-and-a-half million Palestinians living there are living in a collective hovel .
There are 7 200 Palestinians in Israeli prisons ; they include 270 children aged between 16 and 18 and 44 children below the age of 16 .
Seven hundred and fifty thousand Palestinians have been arrested and put in prison since 1967 .
So we are calling for the release of Shalit , but our position that we believe that this can be achieved by divorcing it from the overall picture in Palestine is apolitical .
To close , I should like to add that the only area in the world with a minister for prisoners is Palestine .
I would like to express once again our love and sympathy for the family and I trust that this problem will be resolved shortly .
Mr President , the resolution on Corporal Gilad Shalit , which we are examining today , supplements the many resolutions previously adopted by the European Parliament on the human rights situation in the Middle East .
Corporal Gilad Shalit , who has been held hostage for 1 355 days , must be released as soon as possible .
We demand and we hope very sincerely that he will be released .
The young Franco-Palestinian , Salah Hamouri , who has been detained by the Israeli authorities since 13 March 2005 , must be released .
The children imprisoned in Israel , in violation of the provisions of international law and the conventions on the rights of the child , must be released .
The militants of the NonViolent Popular Resistance Against the Occupation , such as Abdallah Abu Rahmah from Bil 'in , must be released .
The elected representatives , the members of the Palestinian Legislative Council - including Marwan Barghouti - must be released .
It is time for the European Union to insist strongly that human rights and international law be respected in the Middle East .
The solutions do not lie in oneupmanship , exercised under repressive and violent conditions , an example of which was the assassination of a Hamas leader in Dubai , which we condemn , not least because it makes securing the release of Gilad Shalit even more difficult .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( CS ) The case of Gilad Shalit has become a symbol of the endless desperation and frustration in the Middle East .
This is true both for the people living there and for the international community , which is engaged there .
Gilad Shalit is a hostage with a name , whose eventful fate we follow with sympathy and concern .
The people of the Middle East are the nameless hostages of this never-ending conflict .
An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth .
Or is there another hope for Gilad and all the other victims ?
All of the standards of international law will not make up for what we hear so desperately little of in this conflict - an appeal for humaneness .
To try and abandon the geopolitical view of the world , where human beings and their fates are manipulated like playing cards .
To try and put ourselves in the position of the families of victims and of all innocent detainees and destitute people .
What then prevents the release of Gilad Shalit and all those whose guilt has not been established beyond doubt by the courts ?
Not to mention the encouragement of those who want to live in peace.The key to peace is trust , compromise and the courage to defend peace against all those who are implacable .
I would like to ask you to take the first step .
Mr President , the purpose of our debate today is , in all earnestness , to put a name and a face to human suffering , and in that way expand our compassion and our empathy .
In this regard , it is very valuable indeed that we have chosen Gilad Shalit as a topic for our debate today .
This will lead us to extend our empathy to others , so that we can identify with their suffering and their families ' suffering .
There are thousands of Palestinians who are being detained under totally unacceptable conditions , something that is contrary to international rules in every respect , and that is just as difficult a situation for them as it is for Gilad Shalit and his family .
We must do our utmost to take this problem seriously , and my feeling is that all of us in this House are prepared to do so .
The issue here is not just one prisoner , but thousands of prisoners who are victims of this major conflict .
I would also add a further point : it is important that we face up squarely to the cause of this suffering and that we realise that , if we do not do something , not only about the siege of Gaza , but also about the occupation of Palestine as a whole , and if we do not create a two-state solution which I believe all of us are calling for and want , there will be no future for these people .
I think this is a really productive way to go about finding a common solution , and I hope that Baroness Ashton will put the EU in a position where it does not only have to pay , pay and pay , but where it can also make its voice heard every now and then .
- ( NL ) Mr President , on 25 June 2006 , an Israeli Army conscript , Corporal Gilad Shalit , was abducted following a terrorist infiltration from the Gaza Strip .
He has since been held hostage by Hamas .
Hamas has kept Shalit completely cut off from the outside world .
He has been incarcerated in deepest darkness and not even the Red Cross is allowed access to him .
The Shalit case proves once again that Europe and Israel are on the same side .
Barbaric Islamic forces are waging an all-out war against Western civilisation .
Israel is in the frontline of that war .
In Israel and Europe , every human life counts .
For Islamic terrorists , human life counts for nothing , or rather , one human life is worth a thousand lives , because Hamas is demanding that , in exchange for Shalit , Israel release 1000 prisoners , including a large number of terrorist murderers .
It is important that we obtain Shalit 's release , but without Israel having to release terrorists in return .
After all , we have seen where exchanges like this have led in the past : the euphoria of victory for the terrorists , for their followers and leaders , and inevitably more terror .
We cannot allow people to profit from terrorism , and it would be irresponsible if we encouraged Israel to respond to such hostage-taking with an exchange , because the next Hamas hostage could be somebody from Paris , Amsterdam or Brussels .
And what kind of a position will we be in then ?
The boot must be put on the other foot immediately : it is Hamas , not Israel , that must pay for taking Gilad Shalit , a European , hostage .
The price should be so high that they release him of their own free will .
In this regard , we ask that a complete ban on travel to and through Europe be imposed on all officials of the Hamas regime , including those who are not formally allied with Hamas and those who are not on the European terror list .
- Mr President , this young man has been kept in captivity for almost 1 400 days with absolute disrespect for any international norms and no access to him even by the Red Cross .
I think this case should be seen and solved exclusively as a human tragedy .
I am encouraged by the wide support in the European Parliament for this debate and by the warm reception our colleagues expressed yesterday to Shalit 's father .
Shalit 's case should not become a bargaining chip .
Instead it will be in the interests of Hamas if they want to gain legitimacy in the peace process .
To conclude , the best proof for their credibility would be to release Gilad Shalit unconditionally and to abstain from further kidnappings .
( PL ) The resolution we are discussing , today , is not of a political nature , and we are not trying to solve the Middle East conflict .
All we want is that an innocent son be allowed to return to his father and to his family .
I do not know if fellow Members know of the existence of an organisation called the Parents Circle .
It is an organisation of Israeli and Palestinian families who have lost relatives in the conflict .
We are talking , today , about an individual case precisely because we do not want Gilad Shalit 's father to join those who have lost the closest of loved ones - their own children .
We are appealing for the release of a hostage , because we do not agree with the idea that the end justifies the means .
Fighting in a just cause does not excuse actions which are universally considered to be wrong or acts of terrorism .
Organisations which want to gain our approval , our respect , must not hold hostages .
( Applause )
( RO ) I too wish to add my support to those who have called in this Chamber , both today and yesterday , for the release of Gilad Shalit , and I also wish to express my sympathy to his family .
I would like to address my speech to those who are perhaps asking themselves the question : ' Why have a resolution on the Gilad Shalit case , and why now ? '
Other fellow Members have reminded us that it will soon be four years that young Gilad Shalit has been held hostage in brutal conditions and in breach of the international standards recognised by the Third Geneva Convention on the treatment of prisoners of war .
As every one of us can imagine , every extra day in captivity means awful suffering for Shalit and his family .
I would also give another reason for support , namely that Gilad Shalit is a European citizen , he is a European victim of terrorism , and on this day , which is European Day for the Victims of Terrorism , I can think of no more symbolic gesture than this resolution .
- Mr President , first of all I would like to salute the efforts made by Gilad Shalit 's family to seek his release , which we wholeheartedly support .
That is the message we want to convey through this resolution .
We believe , as the Goldstone Report highlights , that he is indeed entitled to the status of prisoner of war , as the prisoners kept by Israel , including many children , should be .
We want all of them to be released .
We want Gilad Shalit and all the Palestinian young men and women to be released .
Indeed this is only way for peace to be achieved in that region .
We urge Baroness Ashton to spare no effort to press for the release of Gilad Shalit and all the other Palestinian prisoners of war , especially those young people who are enduring this captivity .
( PL ) The case of Gilad Shalit has a particular , personal dimension .
It is the tragic case of a very young man the same age as my son , and it is also the tragic case of his family .
However , let us not pretend that the case does not also have a broader political context .
It does , in fact , make us aware that the black and white film which is often very one-sidedly presented also in this Chamber , the film which speaks of victims only on the Palestinian side , is something which is , really , not very objective .
I think that , today , we should demand very clearly the release of this young man , but let us also remember that those who are firing missiles at Sderot are responsible for the fact that he is still a prisoner .
- ( FI ) Mr President , as we know , the background to this resolution was a very politically sensitive set of circumstances , but that ought not to prevent us from passing a clearly humanitarian resolution that is not watered down by general political remarks on the situation as a whole .
I am pleased that this resolution has kept to the point .
I intend to vote in favour of it .
It stresses the idea that all parties involved in the crisis in the Middle East must comply with international humanitarian law and human rights legislation .
I hope that it receives the firm support of this House .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the case of the abducted Israeli soldier , Gilad Shalit , is of great concern to the European Union .
My former colleague Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner called urgently for Mr Shalit 's release in this very House already on 5 July 2006 , less than two weeks after his capture .
Over the years and on a number of occasions , including at the latest Association Council with Israel last June and in the Foreign Affairs Council conclusions of December 2009 , the EU has consistently called on those holding Mr Shalit to release him without delay .
Therefore we join with today 's Parliament motions calling for his release .
It is our opinion , in line with the assessment of many human rights organisations , that the terms and conditions of Mr Shalit 's detention are contrary to international humanitarian law .
Therefore we urge his captors to respect such obligations and in particular to allow delegates of the International Committee of the Red Cross to visit him .
Finally , we are aware that mediation activities have been ongoing , aimed at the release of Gilad Shalit .
We encourage all efforts made in this direction and we express our hope that they will soon be successful .
I will also personally pass on a clear message from you to my colleague Cathy Ashton .
Of course our thoughts are with the family of Gilad Shalit .
I know that his father has been in this House this week and I understand that he is at this very moment sitting here with us .
( Applause )
I want to reassure him that our thoughts and efforts are with him and , of course , with all the others who are suffering the consequences of this long lasting conflict .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - I wish to express my regret in view of the imprisonment of Gilad Shalit .
His abduction alongside the detention of the rest of the prisoners in the area is unacceptable .
This situation needs to be amended as soon as possible .
I believe that release of Shalit would contribute to the Middle East peace process in general .
( FR ) For the rest , France has just decided to sell a Mistral class warship to Russia ; we believe that it will sincerely regret its action .
2 .
The escalation of violence in Mexico
The next item is the debate on seven motions for resolutions on the escalation of violence in Mexico .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to begin by saying that Mexico is a great democracy that has progressed steadily over the last 20 years .
It is a friend of the European Union and we share a Strategic Partnership Agreement .
I would also like to say that Mexico is currently waging a very difficult war against organised drug trafficking .
Today in the European Parliament , however , we are talking about Mexico in the context of human rights , because there has been and continues to be a marked increase in violence , which affects Mexican people in particular , and because there have been repeated , serious complaints about human rights violations .
The resolution that the major political groups are going to adopt here today is based on respect and consensus ; of course , it recognises the situation I have just described and urges Mexico to continue on the path towards rule of law and full democracy .
However , it also makes four important requests : it urges Mexico to ensure the right to a free press , because there have been attacks on journalists ; to guarantee protection for the organisations that defend human rights , because those groups have been attacked and threatened ; to guarantee protection for women who suffer violence , because many women have been murdered ; and to avoid impunity and abuses of power by their police forces .
This is what Parliament has asked of Mexico , in the spirit of friendship based on a favourable relationship with Mexico .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this week we are celebrating International Women 's Day .
In this Parliament , we have seen a great many posters in all the languages of the European Union , saying that we can put a stop to violence against women .
Today we are talking about violence in Mexico , and I think it is right that we should recognise that Mexican women , both indigenous and non-indigenous victims , receive the least protection from local and federal authorities .
Mexican women are victims of all forms of violence , from domestic violence to sexual violence and torture carried out by the army or the police , and they also become murder victims .
Regrettably , up to now the response from the Mexican authorities has been ineffective , which is why we can now accurately say that we are looking at a case of almost total impunity .
Our resolution calls on the Mexican Government to fight against femicide , which is a harsh word , but an accurate one when we consider that almost all the murders involving female victims go unpunished .
For example , during the past four years in Mexico , only 11 % of the criminals who murdered almost 700 women have been sentenced .
At the same time , it would appear that women are the judicial system 's favourite victims .
There is no other way to explain how it was possible for two indigenous women , Alberta Alcántara and Teresa González , to be sentenced to 21 years in prison and to have now spent more than three years in jail for kidnapping six men from the Federal Investigations Agency - all by themselves - during an incident in a market .
Let us hope that the judge , who will make a decision on the women 's appeal in one week 's time , realises how ridiculous and unjust the situation is .
However , violence against women starts in the home .
I hope that Mexican legislators will soon make improvements to the General Law on Women 's Access to a Life Free of Violence so that the different forms of violence and the mechanisms implementing the laws can be properly defined .
It would also be right to establish domestic violence and rape within marriage as criminal offences .
Furthermore , in order for Mexican society to change and reject violence against women , it is important that schools deal with this issue as a basic matter of education for young people .
author . - ( PL ) For several years now , the authorities in Mexico , including , first and foremost , President Felipe Calderón , have been waging a bloody war against drugs gangs .
Over 40 000 soldiers have been involved in the war , and several successes have been achieved .
These successes include , undoubtedly , the arrests of the bosses of the Sinaloa and Juarez cartels , the destruction of over 23 000 hectares of opium crops and 38 000 hectares of marihuana , the closures of over 50 illegal laboratories which were producing narcotics and the arrests of over 45 000 people who were involved with this process .
We need to be aware that the Mexican drugs cartels generate annual incomes of many billions of dollars , which is incomparably more than the amounts allocated by the Mexican Government to tackling the narcotics problem .
So the gangs are spending huge sums on corrupting politicians , judges and police officers .
This is precisely why the authorities are losing the war .
Since 2006 , almost 15 000 people have been killed , and over 6 000 of them have been killed since last October .
Journalists are especially in danger , as over 60 have been killed , including , recently , Jorge Ochoa Martínez .
We have to understand that without international involvement , Mexico will not win the war .
( Applause )
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mexico has a major problem with drugs trafficking and drug-related violence .
To address this situation , the Government of President Felipe Calderón has adopted a tough stance in order to achieve its eradication : he has taken the decision to temporarily mobilise the armed forces , a move which has had a significant impact on the number of people arrested , the destruction of drugs and the confiscation of weapons .
The army has accepted all the recommendations of the National Human Rights Commission , including those concerning the investigation of complaints about their own conduct .
The Government also recognises that it needs to make substantial changes in the area of security and justice , and is implementing an ambitious reform of the justice system in order for it to be more transparent and to bring to justice those who commit crimes , while respecting human rights .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) wishes to show its solidarity with the Mexican people in the fight against drugs trafficking , and we support President Calderón in his willingness to combat organised crime .
Finally , I would like to express my satisfaction with this agreement , which unites the main political Groups of this Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since 2007 there has been a constant increase in human rights violations in Mexico .
According to the Mexican NGOs and media , more than 6 500 murders attributable to drugs cartels have been recorded for 2009 alone , the vast majority of which were in the state of Chihuahua .
President Calderón 's government has sent thousands of soldiers to the worst affected areas .
Since then , the violent acts committed by these military forces and by the police forces alike have increased with complete impunity .
The NGOs are producing ever more reports and talking about crimes of state .
Journalists , indigenous communities , and especially women , both indigenous and nonindigenous , are particularly affected .
I met some of these women from San Salvador Atenco ; they had been raped and tortured by the police forces .
I was appalled at what they told me .
The perpetrators of these acts committed in May 2006 still enjoy complete impunity .
Therefore we cannot share the concerns of the Mexican authorities , the agents of which regularly violate human rights .
It follows that we shall not support the joint resolution and we shall table ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the images of the brutal use of violence on the open street in the so-called war on drugs in Mexico reach us regularly via the mass media .
The murder of hundreds of women , mostly workers in the north of the country , is making headlines and has spawned the term ' feminicide ' .
The European Parliament has produced its own report on this .
Despite knowledge of the major increase in serious violations of human rights , the Mexican Government appears to be unable or unwilling to do anything about it .
Pointing out the necessary relentlessness in the fight against drug dealers is no substitute for consistent government action .
The major expansion of military presence and power , the competence of military courts for crimes committed by soldiers , the almost complete impunity - these are the real causes of the escalating violence in the country .
Even the Mexican national human rights commission has repeatedly documented the increase in violent crime by the military .
The government itself does not want to admit the situation .
It also continually hushes up crime .
Yesterday , for example , there was a story going around in the media that the Ministry of Defence had paid out an awful lot of money to the families of victims of violence in order to buy their silence .
Who were the perpetrators ?
They were soldiers .
The EU must address the fight against impunity in all its relations with Mexico .
Given the severity of the human rights violations , it is absolutely necessary for the EU not to update the Global Agreement with Mexico .
It must not do so until there has been a substantial improvement in the human rights situation in that country .
The violence in Mexico is linked to drug trafficking and the social inequalities made worse by the economic crisis .
Fighting impunity is key .
It is vital to invest in the judicial system to try and punish criminals and to ensure protection of witnesses and victims , many of them young working women caught in the wave of violence by the drug traffickers .
It is shocking that Juárez is the world capital of feminicide , but even more shocking is the macho culture that explains the inaction of the authorities in prosecuting those responsible for these crimes and in protecting defenders of human rights , including journalists .
Europe must use the strategic partnership with Mexico to support constructively all those who fight for human rights .
They are the same people who are fighting to defend the rule of law and democracy .
Without human rights there is no rule of law or democracy .
Mr President , in this Chamber a moment ago , I heard a call not to sign the understanding with the Mexican authorities .
I do not understand this suggestion .
After all , we commend the President of Mexico - and those who spoke before me a moment ago also did so - for his determined fight against the drugs barons and the mafia .
We should , therefore , commend the Mexican authorities for their action , while at the same time , of course , pointing out that they should not throw out the baby with the bathwater , and that in this fight they should still try to respect human rights .
That is obvious .
We have to understand the situation of a country which has been struggling with huge organised crime syndicates and the mafia for decades .
If the president of the country declares war in this area , he should be given complete support .
However , of course , we have been speaking , here , about journalists , and we have been speaking about other victims .
It should be emphasised that these people should not be made the victims of discrimination .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Ladies and gentlemen , just this morning , the Mexican Trade Union of Electricians was surrounded by a police force of between 100 and 200 police officers .
It is the same trade union that , after announcing a general strike , saw one of its leaders , Domingo Aguilar Vázquez , captured the next day on 16 March , and arrested on phony charges .
This attack on the freedom of trade unions in Mexico , conducted directly by the government , is even more shocking because we are talking here of the Mexican Federal Government not punishing crimes committed , for example , by their own military , or ineffectiveness in fighting drug trafficking .
Yes , the situation is complex .
There are attacks by the armed forces on drug traffickers , but at the same time there are attacks against the trade unions .
What happens is that , in a situation of ineffectiveness , impunity and rising authoritarianism , a democracy like the Mexican democracy spirals out of control .
This Parliament must vigorously condemn and , above all , call on the Mexican Government to finally stop being ineffective with regard to criminals and , apparently , so authoritarian with , for example , trade unions , workers and civil society movements .
- ( FI ) Mr President , I wish to highlight two issues in our resolution on Mexico .
Firstly , as we have heard , violence has been on the increase this year .
Mexico is in the grip of large drug cartels and the violence they perpetrate is estimated to have cost 15 000 lives already .
The situation is especially bad close to the border between Mexico and the United States of America .
The Mexican Government is trying to bring the situation under control by means of a massive military and police operation .
The strategy has also attracted a lot of criticism .
Obviously , responsibility for the drug trade , money laundering and the problems these cause also extends to other countries , and Mexico needs to be offered assistance and cooperation .
Secondly , I want to mention recent reports by Amnesty International regarding the unwillingness on the part of authorities to protect human rights activists .
Those who stand up for indigenous peoples and poor communities are at particular risk .
When it becomes dangerous to promote human rights , many have to consider the risks of the work they do .
Those on whose behalf the activists work then lose hope .
These matters , issues relating to the drug trade , and human rights must also be taken up for discussion in May , when we think about plans for cooperation at the next EUMexico Summit .
( DE ) Mr President , we often discuss dictatorships in this House .
Mexico is not a dictatorship , but a democracy .
We are debating individual cases of serious humans rights violations .
For Mexico , that is not the key subject .
The key subject is the fact that this large democracy , which is a strategic partner of ours , has been suffering from a serious , perhaps even fatal illness for decades .
It therefore requires the right treatment and the right doctor .
President Calderón and his comrades-in-arms are that doctor .
That does not mean that they are capable of using , or allowed to use , every treatment there is , but we must support them .
That is why I believe that paragraph 12 in the resolution , in which we state that we intend to make greater use of our financial instrument to reinforce good governance , the rule of law , the structures of a State under the rule of law against the disintegration of the State , against organised criminality , against that impunity , which has been quite rightly criticised , is so important .
We cannot do that , however , by freezing or abandoning our contacts ; rather , we must strengthen them .
( ES ) Mr President , we are all concerned by the increase in violence in Ciudad Juarez , but I trust in the broad measures that the Mexican authorities have put in place in order to effectively tackle this complex situation .
I also support the vigorous battle President Calderón is currently waging against drugs trafficking , which is a very serious global threat that concerns us all .
That is why we should help the Mexican authorities in this difficult struggle .
Ladies and gentlemen , over the past 10 years , Mexico has gone through a very positive process of political and governmental modernisation .
President Calderón is steadily promoting reforms .
Mexico has also taken on greater international responsibilities and is playing an active role within , for example , the United Nations and the G-20 .
In this Parliament , within my modest capabilities , I have always supported the establishment of a strategic partnership between the European Union and Mexico , which we finally achieved in 2008 .
I hope we can adopt an ambitious joint action plan or programme at the May Summit in Madrid , because the European Union and Mexico need to work together in many areas , both on a bilateral level and in multilateral forums , in order to confront challenges and threats together , including drugs trafficking and other forms of organised crime
- Mr President , Mexico has long been a primary conduit into the world 's largest market for illegal narcotics , the United States .
Mexico has therefore been scarred by the brutality and violence that go hand in hand with the drugs trade .
Moreover , Mexico itself , as a country of 100 million people and a vital EU strategic partner , has increasingly - and sadly - become an important market for cocaine .
The rising consumption by young people is especially worrying .
Drug-related violence in Mexico only seems to be getting worse , with ever more grisly murders and journalists who report on such cases being themselves targeted .
The prevalence of unemployment and poverty probably does not help either and induces a climate of lawlessness in parts of Mexico .
President Calderón faces enormous challenges but he is determined to meet them head-on , and the EU should support him robustly .
Particularly we should support his efforts to reform and restructure the police and criminal justice system in order to break up the corrupt links between the drug cartels and law enforcement .
I believe he is also quite justified in the need to use the army as a temporary emergency measure .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , an unprecedented rise in violence has created , within the country , a sense of deep insecurity amongst the population .
The Commission is of course highly concerned at this situation .
We know that the Mexican authorities are taking this seriously and have put in place a lot of measures to address the problem .
President Calderón 's war on organised crime is its main priority .
Apart from deploying a number of military across the country to fight organised crime , Mexico is making a tremendous effort to strengthen law enforcement and the judicial system .
In August 2008 , a package of security measures was adopted which aims at reorganising the Mexican law enforcement and justice system .
The justice reform passed by the Mexican Congress in 2008 has the potential to address the main systemic problems facing criminal justice in Mexico , although we are aware that the implementation of this reform will require a long-term commitment .
Mexico is also making a very serious effort to respond to the concerns over human rights abuses , in particular the impact of organised crime groups and vested interests of freedom of the media and freedom of expression , which have been brought to the attention of the EU by civil society organisations .
In this connection , the Mexican Government established a special prosecutor for crimes committed against journalists in 2006 .
It is making noticeable efforts in addressing other shortcomings , as seen in the approval of a federal law to eradicate violence against women and the appointment of a special prosecutor on this issue , and in the new federal law to combat trafficking in human beings .
As a member of the United Nations Human Rights Council , Mexico pledged to adopt a state policy on human rights and to remain open at international level with regard to human rights .
The issue of the protection of human rights in the framework of the fight against organised crime and the integrity of human rights defenders are reflected in the recommendations accepted by Mexico as a result of its participation in the UN Universal Periodic Review .
Mexico has shown interest and readiness in discussing with the European Union all these issues , most recently during the session of the EU-Mexico Joint Committee held in Brussels on 26-27 November 2009 .
Indeed , this area constitutes the subject of dedicated cooperation .
On 3-4 December 2009 , the EU and Mexico jointly organised an international seminar in Cancún on ' The Legitimate Use of Force and the Protection of Human Rights ' .
The seminar provided a venue to hold expert consultations on a draft policy document on the human rights accountability of local police forces .
The draft policy document was presented to the Quintana Roo local congress in the aftermath of the seminar .
This initiative is complementary to the recently adopted federal law on the reform of the judiciary system and could be replicated by other federal states .
We believe that the EU-Mexico Strategic Partnership provides the best framework for the EU to support Mexico in the areas of public security and the rule of law .
The Strategic Partnership executive document currently under negotiation foresees the establishment of a formal EU-Mexico policy dialogue on security issues , as well as increased cooperation with relevant EU agencies such as CEPOL , Europol , Eurojust and the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) .
From the Commission side , we are already supporting a project from 2004-2007 to strengthen the administration of justice in Mexico .
Further cooperation in the field is foreseen for the period 2011-2013 .
In conclusion , it is clear that Mexico is facing important challenges in the areas of public security and respect for human rights .
It is not easy and the situation is far from ideal , but it is also fair to say that it is showing willingness and determination to ensure the compatibility of an effective public security policy with respect for human rights .
We will continue to support Mexico in its efforts .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place after the debates .
3 .
South Korea - death penalty declared legal
The next item is the debate on five motions for resolutions on South Korea - death penalty declared legal .
author . - Mr President , after 13 years without an execution in South Korea , it is deeply sad that the Constitutional Court there ruled in favour of the death penalty a few weeks ago .
The ruling states that the death penalty is a legal punishment that can deter crime for the public good .
That is a commonly heard argument and merely a response to emotive situations in a given country at a certain time .
It in fact means that the death penalty is being viewed as a preventive force in the hope that , when a criminal knows there is capital punishment , he or she will think twice about his or her acts .
We all know that many studies have refuted that idea .
Even more important is the fact that an execution is irreversible ; there is no way back .
Roman law at the time of Justinian stated that it was better for a guilty person to go unpunished than for an innocent person to be deprived of their life .
That was 15 centuries ago .
Since the South Korean Constitutional Court itself recognised that the death penalty could be subject to errors and abuse , our concerns brought forward today might strengthen the democratic institutions of the Republic of Korea in the idea that this method of punishment should be abolished for good .
Since the Republic of South Korea acceded to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in 1990 , and is a signatory to most of the major human rights treaties , moving backwards would be very harmful to its international reputation .
author . - Mr President , the European Union in general , and this Parliament in particular , has a very proud record - an honourable tradition - of opposing the death penalty .
Therefore we can do nothing other than regret the decision of the Republic of Korea 's Constitutional Court that the death penalty is not a violation of that country 's Constitution .
However , I believe we have to keep the issue in proportion .
The justices ruled by a narrow margin of five votes to four .
The last time they voted it was seven votes to two .
They did not urge or condone the use of the death penalty but called for a political decision for the Korean Parliament to decide on the future abolition of the death penalty in that country .
We also have to note that South Korea is de facto an abolitionist country .
No executions have been carried out since February 1998 and , in 2007 , Amnesty International categorised South Korea as a country that has virtually abolished capital punishment .
However , the seriousness of this issue comes back to the fore when we realise that the floor leader of the Grand National Party in Korea said just recently that this de facto moratorium on capital punishment should be ended and a swift execution should take place of certain prisoners .
I hope this unfortunate opportunistic voice in Korea will be ignored and that South Korea will indeed move away from being a de facto moratorium country by changing its law and becoming a de jure moratorium country .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is regrettable that a number of States around the world still , in this day and age , conduct or permit this inhumane kind of punishment for serious criminals .
I believe that nobody has the right to decide about the life or death of another person , be it at the beginning or the end of that life , and certainly not in connection with punishing a criminal act .
This barbaric punishment by execution has no place in the modern world .
The unforgettable , great Pope John Paul II pointed out that , above all , atonement , the chance for reconciliation , must be possible .
With an irreversible act such as the death penalty , that is not possible .
That is why , as parliamentary groups , we are joining forces to call on our colleagues in South Korea to take up this subject in their parliament and to join with us Europeans to campaign for the abolition of the death penalty , as a mark of humanity .
I would like to call on all Members to support this joint motion for a resolution unanimously .
Mr President , at the Fourth World Congress Against the Death Penalty , held at the end of February in Geneva , the abolitionist movement welcomed the growing number of countries that have abolished or suspended the death penalty .
South Korea seemed to have committed itself along those lines , since no executions have been carried out there since December 1997 .
The recent decision of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Korea cannot but worry us ; we cannot but regret it .
We therefore want the Commission and the Council to regard the abolition of the death penalty - a violation of the right to life and a crime of state - as a key element in the European Union 's relations with third countries .
We want them to call on the Korean Government and the President of the Republic , himself sentenced to death in 1981 , to make a firm commitment to abolish the death penalty ; to decide on a moratorium , pursuant to the UN decision ; to voice their concern at the situation of the 59 people , including certain political prisoners , who have been sentenced to death in that country ; and to call for their death sentence to be commuted .
Mr President , the policy of abolishing the death penalty is a very successful part of European foreign policy .
This can be seen in accession negotiations , in bilateral talks and also in the United Nations , where more and more States within the world community are deciding to come out in favour of a moratorium or to abolish the death penalty completely .
Until recently , the Republic of South Korea was one of those States that , in practice , no longer applied this degrading and demeaning punishment .
Today 's resolution is an expression of our concern that , with the decision of the South Korean Constitutional Court that executions are legally compatible with the constitution , a situation has now been brought about that truly facilitates the renewed use of the death penalty .
We are therefore calling for the government of South Korea to do everything in its power , as an initial step , to adopt a legally binding moratorium that prohibits executions from taking place - there are , after all , over 55 people on death row - at which point , as a second step , the South Korea parliament should pass a law to abolish the death penalty .
It is very positive to see that within South Korean society , too , a movement has come about that is campaigning , ultimately , for the advent of a law to abolish the death penalty .
We in this House should support that movement .
Mr President , at a time when the number of countries which are giving up use of the death sentence is growing , the decision of the Constitutional Court of South Korea should be received at least with surprise .
The death penalty is a clear violation of human rights , because , after all , human life is a value which the law should protect , and a legal system which allows capital punishment strikes at its own foundations and is a peculiar kind of hypocrisy .
Many arguments exist against the use of this means of administering justice .
For me , the most important is its irreversibility .
Whatever else might be said about it , capital punishment is a penalty which is final .
It deprives people of that one most precious thing which they will ever possess .
Besides , there remains the moral responsibility on those who carry out this act , because the risk always exists of executing an innocent person .
Furthermore , the decision of the Constitutional Court is disappointing , because we know that no executions have been carried out in Korea for years . I hope this decision will not affect the number of sentences passed .
What is more , I call for the handing down of death sentences in South Korea to be ended completely .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( PL ) South Korea is one of the European Union 's key trade partners .
It is also a country with which the European Commission has completed negotiations on a free trade agreement , giving both sides very broad access to the other 's market .
In view of such close economic relations , I am surprised that the EU and Korea differ so greatly when it comes to respect for human rights .
All Member States of the European Union are signatories to Protocol 13 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , which bans the use of the death penalty .
What is more , the Union declares in the international arena that it has set itself the objective of working for universal abolition of the death penalty .
In accordance with that declaration , the Union should express clear support for the movement in Korea which is working for the abolition of capital punishment .
Let us hope that , first of all , a moratorium will be introduced on carrying out executions , and that the Korean Government will become actively involved in efforts to abolish the death penalty which are being made at the UN .
Under new powers in the area of trade policy , we have the right and the obligation , as the European Parliament , to demand the abolition of capital punishment in all of the European Union 's partner countries .
Mr President , if today 's views on capital punishment had been in force in Europe at the time of the Nuremberg Tribunal , none of the Nazi criminals who were tried by the tribunal , and who were responsible for the cruel deaths of millions of innocent people , would have been sentenced to death .
I have not heard that anyone in Europe has criticised the Nuremberg Tribunal for its unjust judgments .
Europe is moving ever further away from the essence of a just punishment as a response proportionate to the wrong done by the perpetrator and the guilt incurred .
When we talk about the murder , the killing , of many people , for example in an act of terrorism , or when we talk about genocide and the deaths of millions of people , and this is what has happened , after all , in Europe , then the question arises as to a proportional punishment .
It is true that in academic circles , in Europe and elsewhere , a debate is , nevertheless , in progress on the effectiveness of this punishment in terms of its preventative action and the protection of innocent human beings .
This , however , is probably not the key argument , here .
Europe has , today , abandoned the death sentence .
This is a democratic choice , and we want this choice to be respected .
However , we should also respect the choice of others , and this is why I am in favour of discussion on this subject , including discussion with people in South Korea .
It is a democratic state , and a democratic country .
( PL ) I do not think we should comment on this matter , or that we should interfere , here , for at least two reasons .
Firstly , because South Korea is a democratic country , and the ruling of the Constitutional Court is a ruling of a lawful body of that state .
For this reason , there is no danger that the death penalty will be passed in political or trivial cases - it will be handed down to criminals and murderers .
Secondly , capital punishment is a deterrent .
It is not possible , of course , to prove this empirically , but if we assume the truth of the syllogism that a more serious punishment is a stronger deterrent , this means that the most severe punishment deters more , and this means that the death sentence deters most of all .
This being so , by applying the death penalty we are , in fact , saving the lives of innocent people .
Therefore , the European Union and the European Parliament should not interfere in this matter with the South Korean authorities .
( PL ) Mr President , the decision of the Constitutional Court of South Korea that the death penalty is not a violation of the Constitution must be received with sadness .
That decision is a step backwards in comparison to the trend in South Korea , where the death sentence has not been applied for a decade .
The last execution was carried out 13 years ago .
There are currently 57 convicts on death row awaiting execution .
A critical view should be taken of the South Korean court 's ruling .
South Korea , as an economic leader in the region , should in particular set an example on the matter of respecting the right to life of every individual .
Capital punishment is not compatible with a contemporary system of criminal justice , and contrary to current opinion it does not lead to a drop in crime at all .
- ( SK ) The death penalty is an issue that will live as long as monsters and murderers , living with the knowledge that they can torture , abuse and murder people , remain hidden within the human society , because a weak and impotent society is unable to cope with their brutal behaviour .
Each of the victims of these monsters had the same right to life as all of us , until the moment when they crossed paths with such a monster , a criminal who condemned a person , in order to satisfy a perverse pleasure , to his or her fate without any right to mercy or defence .
The Constitutional Court of Korea has delivered an opinion that the death penalty does not conflict with the Korean Constitution .
Legal status has been thus practically evaluated .
That the political elites in Europe , in our name , have abandoned this path does not mean , however