Resumption of the session
I hereby declare resumed the session of the European Parliament which was adjourned on 30 January 1997 .
Membership of Parliament
I must inform you that , pursuant to the Rules of Procedure , I have received the resignation of Mr Bernard Tapie with effect from 4 February 1997 .
In accordance with article 12 of the Act concerning the election of representatives to the European Parliament by direct universal suffrage , the house recognizes this vacancy and informs the Member State concerned of its existence .
Mr Hory has the floor .
Mr President , I should just like to speak briefly on the subject of Bernard Tapie , because what has happened to our fellow Member is , I believe , unprecedented in the history of Parliament and I should like to comment on this with a minimum of gravity .
Bernard Tapie had given his personal undertaking to you , Mr President , and to our Committee on the Rules of Procedure , that he would resign if his criminal conviction was upheld .
He did not want to seek refuge behind his status as Member of Parliament in order to escape the consequences of a sentence which many of us consider to be unjust .
He honoured this undertaking and he resigned .
But nobody , whether here in this House or among French public opinion , is in any doubt regarding the political opportunism which lay behind the legal persecution of which Bernard Tapie is the victim .
One of our Members who is perhaps one of the least sympathetic to Mr Tapie - I am speaking of Mr Thierry Jean-Pierre - even declared on television that the French courts had been used by the political powers in order to conduct a veritable manhunt .
This is why I should like if I may , Mr President , to say before this House - and also on behalf of the French Members of my Group - how proud I was to participate in the campaign for Europe conducted by Mr Tapie and also to express my hope of waging many other political campaigns with him in the future .
Mr Hory , your expression of solidarity will be recorded in the Minutes at the appropriate time .
You will understand that I allowed you to speak , even if you did not invoke any of the Rules of Procedure , as I believed that as the former Member was absent and thus unable to speak for himself , somebody should at least be allowed to say what he thought on his behalf .
I can assure you that Parliament and all its bodies have acted with the utmost correctness in respect to our colleague .
I must inform you that Mr Kranidiotis has been appointed Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs in the Greek Government with effect from 3 February 1997 .
I congratulate him on his appointment .
In accordance with article 12 of the Act concerning the election of representatives to the European Parliament by direct universal suffrage , Parliament recognizes this vacancy .
In the meantime the Greek authorities have informed me that Mr Kranidiotis is replaced by Mrs Anna Karamanou with effect from 6 February 1997 .
I welcome Mrs Karamanou and remind you that , by virtue of paragraph 4 of Rule 7 , until such time as a Member 's credentials have been verified or a ruling has been given on any dispute , the Member shall take his seat in Parliament and on its bodies and shall enjoy all the rights attaching thereto .
Mr President , on a point of order .
It concerns a human rights issue which I raised in December last year and I wish a discussion on the matter under Rule 97 .
It is a question of the continued incarceration of Roisín McAliskey in a Category A prison in Britain - Holloway Prison to be precise .
There seems to be a misunderstanding between the British and German authorities .
As I see it , the Germans have no objection to this woman being released on bail but the objection comes from the British Government - quite unnecessarily so , given the treatment this woman is receiving .
Roisín McAliskey is being kept in a Category A gaol without adequate medical care .
She is strip-searched on every possible occasion .
It amounts to an abuse of authority .
I appeal for something to be done about it .
This question is not on the agenda .
I cannot let you discuss it further .
I take note of what you said and this House will take the necessary steps .
I cannot allow a debate on the question now .
Order of business
The draft agenda drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 13 February 1997 , under Rule 95 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
At the sitting of 13 December 1996 , Parliament referred the report by Mrs Izquierdo Rojo on technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources ( A4-0409 / 96 ) back to committee , pursuant to paragraph 3 of Rule 59 of the Rules of Procedure .
At its meeting of 20 and 21 January 1997 , the Fisheries Committee appointed a new rapporteur , Mr Adam , and decided to request referral back to committee pursuant to Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure .
Mrs Fraga has the floor to move the request from the Fisheries Committee .
Mr President , all I have to say is that the Fisheries Committee did indeed decide to request referral back to committee .
I shall now put the request from the Fisheries Committee to the vote .
( Parliament approved the request )
Monday and Tuesday
I have not received any proposals for changes , but I would remind you that I already informed you on 13 February , pursuant to Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure , that 71 Members had tabled a motion of censure on the European Commission for its attitude in the management of the BSE crisis ( B4-0056 / 97 / rev.2 ) .
The motion of censure has been forwarded to the Commission .
As indicated in the final draft agenda , the debate will be held at 3 p.m. tomorrow , Tuesday .
Mrs Green has the floor .
Mr President , just one very minor request .
At the moment the deadline for compromise texts for the resolution on the Committee of Inquiry 's report into BSE is set for 4.00 p.m. tomorrow .
That would be before the debate and before the Commission 's response had been properly heard .
So I would ask you to see if you could delay that deadline until at least 8.30 p.m. tomorrow evening .
I know it is very tight for your services and I apologise for that .
But it is not appropriate for us to set the deadline for the resolution before the debate and before the President of the Commission has had an opportunity to respond .
If you want , I would suggest keeping the deadline for tabling the joint text and amendments , but allowing changes up until the end of the debate - that is , until 8.30 p.m. tomorrow evening .
That would provide the flexibility you mentioned , in case there are any changes as a result of the debate , and the services could go on working on the translations .
So we will stick to the deadline , but if any changes arise from the debate , they can be introduced up to 8.30 p.m.
Wednesday and Thursday
The Group of the European Radical Alliance is asking for the vote on the motions for resolutions tabled further to the oral questions on the BSE recommendations to be moved to 3 p.m. on Thursday , after the vote on the motion of censure .
Mrs Barthet-Mayer has the floor to justify the request .
Mr President , I should like to propose , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , an amendment to the agenda which you have just proposed .
We would like the vote on the motions for a resolution following the Committee of Inquiry 's report into BSE to come after the vote on the motion of censure tabled on this same subject .
There are four reasons for this .
Firstly , we consider the motion of censure we have before us to be a kind of prior question on which we must definitely vote before the vote on resolutions , insofar as it must be treated in the same way as procedural exceptions in parliamentary law .
Secondly , on this same subject , it is traditional parliamentary practice to vote first of all on the text which departs most from the original text , or the most radical text .
Thirdly , if the vote on motions for a resolution were to produce a majority in favour of a condemnation of the Commission 's attitude in terms which are less strong than is implied by the motion of censure , the subsequent vote would by that very fact be devoid of any political significance .
Fourthly and finally , the result of this situation would be the unfair treatment of the initiatives of certain Members and Groups . In the case of a majority adoption of a less radical resolution than a motion of censure , a minority of Members would find themselves denied this power of censure which is an absolute prerogative of Parliament .
Mr Puerta now has the floor to speak in favour of the request .
Mr President , I have already put the points the Group of the European Radical Alliance is making today at the Conference of Presidents .
I know Parliament is sovereign and it can decide what it thinks fit by a majority - and we will all respect that .
But it does not make sense , as far as European public opinion and the way we operate are concerned , to allow other factors to interfere with the motion of censure on the European Commission , a dramatic moment if you like , Mr President , when Parliament finds itself obliged to exercise its responsibility .
There is little sense in this interference and it weakens Thursday 's vote on the motion of censure .
It could even be said that it contradicts Rule 136 of the Rules of Procedure as well as the development and consequences of the report of the committee of inquiry .
The committee of inquiry did not take a decision to table any resolution .
Nor did it decide to table a motion of censure .
But in view of the gravity of the events and their impact on the health of Europeans , the completion of the internal market and the proper functioning of the democratic institutions of Europe , 71 Members of this Parliament have tabled a motion of censure .
And that motion of censure takes priority .
That motion of censure cannot be disrupted by a prior debate and vote on motions for resolutions .
If we insist on working in this way , I think we will be lacking in self-respect as Members of Parliament , and in respect for what European public opinion is demanding of us .
So on behalf of my group and the 71 Members of Parliament who have tabled the motion of censure , I put it to you , with the full agreement of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , that the voting on the motions for resolutions should take place after the vote on the motion of censure .
In that case , if the motion of censure is unsuccessful , the Members who are tabling the motion of censure would also be able to agree with some of the resolutions established through the parliamentary policy statement .
But we cannot allow it to be said that the motion of censure is influenced for several months afterwards by a policy resolution , when we are taking the serious responsibility of moving a motion of censure on the Commission .
And we are conscious that if the European democratic institutions and this Parliament operated differently it would probably be possible to table a motion of censure or reprimand on the Agriculture Commissioner .
As that is not possible , we maintain the priority of the motion of censure .
Mr Martens now has the floor to speak against the request .

So tomorrow , Mr President , between 3 and 3.30 p.m. we are to have a combined debate on three agenda items : the Medina report , the oral questions with debate , with a debate on the motions for resolutions , and a debate on the motion of censure tabled by Mr Happart and others .
The great majority of the Conference of Presidents thought that we had to follow the normal voting procedure , namely Wednesday afternoon for those motions which had been put down .
The draft agenda says that we are to vote on the motions relating to reports on which the debate has closed .
Under Rule 34 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure the vote on the motion of censure must be by roll call and must not be taken until at least 48 hours after the beginning of the debate .
The whole question , ladies and gentlemen , is whether our House can , using this procedure , hold an in-depth political debate and whether everyone can in all good conscience reach a verdict on Wednesday afternoon in the vote on the motions , and then at 3 o 'clock on Thursday afternoon on the motion of censure .
We want a full and thorough debate .
The proposal is that the three items should be dealt with together : the Medina report , the oral questions with the motions for resolutions and the motion of censure .
I do not think there is any question of an attempt to stop every member of the House from having a completely free vote .
And this is why we and the great majority of the Conference of Presidents suggested that we should hold this joint debate , with a subsequent period for reflection as stipulated in our procedure , before the motions are voted on , and that after a similar but longer period for reflection as required in our Rules of Procedure we should vote on the motion of censure .
For this reason we advocate keeping to the agenda as it stands . It does not stop us from having a free debate , it does not stop us from being free to act , nor does it stop us from having a free vote and I am thus opposed to the proposal to amend the agenda and I urge the majority of the House to approve the agenda as set by the Conference of Presidents .
At the request of the Group of the European People 's Party , I shall now put the proposal from the Group of the European Radical Alliance to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the request to amend the agenda )
Energy Charter
The next item is the report ( A4-0041 / 97 ) by Mrs Matikainen-Kallström , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the proposal for a Council and Commission Decision on the conclusion by the European Communities of the Energy Charter Treaty and of the Energy Charter Protocol on energy efficiency and related environmental aspects ( COM ( 95 ) 440-12046 / 96 - C4-0664 / 96-95 / 0237 ( AVC ) ) .
Mr President , colleagues , the EU 's dependence on imported energy is likely to increase from the present figure of 50 % to around 75 % by the year 2015 .
It is estimated that the market for energy production equipment in the EU will grow by only 1-2 % per year over the next 15 years .
Environmental protection measures taken in the EU will have little effect unless they are also taken worldwide .
Pollution is no respecter of boundaries .
The Energy Charter originated in 1990 with an initiative by the Dutch Prime Minister , who believed that economic growth could be set in motion in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union and accelerated by means of cooperation in the field of energy .
The European Community and its Member States signed the European Energy Charter in The Hague in 1991 .
In 1994 a total of 50 parties signed the Energy Charter Treaty and the Energy Charter Protocol , concerning energy efficiency and related environmental aspects , to create a sound international legal basis for the principles and objectives stated in the Protocol .
The majority of the EU Member States have already ratified the Treaty , and Finland will do so before the end of this year .
Russia has yet to ratify it .
The USA was involved in drafting the Treaty , but seems unlikely to sign it , which is a significant shortcoming .
Energy efficiency and energy saving should be promoted throughout Europe .
Particularly in Central and Eastern Europe and the CIS States , energy savings of as much as 30-40 % could be achieved .
Western enterprises could help and advise on the introduction of new technologies , for example through the Synergy programme .
The economic transition in Central and Eastern European countries and Russia could be facilitated by means of the Phare and Tacis programmes , and energy projects could as a result serve as a way of funding the transition .
The Energy Charter Protocol on energy efficiency and related environmental aspects constitutes a good basis for more exacting environmental protection , particularly by promoting energy efficiency .
It is therefore both positive and necessary that the Charter and Protocol endorse a policy of sustainable development , the ' polluter pays ' principle and the principle of minimizing environmental problems .
However , they do not contain any legally binding provisions on environmental protection , and this is quite clearly a shortcoming .
When building new power stations , Eastern European countries could be expected to adhere to the same emission standards for sulphur dioxide , nitrogen oxides and particulates as apply in the West .
When it comes to overhauling old power stations , less exacting standards can be accepted .
New projects and measures to be implemented within the framework of the Treaty must also be preceded by a compulsory Environmental Impact Assessment .
Nuclear safety cooperation is also important .
Difficulties in maintaining nuclear power stations have increased in Central and Eastern European countries and the CIS States , as has trafficking in plutonium .
The EU ought - like the USA - to try to purchase weapons-grade plutonium , i.e. that which is enriched to more than 90 % .
By mixing it with depleted uranium , one obtains nuclear fuel with a concentration of 3-4 % , which can no longer be used to make atomic bombs .
Although at the moment nuclear weapons are being dismantled , the enriched plutonium still remains .
Just think : in this way , nuclear power could promote world peace .
Since the Treaty is of considerable importance , I recommend that the European Parliament gives its assent to the Council and Commission Decision to adopt , on behalf of the European Communities , the Energy Charter Treaty and the Energy Charter Protocol on energy efficiency and related environmental aspects .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Energy Charter is a welcome initiative .
It is important to provide a an international legal basis for the principles of energy policy cooperation , energy efficiency and related environmental aspects .
Far too often we have done so much too late , so that it is still hard to us today to find a common denominator .
The Energy Charter has four important objectives : to create an open market for primary energy sources , to facilitate the transit of energy products , to promote technology transfers , which is particularly important for the Eastern European states and the CIS states , and to restrict harmful environmental effects to a minimum and take adequate account of security aspects .
It is that aspect I am concerned with today .
Environmental aspects are incorporated in the Energy Charter in the form of the Protocol on energy efficiency .
I think it is good and also important that we finally have this Charter and , like my colleagues in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , I can only recommend that we endorse the first implementation of the Charter Treaty .
But what has been submitted to us is neither fish nor fowl .
Why are energy efficiency and environmental questions regulated in a protocol , leaving aside Article 19 of the Treaty , which is not binding ?
It is because in case of doubt the provisions of the Treaty take precedence over the Protocol .
The wording of the Protocol is marked by diplomatic phrases which are only moderately successful in concealing its lack of substance .
To try where possible to formulate low-cost and economically efficient energy efficiency policies and take adequate account of environmental aspects , as stated in Article 3 of the Protocol , sounds pretty weak .
There is not one word about introducing binding legal environmental and safety standards for energy-producing plant in the Eastern European countries , at least for power stations that supply , for instance , electricity to the European Union .
It is ironical that Austria is protesting about Mochovce while considering importing electricity from the Ukraine .
The signatory states to the Rio convention were supposed to bring down their energy consumption to the 1990 level by the year 2005 .
We are far from achieving that .
Then there was the idea of economizing elsewhere , in less costly areas , e.g. , in the CIS or the Central and Eastern European countries .
The greenhouse effect could be curbed effectively if the leaks in the gas pipelines between Siberia and Eastern Europe were sealed .
Even if only 5 % of methane escapes , the greenhouse effect potential is just as great as the potential of the 95 % that remains as CO2 after incineration .
Yet we have wasted this opportunity to lay down binding rules on technology , for instance for investments .
While competition is given high ...
( The President interrupted the speaker ) I appeal to Members to keep their eyes open and to draw the public 's attention to the shortcomings of the Charter .
We approve it because it is better than nothing , but only just .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Energy Charter is the framework of the political agreement between the countries of the east and the countries of the west , and amongst the eastern countries , the Russian Federation looms large .
The world 's great gas reserves are in Russia - in the Yamal Peninsula , in the Barents Sea , and in Siberia - and the European Union has embarked on a major programme to increase gas consumption .
I hope the new directive governing the liberalization of the gas market will soon be before this House , and what happens in the Russian Federation is therefore of paramount importance to us .
As other speakers have said , we are fully in support of consent to the Energy Charter Treaty and its Protocol on energy efficiency and related environmental aspects .
We think the treaty is good although , as Mr Stockman said , the action is limited .
In the eastern countries between 30 and 40 per cent of the energy consumed could be saved .
That is a very great deal . The Russian Federation obtains 60 % of its foreign currency from the export of energy products and this could be greatly increased , and the western countries could also reduce consumption by 20 % .
That would be the best policy for the environment , Mr President .
But we talk a lot and I do not think we are doing much .
From the environmental point of view , I consider it urgent to carry out prior environmental impact assessments and ecoauditing for all measures promoted under the Energy Treaty in the existing installations , so as to correct the massive deterioration that exists - and not in the eastern countries alone , but in our countries too .
There are three levels to the Charter : the treaty itself , the agreements specific to three countries and the concrete measures .
The steps I have outlined should apply to all of them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Energy Charter and the Energy Charter Protocol on energy efficiency and related environmental aspects have already been in the pipeline for quite some time .
And now , here we are , discussing the Council proposal that empowers the Union to adopt the Treaty , and Mrs Matikainen-Kallström 's report for the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , for which my group will be voting .
The Charter 's objectives , from security of supply of energy resources for Eastern European countries to energy efficiency and environmental protection , represent aims and contextual guidelines that have won a broad consensus in the Energy Committee .
I should , however , like to mention two remaining concerns that continue to require the Commission 's attention .
The Charter has not been signed by either the United States or Russia and , without these partners , the Treaty seems somehow incomplete , particularly as regards issues of nuclear safety in Eastern European countries - issues that the Charter could , nonetheless , help us to tackle within a cohesive framework .
The agreement could prove to be inadequate if it fails to involve Russia , from the point of view of principles and norms , and the United States , particularly with regard to technology .
The other concern is the effectiveness of our actions with regard to improving nuclear safety in the Central and Eastern European countries that were members of the former Soviet Union .
The reactors in service include some that western experts consider to be intrinsically unsafe and others that require technological improvements if they are to meet adequate safety standards .
On the basis of the norms set by the Charter , a few pilot projects should be undertaken to apply European standards to the better plants in Eastern European countries , so as to create a safety culture and work towards the definitive closure of the most unsafe installations .
The Charter will only have visible results in the eyes of the public if the issue of nuclear safety in Eastern Europe is brought under some control .
Mr President , the Treaty on the European Energy Charter and the protocol on energy efficiency represent a substantial contribution to a cleaner , more efficient use of energy ; that is good for the environment and the Liberal Group is very much in favour of it .
Investment in energy efficiency can best be made where the environmental benefit will be the greatest and at present that is in Central and Eastern Europe , where energy savings of 30 to 40 % can be achieved by simple means .
Starting with the extraction and transportation of raw materials .
Western firms can help here with expertise and advanced technology .
The benefits are twofold : lower energy costs and a healthier environment .
This brings me to my second point : the Ukraine , for example , is one of the least energy-efficient countries in the world .
Energy consumption per unit of gross national product is seven times higher there than in the European Union .
Yet two new nuclear power plants are being built with a loan from the EBRD so that Chernobyl can be closed down , and this against the advice of an independent panel of experts .
So my question to the Commission and Mrs Wulf-Mathies is this : can the EBRD invest in new nuclear plants in the Ukraine if this is not the cheapest solution to the energy problem in that country ?
Is one of the criteria for EBRD loans not that the solution chosen has to be the one which is economically the best and thus the cheapest ?
Will you and the Commission , Commissioner , have the courage at last to ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , there was and still is a lot of justifiable criticism of the Energy Charter .
Firstly , for reasons of content and then , of course , also for formal reasons .
Parliament can only say yes or no .
In fact we must of course admit that Parliament did not exactly make great efforts to exert any influence on it - which is regrettable and also rather shameful .
But we must also admit that this is the first time we have ever had international legal provisions on the inclusion of environmental costs and the polluter-pays principle , even if they are not yet entirely binding .
Previous speakers have also pointed that out .
It is after all a small step forward , even if unfortunately these environmental aspects are only set out in the Protocol .
I believe it is a political duty , and of course the duty of the Commission , to ensure that we come closer to the noble objectives and higher aims set out in the Charter .
On the other hand , of course , we must say that the conditions we have at present need to be changed , namely the fact that nobody is responsible for pipelines , nobody even repairs them and everyone says , I only get five , ten or 20 per cent out of it , and that unfortunately the revenue does not go to those from whom it is taken but , especially in the case of Eastern Europe , generally lands in the hands of the mafia .
I think our main task now is to concern ourselves a little with these matters and not just put our hand up and say yes tomorrow ; for environmental considerations must not just be taken into account in energy policy but ought to become a central aspect of it .
In the same way , energy efficiency needs to be improved and renewable energy sources must be tapped and used through better transfers of resources and framework programmes .
And that is precisely where we as a Community are setting the worst example .
Let me just remind you of SAVE , THERMIE , etc .
I hope the Commission is listening carefully .
At least we are making a start with implementing the noble aims set out in the Energy Charter .
Mr President , it has taken longer to get the Energy Charter completed than its inventor , former Dutch prime minister Lubbers , ever imagined in 1990 , largely because of a growing self-awareness on the part of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
With hindsight it was good that rather more time elapsed , since otherwise the Treaty would have been too advantageous to the West .
The present text is a good compromise between the interests of the countries which produce raw materials and those which buy them .
And yet I still have mixed feelings about this Charter .
Obviously the Eastern Europeans are keen to sell sizeable quantities of fossil fuels .
They sorely need currency in order to develop their own economies themselves .
But in the long term this Charter may push energy prices down since the supply of crude petroleum and gas will become more plentiful .
In my view this is all the more reason to tax energy as fast as possible , because low prices for fossil fuels will not favour the introduction of renewable sources !
In this sense the Charter is actually a piece of old-fashioned short-term thinking , despite all protestations to the contrary .
It is a good thing that the protocol on energy efficiency has been added to the Charter , so that it can be implemented later without too much difficulty .
It shows that thinking about energy savings has now become a commonplace .
Like the rapporteur I have my doubts about the actual implementation of the protocol .
Nowhere is there any compulsion to improve efficiency .
I fully appreciate that a multilateral treaty of this kind cannot impose too many dictates , but an awful lot is left to the goodwill of the Member States .
The environmental measures do far too little to remedy the greenhouse effect , which this Treaty will only make worse .
Nevertheless we too endorse this Treaty .
At least it gives some structure and legal certainty to the oil and gas trade .
The Union will in future have to do all it can through programmes like SYNERGY and PHARE to promote energy-saving measures in Eastern Europe , because they are sorely needed .
Mr President , I was there in Lisbon , representing Parliament when the Energy Charter Treaty was signed .
It was clear at that time that unless these protocols were taken very seriously , we could end up with a rather dangerous situation .
We are becoming more and more dependent upon imported fuel , and there are ample resources in the eastern part of Europe and farther afield so , clearly , we can put those two together and come up with a trading situation .
If we just did that , however , and failed to look at energy efficiency and environmental protection , we would end up with a situation which was far worse than the present one .
Let me say that we should , in any case , be making more use of indigenous energy sources and not relying so much upon imported fuels .
The environmental problems have already been named : greenhouse gases - CO2 above all , but also methane , as my colleague , Mr Stockmann , has ably explained ; nuclear power , where there are operational problems and , of course , problems in the disposal of waste and in the transport of fuels ; and oil exploration and production which also involve dangers .
So we need to have a worldwide environmental strategy with an impact assessment because the environment is worldwide .
Energy efficiency has quite rightly been called the fifth fuel .
It is , frankly , the best fuel .
Where you have a potential 30 % to 40 % saving , which is the case in some of these countries , how absurd that this is not the first strategy , top of the list on every occasion way beyond building unnecessary nuclear reactors .
This treaty needs tightening up .
It is weak .
Above all it needs monitoring .
This is what I ask the European Parliament to take on as a duty : monitor the working of this treaty .
Mr President , the energy situation of the countries of central and eastern Europe is such that we must think about the vital ways of monitoring the efficient use of energy resources and how they can be implemented .
However good the proposals made officially , experience has been extremely hard and inefficiencies have been shown up - together with the harm done to people 's well-being which accumulated in a socialist system where market conditions were ignored and , because there was no democracy , people 's rights were not necessarily respected .
The efficient use of energy resources must not have undesirable side effects , it must be fair and the economic effects must be positive - it is possible to have an excellent policy which avoids any undesirable side effects .
This is a consideration which must be taken into account especially every time there is a new Commission initiative aimed at improving ( rather than worsening ) the energy supply situation - it does so in a dubious way vis-à-vis the current Member States of the European Union and incorrectly , without doubt , from the viewpoint of countries which are candidates to join .
Burdening with greater percentage targets the expenditure of families on modest incomes is both regrettable and unfair ; higher energy expenditure on more antiquated equipment means damaging the competitive capacity of countries which have still not had an opportunity to modernise .
In those countries , people 's living standards is a top priority and most of the pollution in Europe ( i.e. carbon dioxide emissions ) has been produced by the most industrialised countries - Germany , the United Kingdom , Italy and France , responsible for 71.5 % of the total of the European Union 's pollution , percentages much higher than their population warrant .
Instead of burdening the budgets of those with less and impeding the development of those who lag furthest behind , the policy of the countries of central and eastern Europe should be , rather , one of monitoring legal requirements for gradually modernising domestic and industrial installations .
By supporting this restructuring , as it has been doing , the European Union would show , without the shadow of a doubt , that it really does want to find the right solution to this problem .
This is , after all , in keeping with the logic behind Article 130R of the Treaty , which takes into consideration the diversity of situations existing in different regions .
Mr President , I believe that the European Parliament should give its assent to the European Energy Charter which was underwritten in The Hague in December 1991 .
The Energy Committee of the European Parliament is right to urge the European Commission to press for negotiations with a view to removing uncertainties by conferring a binding force on the protocol on nuclear safety within this Charter .
From an Irish perspective , with the Sellafield and Thorp nuclear installations only 60 miles from our shores , it is just unacceptable that the British Government can sign up for the European Energy Charter without its own nuclear industry being obliged to comply with those provisions .
Greater protection of the environment is , of course , important and the European Union has made a start in the right direction in this regard by finalizing the SAVE III programme which is designed to support measures for reducing carbon dioxide emissions in the atmosphere .
A further concern indeed is the liberalization of the electricity and gas networks .
The European and Irish consumer , as well as the individual producers have a right to know if enhanced competition will result in higher energy costs for the consumer and , of course , the employees working in the industry have the right to know how it is going to affect their jobs .
So , the Charter should have dealt with the issue of privatization of energy resources in greater detail , outlining the protection available to the consumer who ultimately would be affected by any changes in this regard .
Mr President , there are grave defects in the Council proposal because the environmental and energy-saving clauses are aspirational only and the Charter will provide no binding legal instruments for dealing with what are admitted on all sides to be really grave environmental degradation and pollution and seriously deficient energy-saving norms in the Eastern European states , which they show no signs of changing .
This could turn out to be a Charter to waste energy , not save energy , and I would suggest to you that would be a very grave and dangerous outcome .
It was particularly noticeable during the exchange of views with Ambassador Rutten and Secretary-General Schutterle of the Energy Charter Conference that instead of defending the difficulties the Union might have in implementing environmental and energy-saving provisions of the Energy Charter , they stated baldly that some Member States did not wish binding provisions for dealing with the environment in the Charter but took the view that these should be dealt with under a separate agreement .
I believe this to be completely unacceptable as a policy for the European Union or its Member States .
The report states that the Energy Charter Protocol on energy efficiency and related environmental aspects provides a good basis for greater protection of the environment , especially by promoting energy efficiency , but the wording is meaningless .
It says that we should encourage cooperation in the attainment of environmental objections and have particular regard to improving energy efficiency .
I would suggest that in the light of the difficulties we have had with making Eastern European states understand the importance of energy efficiency , this is an absolutely meaningless document .
The rapporteur has referred to a bizarre proposal to import weapons-grade plutonium from Russia for use in civil nuclear power plants on the basis that this would promote peace .
I find this an astonishing proposal .
Although it draws attention to the fact that we have an outrageous plutonium economy and that we should not be producing plutonium , I hope we can have a serious debate and discussion on the proposal at some future date .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of Mr Papoutsis who is currently in Moscow let me once again explain the Commission 's position on this important report .
Let me first underline that the Commission attaches the utmost priority to the ratification of the Energy Charter Treaty and the Protocol on energy efficiency and related environmental aspects .
This Treaty will only enter into force once at least 30 states have ratified it .
At present , therefore , it is where possible applied provisionally .
As I am sure you know , the European Energy Charter - a declaration of intent that is not legally binding - has now been signed by 51 states and by the European Community .
Mrs Matikainen-Kallström , the rapporteur , whom I warmly thank for her report , has described its past history .
So I will not repeat it but just make clear that so far 49 states and the European Union have signed the Treaty that was drawn up on the basis of the political declaration of intent .
This Energy Charter Treaty is the first economic agreement signed by all the republics of the former Soviet Union , the Central and Eastern European countries , the European Community and its 15 Member States and other OECD member countries .
Its main purpose is to create a legal framework for long-term cooperation in the field of energy on the basis of reciprocity and mutual benefit .
The Treaty contains provisions on the development , production , transit and free trade in primary energy sources and energy products , together with the protection of investment and free movement of capital .
The Treaty and the Protocol also contain general statements about environmental aspects and improving energy efficiency .
During the negotiations we did not manage to achieve more than what you have rightly criticized in regard to the non-binding nature of some provisions .
Yet it is an important first step that so many states have in fact subscribed to these principles .
Of course the Commission will be guided by the views expressed here by the European Parliament when it implements the Charter and the Treaty .
In November the Commission submitted the communication and proposal for a Council and Commission decision on the conclusion of the Energy Charter Treaty and the Energy Charter Protocol on energy efficiency and related environmental aspects .
In addition to the conclusion of the Treaty itself , this proposal provides for the European Community and its Member States to deposit the ratification documents at the same time and for a simplified procedure for setting out the European Community 's position at the Energy Charter conference .
In December last year the Council agreed a consolidated wording of the decision .
This decision is now before the European Parliament for its assent .
Although the Commission is aware that the wording adopted by the Council differs considerably from its original proposal , it can endorse it in order to demonstrate its willingness to compromise if , as indeed seems to be the case , it is also approved by the European Parliament .
I would therefore like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Matikainen-Kallström , because her report points in precisely that direction .
The Commission takes the view that it is politically very important for the European Community to ratify the Energy Charter Treaty as soon as possible so that the Member States can conclude and ratify it in good time .
Nine Member States have now concluded their ratification procedures and most of the others are about to do so .
Conclusion of the ratification procedure by the European Union and its Member States can act as a positive signal for Russia , which has indeed signed but where the ratification procedure is still under way .
I think we can also assume that the other independent states and the Central and Eastern European states , will react to this signal .
The Commission takes the view that the conclusion of the Treaty is very much in the Union 's interest and that rapid ratification is especially important to ensure that the other parties to the Treaty and the energy industry do not lose interest in it .
Without a shadow of doubt the Energy Charter Treaty will promote cooperation between East and West , which is in the end in the interest of us all .
So let me ask you again to approve this decision .
Moreover , let me briefly refer to the question put by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel : both EIB and G7 credits are being considered for projects in the Ukraine ; to date , however , no decisions have been taken and the reports you described are also being taken into consideration here .
Mr President , I have another question for the Commissioner .
It appears that a report has been produced by a panel of experts .
Might Parliament perhaps be given that report , since it is highly important here , and relevant to my question ?
Please bear with me , but I do not know this report because I am merely standing in for Mr Papoutsis today .
But I will pass on your question .
We will then answer it in writing and tell you whether this report exists and what we will do about it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Development problems in Italy
The next item is the report ( A4-0405 / 96 ) by Mr Podestà , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on development problems and structural measures in Italy ( C4-0050 / 96 , C4-0051 / 96 and C4-0052 / 96 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the policy of economic and social cohesion and cooperation and solidarity between regions is one of the prime objectives of Union policy .
In this context , the Structural Funds are of particular significance as an instrument for trying to reduce the serious disparities between the various regions of Europe .
Now , the case of Italy is one of the most interesting because Italy - the third largest beneficiary of the Structural Funds , after Spain and Germany - is having some structural difficulties in using these resources .
In the research that led to the drafting of this report , in which the concerted efforts of various colleagues were of major importance ( for which I duly thank them ) , we tried to identify the main reasons for these difficulties as well as possible ways of making good the delay accumulated over the past few years .
Various factors are involved , of which I shall mention only the most significant : first and foremost , obviously , the political instability that has marked the country over these past years - sufficient to say that Italy has had more than fifty governments in the fifty years since the Second World War ; the fragile nature of Italy 's administrative structures , both at central and , particularly , at regional level , and a certain inability to plan and implement programmes ; a proliferation of decision-making centres , caused not least by the fact that , when regional government was introduced in Italy , no real provision was made for the distribution of powers and responsibilities , which has led to an overlapping of decisionmaking powers ; the proliferation of sometimes contradictory legislation , with long-winded and highly complex bureaucratic procedures ; the lack of coordination between Community structures and Italian central and regional structures , which has resulted in long delays in passing on information and often , I have to say , in a lack of transparency of that information ; and , finally , the accumulated delay in the use of resources for the period 1989-1993 - in this respect , it is worth mentioning the possibility , offered by the agreement that Commissioner Wulf-Mathies reached with former Minister Masera , of extending to the end of 1997 the deadline for the use of funds that should have been used by the end of 1996 .

However , all of this has inevitably led to a delay in the use of resources for the subsequent period , up to 1999 .



So , why does this continue to be a difficult situation for Italy to manage ?
In practice , Italy can be seen as two completely different countries .
The regions of southern Italy - all of which come under Objective 1 , with the exception of Abruzzi , which has only just removed itself from the list by markedly improving its situation ( and here I should like to mention an amendment , on which we shall be voting tomorrow , concerning the need , in the future , to introduce transition periods ) - have a very much lower rate of development than the regions of central and northern Italy , and much higher rates of unemployment .
Among other things , we shall , tomorrow , be tabling an amendment updating the data on employment , which unfortunately show that the situation in Italy has become even more difficult .
On the other hand , we have some data - which , unfortunately , are not yet official and which we could not , therefore , include in this report - that offer some encouragement , as they show that the use that has been made of funds over the past few months , thanks mainly to the efforts of the national and regional control centres , is beginning to improve a situation that we have to confess is still far from satisfactory .
So , Italy 's situation may not be unique in Europe but it is symptomatic of the need to make every effort - and this is the point made by the report - to shorten authorization procedures and improve coordination between Community , national and regional levels to prevent any loss of resources , which , especially in this post-Maastricht period , may be the only resources available .
Mr President , I feel that Mr Podestà 's report is very positive and accurate .
That is thanks to him , of course , but also thanks to an overall working method established within the Committee on Regional Policy , for discussing and researching all cases of structural intervention in all Member States and not , of course , in Italy alone .
There have been in-depth discussions with the Commission .
In addition , meetings have in all cases been organized with the leaders of the Member State concerned - representatives of government , parliament , local and regional authorities and the social partners - and the same applies in the case of Italy .
This is why we are now in a position to reach some general conclusions .
Certainly , as regards use of the Structural Funds , Italy is lagging seriously behind , even in comparison with some other countries - and this delay is all the more worrying as it is depriving weak areas of resources and investment .
We have to acknowledge - as the report does , and I would like to reiterate that acknowledgement - the fact that the Italian Budget Minister has given a serious undertaking to make good the delays .
I also recently had a meeting in Brussels with the Commissioners responsible and we undertook to make good the delay by the end of this year .
This is a difficult and ambitious objective , but it can be reached if a similar commitment is made by all ministers - by all ministers and , in particular , by all the regional and local authorities concerned .
In particular in Italy , most of the Structural Funds , in terms of quantity , are of course concentrated in the regions covered by Objective 1 , that is , in southern Italy , as has already been pointed out .
The worst delays concern some of these regions - not all of them - but in particular the largest of them : Sicily , Campania and Apulia .
If we can achieve results in these regions , the overall picture changes dramatically .
We therefore need special measures , but we also need commitment on all sides , a much stronger and broader political awareness .
We must call on Members of both the European and Italian Parliaments who represent these areas to make a special commitment in this respect .
The special measures required are reprogramming of objectives ; speeding up expenditure by regional authorities , including , where necessary , modifying and strengthening administrative structures ; and also giving consideration to the possibility mentioned in the report of replacing the public agencies responsible for implementing programmes in serious cases where resources are persistently under-used .
This is an extreme and very delicate measure that promises conflict with the agents concerned .
But we have to ask ourselves whether a continuing failure to act would not itself promise conflict with citizens who are being denied the use of these funds and are at risk of losing them altogether .
What , or who , is most important here ?
Finally , I should like to point out that this issue of non-use , or of failure to make good use , of the Structural Funds is one that concerns other Member States also .
This raises the issue of an in-depth review of the Structural Fund Regulations and of a simplification of procedures to eliminate bureaucratic delays and problems , with a view to the review of the Regulations due in 1999 .
I believe that the Committee on Regional Policy and the European Commission should work hard this year to begin to look at and review these Regulations .



Mr President , after what the rapporteur , Mr Podestà , and fellow Members , Mr Speciale and Mr Viola , have just said , it is difficult , not least because of the croaky voice I am suffering from today , to speak out and repeat some opinions that are commonly shared , particularly by members of the Committee on Regional Policy who have been in a position to appreciate , right from the start , the report that bears Mr Podestà 's name , because it was drawn up by him , with the help and cooperation however of all the Committee 's members .
This cooperation was mentioned a little earlier by Mr Speciale , the Committee 's excellent chairman , and I feel I need to say this publicly , because he enabled all of us to work towards a realistic and objective - since we are speaking of objectives - view of the situation .
Because of its structure , Italy is a country that can be taken as a very valid test case for other Member States .
So , what is the undertaking I should like to call for , seeing that Commissioner Wulf-Mathies is here with us ?
I refer to the need for simplification - something that has been so often repeated in the Commission 's statements when the Commissioner has attended meetings of the Committee on Regional Policy , that is repeated in Mr Podestà 's report and that has been highlighted as a matter of great urgency by my fellow speakers here today .
It is vital that certain procedures be simplified and that the various activities of the Commission , Member States and regions be rationalized and harmonized . I believe that the crucial issue goes beyond the removal of structural and cultural obstacles .
I believe that what is needed , above all else , is a clear out of certain ' physical cultures ' that prevail not only in individual Member States and at local level but also in some major sections of the Commission itself .
What is needed is cultural cohesion with the Commissioner 's guidelines and a common objective : the objective I mentioned earlier , which is , I assume , the central point of the report drawn up by Mr Podestà , to whom I offer my warmest congratulations .
Mr President , the Treaty of Rome was signed in 1957 and now , after forty years of European construction , we have to admit that , according to the annual report of the Court of Auditors , most of the errors concerning management of the Structural Funds can be attributed to the Member States .
Various material and formal errors are made in compiling applications for aid , but unquestionably the greatest and most sinister error is the one committed by Member States in obstructing the desire of the regions and counties for political and administrative decentralization .
Too often the maturity and self-management capacities of regional bodies are systematically strangled and conditioned by the centralism of the States of which they are a part , as is evident not only from the annual report of the Court of Auditors but also from relations between the regions and Parliament and from European citizens ' faith in the State .
The Italian Government 's undertaking to reform the public services and simplify procedures for using the funds required for technical assistance in managing the Structural Funds is not enough .
The more democratic and federal a State is , the more provinces , Länder and regions demonstrate their efficiency and ability to stand on their own two feet as regards the construction of the new Europe .
There are many regional bodies in Europe that are sufficiently capable and mature to maintain direct relations with European structures , but are held back by the centralized organization of the State of which they are a part .
In Italy , some regions that are fifty years old choose not to come of age , whilst others , of the same age , have obviously entered adulthood but are deprived of any independent , democratic , free initiative .
What kind of Europe are we going to construct if this Europe , in its centralism , is a reflection of individual Member States ' inability to use the resources available to them ?
Let us all work towards ensuring that the scope of the Structural Funds is extended , that they include cultural activities in the areas coved by Objective 5b , and especially mountain regions , but , above all , let us commit ourselves to ensuring that this Europe becomes increasingly democratic and federal , comprising federal States , and that regional bodies can express themselves , in the management of the Structural Funds as elsewhere , and prove that they can do a better job than the State of which they are a part .
Mr President , I , too , should like to thank Mr Podestà for the clarity of his report and the research he has done on the problems concerning allocation of the Structural Funds , not only in Italy but also in other Member States .
It is nonetheless a fact , as all my Italian colleagues here know , that the Community Structural Funds continue to be a vital resource for Italy - but , in particular , for the development of its southern regions , where unemployment has now reached close on 20 % , as is rightly mentioned in the report .
The Structural Funds are , then , an irreplaceable instrument of European solidarity and it is precisely this solidarity that should become the basis of a European identity - without it , no integration of the Community would be possible .
Certainly , we need to take note of the shameful delays that have so far characterized Italy 's use of the Structural Funds .
My country and therefore its governments , but also - with all due respect to Mr Moretti - incredible bureaucratic inefficiency at regional level have often led to loss of access to millions of ECUs that the Italian regions really need , be they in the north or the south , for access to these funds has been restricted in both the south and the north .
What has emerged is a unique situation in which Italy is one of the countries that has the greatest need for funds but which makes the least use of them .
I hope that , with the help of the contribution that Mr Podestà 's report has made and will continue to make to this debate , both Italy and the other countries concerned will be able to overcome the problems experienced to date .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make two comments on Mr Podestà 's full and in-depth report ; they concern respectively the ' if ' and ' how ' of the use of the Structural Funds in Italy .
As regards the ' if ' , that is , greater efficiency and speed of use , I take up Point 6 of the motion for a resolution to specify , in the event of delays by regional governments , which alternative public agencies , including replacements , should be the protagonists of local partnerships : for example , agencies and projects involved in regional employment initiatives , which are increasingly common and effective instruments of development in the regions covered by Objective 1 .
As regards the ' how ' , that is , improved planning , an amendment tabled by the Green Group and signed by me declares that regional development projects must comply with the principles of sustainable development , at both the planning and subsequent phases ; the amendment also calls for the involvement of the Ministry of the Environment and nongovernmental organizations .

Mr President , firstly , I should like to congratulate Mr Podestà on his excellent work : it was no easy task , but the result is outstanding .
In concordance with the report , I should like to reiterate a few considerations here .
One of the most marked differences between Italy 's situation and that of its main partners is the extent and persistence of regional disparities .
It should be possible , Commissioner Wulf-Mathies , to increase the concentration and efficiency of the Structural Funds and improve the procedures for assessing and monitoring results and available funding so as to ensure that growth in underdeveloped regions is reflected in job creation and support for the process of convergence .
If competitiveness is to be increased , more resources need to be made available for research , development and innovation .
To encourage enterprises to use innovative technologies and develop new products , the European Union should seek a better combination of support measures for capital and enterprises , technology transfers and both initial and further education and training initiatives .
The difficulties encountered with the use of the Structural Funds over the past few years have been , and remain , the cause of serious concern , both for us Italians and for Community institutions .
Attempts have recently been made to tackle these difficulties by introducing some changes to Italian structures : the setting-up of the National Control Centre and the introduction of regional agreements that could serve as a significant expression of the principle of social partnership by involving the social partners , who participate at both the planning stage and the implementation stage , when they enter into binding commitments .
In other words , what we are talking about are agreements whereby local operators , representatives of employees , enterprises and public administrations undertake to implement specific investment projects .
The promotion of local development , by means of measures to trigger small-scale local initiatives , relating to both structures and infrastructures , or by means of aid and services for small and medium-sized enterprises , takes on ever greater importance within a properly planned regional development policy .
This could indeed promote maximum job creation by taking full advantage of a whole series of initiatives that would , individually , generate just a few jobs but could , when combined , produce some worthwhile results for an employment region or area .
Local development measures consist mainly , but not exclusively , of promoting what might be defined as the mobilization of initiatives , capacities and skilled human resources , to generate production systems that look towards innovation and internationalization .
The aim of local development is , in fact , to change the attitudes underlying development strategies .
Full advantage needs to be taken of existing structures with specific professional skills , such as the EBICs , which have been set up to stimulate the local economy in areas with potential for industrial development .
To conclude , I feel that greater attention needs to be paid to three objectives : combating unemployment , promoting equal opportunities for men and women and improving instruments of environmental protection . The environment and sustainable development are often under-valued in areas that are structurally weak .
And all of this is linked to the urgent need for simpler procedures and new methods and models of information-provision .

Mr President , I , too , have greatly appreciated Mr Podestà 's report and agree with the comments concerning Objective 2 , re-industrialization , which I should like to address for a moment .
It is my opinion that , here too , the delays suggest that the problem is an underlying one , concerning the overall mechanism and perhaps what has , over the past few years , become the modern notion of programming in Italy .
But the fact that , in these areas , we have more concentrated interventions , albeit with fewer funds and , all in all , a method - reindustrialization - that goes hand-in-hand with an existing economic , productive and administrative fabric , should lead us to expect that the delays can be made good more quickly .
Having said this , however , it is my opinion that this experience of Objective 2 , which has been a real and very important experiment , not only in Italy , and which has brought the public and private sectors face to face and thrown up new ideas concerning long-term planning , has aspects that we need to address from a critical viewpoint in the reform of the Structural Funds .

I should also like briefly to mention two priorities referred to in the report : firstly , as regards local initiatives , an issue that some of my colleagues here have already addressed , I should like to point out that development requires an alternative culture , a culture of monitoring and promotion , rather than a culture of official control and authorization . And , secondly , as regards cultural activities , which tend to be subordinate to economic development , I feel that , here too , there is a need to establish , in more than a piecemeal fashion , an approach that favours the rebuilding of the economic and social fabric .
Just two more points : urban actions and policy for mountain areas .
Under Objective 2 , it has often happened that actions cease at district boundaries .
It has been important to set this limit , but I believe that this points to the need for an organic urban policy and - and the report mentions this briefly - a policy for mountain areas .
Objective 5b perhaps suggests that , instead of implementing a combination of interventions , we need , in future , to concentrate on limited but significant action for mountain areas , not just in Italy but throughout Europe .
Mr President , I should first like to congratulate our colleague , Mr Podesta , for his excellent work on what is a particularly sensitive subject for him , as indeed it would be for any of us if we had to assess the impact of structural assistance in our own country .
The European Union 's Structural Funds were set up in order to promote lasting economic and social development .
The record of their implementation has been the subject of much criticism , in particular due to the obstacles and delays in the utilization of aid .
But the most striking feature about Italy is that it continues to show extremely deep-rooted regional disparities .
I therefore consider it essential for the European Union to keep up its efforts to ensure balanced development throughout Italy .
The imperfect use of funds does not mean there is no need , but much more generally that the means for obtaining and using the available resources are inappropriate .
It sees to me unacceptable that we have not yet envisaged any system for regions who lose their eligibility under one of the Structural Fund objectives .
As what will prove to be the precedent of the Abbruzes case shows , there is no provision for compensation in order to lessen the shock of a sudden discontinuation of structural aid .
Other regions risk finding themselves in precisely the same situation in the near future .
Are they then going to see all their efforts which permitted the beginnings of economic recovery come to nothing ?
Without seeking to indefinitely maintain economically vulnerable regions dependent upon financial assistance , I believe it would be irresponsible not to create a transitional support device for these regions .
Failing this , we will soon be forced to accept that the structural measures applied today are a waste of money as the least sign of economic life in a region is likely to result in the cutting off of structural assistance as soon as the planning period ends .
The example of the Abbruzes must lead us to quickly look at what measures can be implemented in order to fill the legal vacuum which surrounds the abrupt termination of a region 's eligibility under the Structural Fund objectives .
We must therefore find a solution before 1999 , in the framework of the next Structural Fund review .
The urgency of the matter has been amply demonstrated .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Podestà , on his skill in dealing with the problems relating to the structural funds measures .
I will not analyse the specific issues , because I think those who have spoken before me have done so very accurately .
I will just refer to some general points which I think it is interesting for us to consider .
One is the concern Mr Podestà has mentioned about the future of the structural funds and the need for the European Union to determine this when the funds are reviewed in 1999 .
We note with concern that the gap between the more developed regions and the less developed regions of the European Union , far from narrowing , is tending to increase .
So the problem of applying the structural funds will continue to be important in the future .
Another disturbing issue is the fact that resources have been lost through faulty application of these funds .
In this respect , I believe priority must be given to bringing the structural funds regulations into line with the aim of applying them more effectively .
And finally , I want to highlight the need for these structural funds to be adequate and coordinated with other programmes , MEDA for example , specifically affecting the southern Mediterranean .
Mr President , I want to give warm thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Podestà , and to the committees concerned for their detailed and thorough analysis .
The Commission shares their concern about the inadequate use made of the structural funds and largely agrees with the measures you proposed for making them more effective .
As you know , in July 1995 the Commission negotiated a comprehensive package of measures with the Italian government in order to improve the management of the structural fund programmes .
Among others , this package provides for the creation of new administrative structures , for tightening up the procedures , for practical support measures and improving the skills of the programme managers , more efficient procedures for monitoring , controlling and assessing the programmes and simplified procedures for transfers of resources to the organizations responsible .
It should also be pointed out once again that all the Italian regions also approved this package of measures in September 1995 . I explained it to them all at the time .
For the rest , we made this programme and these proposals as simple as we possibly could , but control and correct financial management are essential and I think it is in all our interests not to end up with difficulties here .
At my most recent meeting with the Italian minister of finance , Mr Ciampi , on 20 January , our talks focused on assessing what has been achieved so far .
The situation as regards implementing the programmes in the Objective 1 regions has improved in relation to the figures for last May given in the report .
At present the payments to the final recipients account for more than 14 % of the total amount , compared with 7.7 % in May 1996 .
So there was a clear acceleration of payments here .
Compared with other Member States , Italy is , however , still very much offside , because the EU average is about 35 % .
But once again we must make it clear that this cannot be due just to the complexity of the Commission procedures .
Because of the lack of progress in situ , ECU 1600 million could still not be allocated and we all agreed during the discussions that this situation has to change .
That is why the Commission has once again agreed with the Italian authorities that new expenditure targets have to be set .
Unused resources from programmes that do not achieve these expenditure targets will be deducted and used mainly to finance more successful programmes .
But let me make it quite clear that this does not necessarily mean that in the end we do not also transfer resources to other regions , in the event that no improvements become apparent after a fairly long time in certain regions .
This should induce everyone actually to do something to ensure that the people at whom these programmes are aimed finally benefit from them .
With this procedure the Commission has also introduced the measures you recommended to prevent further losses of Community resources .
The Commission hopes these measures will have a positive effect even in the course of this year and it will carry out the evaluation you called for during the 1998 financial year on the basis of these measures .
Moreover , I have agreed with Minister Ciampi on regular checks of the practical implementation of the July agreement , at both technical and political level .
This applies both to the actual fulfilment of the reform undertakings and to monitoring whether the financial objectives have been attained .
And I would appeal to you : let us not create new structures now but let these new proposals and the cabina di regia finally become operative at all levels .
That is our problem : in theory and on paper we now have a very sensible system , but we need the people to apply it and to support it .
In the case of the new Objective 2 programmes , we have already embarked on radical corrections with the Italian government and I hope that this will be of some help in future too .
We have also made progress in involving the economic and social partners , both in the framework of the 1995 agreement and in relation to the new Objective 2 programmes .
I hope this will also be of help in terms of future developments .
We have also accepted your call , Mr Podestà , for greater emphasis to be put on the economic potential in the cultural sector and have incorporated this aspect in the cooperation with the Italian authorities , for it is quite clear that Italy is particularly well placed to use this economic potential .
The structural funds offer Italy a unique opportunity , with a view to economic and monetary union , to make progress with budgetary consolidation , without disregarding forward-looking investment .
I can only appeal to all those responsible to seize this opportunity .
The Commission , at any rate , will continue to use all its energies to urge that the resources finally go to the places where they are needed most urgently and we continue to hope for your active support .
Thank you very much , Mrs Wulf-Mathies .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Development problems in Germany
The next item is the report ( A4-0002 / 97 ) by Mr Botz , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on development problems and structural assistance in Germany in the period 1994-1999 ( C4-0047 / 96 , C4-0048 / 96 , C40049 / 96 , C4-0673 / 96 , C4-0674 / 96 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , reading the titles of the reports on the agenda today one could be tempted to think these are merely routine matters .
But let me begin by briefly explaining why this is anything but a routine matter in the case of Germany .
German unity , which was only possible with the assent of the Member States of what was then the European Community , has given us Germans the chance to see what belongs together come together again , as a former Member of this House , Willy Brandt , put it in 1989 .
Primarily this is of course a German task , but it is also a European one , at least insofar as when the former GDR was very rapidly integrated in our common single market , it was - and I want to emphasize that strongly - the first region of the former Central and Eastern Europe planned economies to do so .
That has created a completely new situation for one of the most prosperous Member States of the European Union , Germany .
Until 1990 there were very major structural differences outside the German borders between regions in this internal market , today we have extremely serious differences within the German borders in relation to gross product and prosperity .
By accepting this challenge to create cohesion within its borders Germany is also taking on a European responsibility .
That is why concentrated support from the European structural funds in the new Federal Länder was , is and will remain necessary and is very gratefully received by the people concerned .
Let me just say briefly , over the period 1994-1999 this involved a total of ECU 13 640 million .
European Union support in what are called the old Federal Länder , the territory of the former German Federal Republic , is equally necessary and logical .
There it goes to Objective 2 and 5b regions .
Over that same period , this involved a total of ECU 2 820 million .
Let me now briefly list and address a few of the major development problems that occur in all the target regions , meaning all the German target regions .
The administrative procedures at Commission , Federal and Land level need to be speeded up .
If I may make a personal remark , we tend rather often to hear the different levels apportioning the blame for this , but rather more rarely to hear practical proposals for solutions .
In view of the disturbing trend of the German labour market - I need not quote you the figures here - we must try to adapt the existing aid measures in as simple a manner as possible , which in principle is already possible through the regulation .
In this context , the regional economic and social partners must be involved more closely in the activities of the supporting committees .
Some Federal Länder are doing so in exemplary fashion .
But there are other Federal Länder , in particular among the new ones , where more effort needs to be made here .
It is vital for local employment and development agencies to play a larger role with a view to reducing the current rise in mass unemployment .
The procedures for disbursing the resources must become much more transparent , and I say this as an urgent warning to the German authorities , in particular the Land authorities .
The interim financing in the regions which is often still necessary should be avoided in future .
In view of the widely known budgetary situation , there is a need for action here too .
Allow me briefly to address a major problem in the Objective 1 area , where I am personally involved too .
Let me point out quite clearly that we are dealing with the consequences of structural upheavals which have meant that nearly everything has changed for nearly everyone in nearly every area of life .
This has also created certain psychological problems , which should not be disregarded .
To conclude , let me point out that the European Union 's structural funds are a vital means of building up the new Federal Länder and will have to remain so for a long time to come .
In view of the increasingly complex economic and social situation , they must become more flexible and be used more flexibly for Germany too .
All those involved at Federal , Land and Commission level , but here in Parliament too , must make their contribution .
Mr President , Commissioner , Germany is the second strongest country in the EU and the second largest recipient of resources from the European structural funds .
And that is despite the fact that Germany is supposed to be and indeed is one of the strongest countries in the European Union .
The explanation is that the European Union is paying attention to the situation in Germany and , as the rapporteur Gerhard Botz just said , is giving massive support to the new Länder .
But the European Union is also assuming responsibility for the weaker regions in the old Federal Länder .
It is important to note that , for as Europeans we want to pay attention to the regions , to regional differences .
In Germany the European Union is assisting what are regarded as the fallen giants in Objective 2 regions .
These are the industrial regions that have to overcome problems for which they need our support because they are engaged in structural adjustment measures ; they were the motive force in Europe for many decades and they therefore deserve our support .
Secondly , the European Union is also assisting the rural regions , which are quite different from the industrial ones because they have to tackle different problems , namely the lack of infrastructure and also the fact that the European agricultural policy creates difficulties for them .
In terms of disbursement of the structural fund resources , Germany is unfortunately no paragon .
In 1995 only 21 % of the funds earmarked for Objective 2 regions were disbursed .
In the case of Objective 5b regions , the figure was only 51 % .
So opportunities were missed , opportunities to promote development but also opportunities to bring the people closer to Europe by making it clear to them that Europe is looking after them too .
In the near future we will monitor the disbursement of the funds more practically , critically and promptly in the committee and at every opportunity , so that we really can make more progress with using the funds in Germany too .
We know that the application procedures are to be improved and in view of the further development of the structural funds we should take what the regional representatives have said very seriously , in relation also to the findings of Gerhard Botz 's report .
We must try when we further develop the structural funds to simplify them , to concentrate them , to strengthen partnership and avoid duplicated assistance , and in particular to ensure transparency , so that the people can see on the spot what is happening with the European resources .
We must no longer allow resources to be pocketed without it being made clear that the European Union is assuming responsibility for all those people in Europe who live in regions that need assistance .
European assistance in Germany can stand up to scrutiny .
We support it entirely .
Of course we will continue to point to the problem areas and try to bring about improvements where these are necessary .
We fully and entirely support the outstanding report by my friend Gerhard Botz .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group let me first acknowledge and express my appreciation for the common efforts made by Germany and the European Union towards the economic recovery of the new Federal Länder and the successful contribution of the structural funds towards improving the situation in German Objective 2 and 5b regions , as the rapporteur also did so well in his report .
For the future too we regard the structural funds as an essential expression of European solidarity with the disadvantaged regions of Germany .
This report is a mid-term evaluation of the development problems and structural fund measures .
It is up to Parliament and the Commission to draw conclusions from it for the next programming period .
Let me list a few of these conclusions and also of the experiences drawn from current practice .
The current procedure for drawing up EU assistance plans and operational programmes and for implementing these programmes does not make nearly full use of the possibilities for simplification provided for in the regulation .
For instance , in 1994 the Commission did not permit a uniform programming document to be drawn up .
Instead it insisted on what are called multi-fund programmes , which unnecessarily increased the administrative procedures for implementing the operational programmes .
At the same time , as a result of constantly increasing and changed requirements in relation to evaluating , reporting , etc . , the administrative statistical procedures have also increased sharply .
The Commission interprets the respective regulations very broadly - or at least this is what was constantly confirmed in practice .
Other major problems are the legal uncertainties , which result in different interpretations of various assistance aspects , such as final recipients of the assistance , costs eligible for assistance and so forth , together with the rules on actual expenditure , which create a considerable and unnecessary burden for undertakings and local authorities who have to pre-finance the costs .
That really is the crunch .
Transparent and unambiguous rules with clearly demarcated figures need to be adopted , which also take due account of the budget laws of the individual Member States and make specific provision for advance payments .
Commissioner , the new structural fund regulations must restrict the type of indicators required to the respective assistance objectives .
They must expand the rights and responsibilities of the Member States in administering the EU resources and they must widen the powers of the flanking committees and not make their decisions subject to additional confirmation by the Commission .
The economic effects of the assistance and their acceptance by the economy and the regions could be measurably and considerably improved by these proposed measures , without incurring any extra expenditure .
I believe that Mr Botz 's report offers a good point of departure for this .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , Mr Botz , I think you have produced a splendid report on the structural funds position in Germany , which is an obligation for Germany - as you yourself said so well - and an obligation for Europe .
These funds have to cope with the problem of the new Länder as regards infrastructure , not to mention everything corresponding to their application for environmental improvements and , above all , for the creation of employment and hence major support for small and medium-sized firms , which can best generate employment in those territories .
You have highlighted two important points in your report which could also be applied to other States .
The first is the importance of involving the social partners in decision-making , application and monitoring of the structural funds .
The second , equally important , relates to direct participation by the Länder authorities : they are the best placed to ensure more effective application of the structural funds , in line with the principle of subsidiarity .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there have been some changes in the nature of structural assistance since the Delors White Paper , which enshrined the concept of ' sustainable development ' .
Delors also made it clear that basically regional development must be interpreted more broadly .
More emphasis was accordingly laid on environmental protection and the using structural change as a means of creating new jobs .
Germany wasted this development opportunity .
There they rake in EU resources and pass them on to the Länder via the instrument of Community assistance , following the economic policy model of the 1950s .
Yes , esteemed colleagues , you have understood me correctly .
In Germany the structural funds cannot be used for the same broad spectrum of assistance as has been customary throughout Europe since 1994 .
The main victims of this are the five new Länder and because they have no financial reserves they have to rely mainly on what they can assist jointly with the Federal Government .
But the small and medium-sized undertakings have also suffered , which is why so far there are no SMUs in the new Länder , even though assistance has been going on for a long time .
We cannot just let this continue unchecked and should aim now at decisive changes .
I would ask you to that end to support the amendments tabled by the Greens in the European Parliament .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all Mr Botz rightly says in his good report that rising unemployed is the biggest social problem facing the united Germany .
But real unemployment is far higher in the new Federal German Länder in particular than the statistics suggest .
The European Union and the Federal German Republic have certainly used the European structural fund resources successfully to improve the situation in the Objective 1 regions in the new Federal Länder and the Objective 2 and 5b regions in the old Federal Länder , although unfortunately there were considerable delays in the latter case , Commissioner .
It is essential to avoid such delays in future !
It is not easy to achieve the aims of creating and protecting jobs in the new Federal Länder , although ECU 13 640 million have been planned for 1994-1999 .
In the Objective 2 regions , ECU 1 590 million are also to be set aside for the economic and social restructuring of industrially backward regions .
The lion 's share of ECU 1 130 million goes to NorthRhine Westphalia and Berlin .
Lesser amounts go to states , for instance c .
ECU 32 million to Bavaria .
Instead they will receive ECU 1 230 in Objective 5b assistance .
This assistance is very important for the rural regions , especially in states such as Bavaria and Lower Saxony , for instance to enable them to tap new agricultural income sources , create new jobs and to promote training and further training .
Commissioner , at this point I would like to address your plans for concentrating and improving the efficiency of the structural funds after 1999 .
In the event that Objective 5b assistance really is abolished , it is vital for rural development and assistance measures to continue , otherwise we will risk a further flight from the land and an unhealthy growth of conurbations .
At the same time , you want to assist the environment , which is damaged by this kind of trend .
Ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament and of the Commission and the Council , when you continue with the development of the structural funds , do not forget to assist the rural areas and the people who live in them !
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I agree that the Botz report gives an objective picture and a critical view of the development problems and structural measures in Germany over the period 1994 to 1999 .
Commissioner , I think it was a good idea for this report to be submitted during the first half of the reference period because that can enable us to deal with the problems that have been identified during our further handling of the structural funds and thus make effective use of the remaining time to promote structural development in Germany .
What are the crucial points in the Botz report ?
We must seek to improve the coordination between the various funds .
That means that the consultation and service capacities have to be expanded to make it easier to identify potential assistance areas .
Furthermore , in my view it also means that in future we should concentrate on fewer but more effective programmes and press ahead with them .
The application procedures have to be simplified .
And here , Commissioner , we are fully and entirely in agreement with our Italian colleagues .
After all , we cannot continue having advisory offices in order to help us find our way through the bureaucratic European application procedures .
In their own interests the regions must be more closely involved in the decision-making processes .
This applies in particular to the pilot projects , for which only 1 % of structural fund resources are available but which involve a lengthy and costly application procedure and in the end are not authorized for lack of resources .
We must make Europe more visible , more comprehensible .
The structural funds make a splendid contribution to the adaptation of the European regions .
Major differences exist between individual regions in Germany too .
I would wish , indeed I would demand that all European resources that go to the regions are also clearly recorded as such and shown in figures .
Following the German saying ' Do good and tell about it ' , this would give the European Union a better image and reputation in the regions .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes Mr Botz 's comprehensive and balanced report and I hope that we will be able to translate most of its findings into practice .
The shock of the labour market situation in Germany , but also the very serious economic break-ups in East Germany make it very clear why the Federal Republic comes second only to Spain and Italy in terms of overall assistance from the structural funds .
As a number of Members have pointed out , this fact is unfortunately too little known in Germany itself , which is why I can only support your efforts in that direction .
For the rest , it is not just a question of making friendly gestures but also of the Federal Government and the Federal Länder in question publishing details of structural fund participation .
Between 1991 and 1993 , the structural funds helped create and preserve more than 220 000 jobs in East Germany and I hope the figure will be even larger not just in East Germany but in Germany as a whole over the current assistance period .
Let me also point out that the European resources that go to Germany are not just a continuous and calculable source of finance but are also a tangible expression of European solidarity .
So I welcome the fact that the report takes a most positive view of this contribution from the European structural funds both to Objective 1 regions and to improving the situation in the German Objective 2 and 5b areas .
The Commission broadly endorses the conclusions in the report regarding the development problems and confirms the priorities it set , jointly with the Member States , for the period until 1999 : namely combatting unemployment , the environment and sustainable development , improving competitiveness - especially in the case of SMUs - and equal opportunities .
They have been clearly defined in the Commission 's guidelines for the new programming period 1997-1999 for Objective 2 areas and these projects have proven themselves , as the new German programming plans show : the Commission has accepted six out of nine programmes on principle since the end of January .
In saying this I also want to make it clear that this time we are deciding the programmes early in 1997 and that we have effectively countered the criticisms that have been made about delays here .
For the rest we intend to submit similar guidelines for the mid-term review of Objective 1 areas .
I think we should use this forthcoming mid-term review to take critical stock of the situation , for I believe we should regard the dramatic decline in growth of Objective 1 areas , i.e. , in East Germany , and the rise in unemployment as a reason to check all the planned measures once again in terms of their effectiveness and , where necessary , to adjust the programmes accordingly .
Mr Botz , in your report you address a widespread concern in the new Federal Länder in noting that the first green shoots of economic recovery in ' regions of hope ' must not be jeopardized by a premature reduction in support rates .
Let me therefore point out , and with reference not just to the East German regions , that firstly , we must guarantee solidarity with the poorer Länder and regions in future too and secondly , even if they achieve the GDP targets , which unfortunately is unlikely to be the case in East Germany in the short term , we should avoid any sudden breaks in assistance .
Abruzzi , which was referred to earlier , is in fact quite a good example of slow phasing-out , rather than the reverse .
I think we should look at the situation in practical terms .
I also want to make it clear here that we will not forget the rural areas when we review the structural funds .
As you rightly pointed out , Mr Botz , one of the most important tasks for the new generation of programmes is to simplify the implementing and financing procedures .
There are certainly areas here where improvements are needed .
But let me also point out , and recently I have undertaken a number of trips round the various regions , that the East German Federal Länder now regard the EU instruments as more flexible and targeted than the German ' joint scheme ' .
Perhaps we should draw a lesson from this that we do not only need major changes in the Commission and that there is in fact some reason to believe that we can all achieve improvements through cooperation and partnership , on the basis of the subsidiarity principle .
For the rest I hope that the SEM 2000 procedure concerning eligibility for assistance will bring some relief even in the short term .
On the question of evaluation , I know this subject keeps being brought up .
The German Federal audit board criticized the fact that the German aid instruments contain almost no target projection , no quantified objectives and no rational evaluations , and I think this explains why the Germans groan so much about the European requirements .
But I believe that if more account was taken in Germany of the Court of Auditors and its reservations we would also find evaluation easier .
I would also point out that Member States ' budgetary laws are far more complex and less flexible than the European Union legislation .
For instance , as you know , they do not have the transfers of resources we have under European law and which are a particular advantage to backward regions .
And when you consider that the majority of resources are based on advance payments and only the last 20 % depend on the measures actually being taken , I do believe this is a very generous system .
I hope you are taking note that the interest that has meanwhile accumulated in Bonn also benefits the regions .
Let me just point out again that of course we cannot say on the one hand that we want strict controls , that we want sound financial management , while on the other hand we just keep paying advances and do not make sure that in the end the measures really have been carried out and carefully executed .
I believe this procedure allows for great flexibility and I would wish to see it presented as being as transparent as it actually is .
Let me conclude with two pieces of good news .
Firstly , at the end of 1996 the payments backlog in the new Federal Länder was basically made up and the only remaining delays are with Objective 2 and 5 programmes .
These delays do indeed exist , but here gain we have a good chance of making them up .
That applies in particular to Objective 2 .
Secondly , we have made substantial progress with establishing the principle of partnership , and I hope this will make the programmes more effective and lead the regions to identify more closely with their EU programmes .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Cohesion policy and the enviroment
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0360 / 96 ) by Mr Hatzidakis on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the Commission communication on cohesion policy and the environment ( COM ( 95 ) 0509 - C40141 / 96 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report that I am privileged to present to you today deals with Community cohesion policy and the environment .
It relates to the Commission communication on the subject - which , I must say , is a very good document - and examines the effects which the Union 's policies to promote economic and social cohesion are having , and may have , on the environment in the Member States and regions which are the recipients of assistance .
The quality of the environment has a direct bearing on the quality of our lives and should therefore be a matter of continuing concern to us .
The degradation of the environment which has already occurred poses great dangers .
As I say in my report , the Union 's cohesion policies can actually have a prejudicial effect on the environment in some cases .
All necessary measures must therefore be taken to eliminate these adverse effects and to harmonize the cohesion policies with the goal of environmental conservation .
We have to find the golden mean via which the cohesion policies can in themselves contribute to the fostering of sustainability .
It should be understood , also , that development and environmental protection are not necessarily mutually incompatible , as was believed in the past and as many still believe , but that they can actually complement each other .
A good environment is often a main prerequisite for development .
A region blessed with good environmental conditions is certainly more attractive to investors than one with a damaged environment .
For example , cleaning up beaches and setting up a biological purification plant in a tourist area , particularly in the regions in the south of the Union at which the cohesion policies are principally aimed , not only benefits the environment of the area but also makes it more attractive for tourists and therefore contributes to its development .
In order to achieve these objectives , however , the cohesion policies need to be changed and reformed in a number of ways .
I list the requirements in my explanatory statement , and I will mention a few of them quickly now .
Firstly , it is essential to boost the environmental dimension at every level of the planning and implementation of the Union 's cohesion policy .
This can be achieved through increasing the appropriations for the environment , improving the quality of environmental projects and creating the potential for purely environmental Community initiatives .
Secondly , as regards the Cohesion Fund , which , as you know , finances actions in the transport and environmental sectors , the distribution ratio of 50 % : 50 % , which so far , despite the clear improvements in relation to the past , has not been fully respected , must be strictly observed .
The greater emphasis should be placed on promoting the most environmentally-friendly solutions , by giving priority , for example , unlike at present , to railways over roads .
As far as the environment is concerned , support should be given for actions which are more directly environmental , such as afforestation and the combating of desertification in the Mediterranean area .
Thirdly , the particularly important institution of the environmental impact assessment needs to be reformed . Assessments are carried out at present , of course , but their effectiveness is very questionable .
They must take place before the project is approved and be carried out by persons who are independent of the contractors , and they must be binding .
Fourthly , it would be helpful if the Commission could initiate a study to find a widely accepted methodology for measuring the possible environmental impacts of projects and actions .
Fifthly , there is a need for an improvement in the functioning of the monitoring committees . This must , of course , be pursued in close cooperation with the Member States in order to avoid undermining the principle of subsidiarity .
It would be a good thing , furthermore , if a body of environmental monitors were to be established at Community or national level .
This body would monitor compliance with the environmental conditions on a continuous basis and be able to impose fines or other penalties in the event of violations in accordance with ' the polluter pays ' principle .
Sixthly , an important role can be played by the broad range of undertakings known collectively as eco-businesses - the great majority of which are small and medium-sized - which engage in such activities as pollution control , the production of new , energy-saving technologies and the provision of services for waste management and reduction .
Here we have a good example of the combination of the agreeable with the beneficial : environmental protection and also the fostering of development through the support of small and medium-sized enterprises which create permanent jobs .
Lastly , assistance should be provided for environmentally-friendly activities , such as eco-tourism .
I would like to thank all those who contributed to the completion of this report with useful observations , proposals and amendments .
In its final form , as presented to the House , it satisfies me almost completely .
I have tabled only two amendments , one of which is purely technical and the other a more substantive formulation of a particular point .
In finishing I wish to say that I hope that the conclusions of this report are taken seriously by the Commission and , most importantly , that they can be discussed in the framework of the impending reform of the structural funds .
The Community 's cohesion policies must in future be made even more environmentally-friendly . As I said at the beginning , we all of us have to grasp that development and environmental protection are not mutually incompatible objectives but , rather , that they can complement each other , and that , indeed , they must complement each other in order for development to be sustainable .
Madam President , the House has seen the opinion of the Environment Committee so there is no need for me to repeat everything that it says . I would just like to say a few words in connection with three or four of the points that are mentioned in it .
I believe , firstly , that we need to move more purposefully towards a policy of serious and responsible pricing of natural resources . These resources are often used wastefully .
I think , in particular , of water and energy resources .
Green taxes could help , but , unfortunately , there seems to be very little progress in that direction .
The second point that I feel obliged to mention , without elaborating , is the need for integration of the objectives of sustainable development with the common agricultural policy .
A third point , and one that we feel merits particular attention , is the need to make sure that national selection of environmental programmes is not distorted by political or electoral pressures .
The Commission will have to exercise more control in this regard and start to impose sanctions at some juncture .
It is not acceptable , for example , to select Pharaonic projects involving the diversion of rivers when water-saving and small projects would be more beneficial .
Another point is nature conservation .
We think that too little attention has been paid to investment in terms of nature maintenance and protection .
Here one sometimes finds baffling violations : environmental investments supported from the Cohesion Fund , such as biological purification plants , which actually damage the environment because they are constructed in woodland , and therefore necessitate the felling of trees , or on beautiful pieces of coastline or even in vulnerable biotopes .
I could give examples of such projects in Greece and elsewhere .
The integration of sustainable development objectives into routine policy practice will be promoted very substantially if the very interesting report provided for us by the committee and the arguments adduced by Mr Hatzidakis , which we endorse , stimulate action on these points .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as part of the budgetary authority our House has shown , with what is called the greening of the budget , how much importance it attaches to environmental policy within the Union 's expenditure policy .
Of course this applies very much to structural and cohesion policy , especially in view of the fact that many of our citizens fear that the Union uses their taxes first and foremost for onesided industrialization and that this tax revenue is then used to repair and remedy the environmental damage this has caused .
The very good report by Mr Hatzidakis now before us also leads one to suspect that the Commission is still not taking this disquiet felt by the people seriously enough .
There is no other way to interpret the lack of meaningful and in particular comparable data on the percentage shares of expenditure on the environment .
I believe that as Members of Parliament we must be particularly concerned to have transparent data on expenditure before us and to be able to check it accordingly .
Moreover , we must emphasize that , as stated by the rapporteur , there is still an imbalance between transport infrastructure projects and environmental projects .
We expect the Commission to take rapid , concrete action as a means of emphasizing the importance it attaches in cohesion policy to its projects , which are right as such , in the field of environmental expenditure .
We know that in the medium term too there will of course be a need for action here after 1999 .
The social democrats in this House support the report and congratulate the rapporteur again on his detailed and good work .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in its communication on cohesion policy and the environment , the Commission presents a detailed and illustrated overview of the factors necessary for achieving complementarity between cohesion policy and environment policy , a complementarity which presupposes that development has the least possible impact on the environment and that both can go hand in hand in harmony .
First of all , I want to congratulate the rapporteur on his report analyzing the measures necessary to obtain that harmony .
As Mr Hatzidakis rightly points out , the strategic objective is sustainable development .
However , we still have a long way to go in applying cohesion to achieve truly sustainable development , even though progress has certainly been considerable .
In fact , in implementing the programmes , the Commission concentrates priority action on the environment in terms of legislation and regulations .
However , as the rapporteur points out in his report , considerable efforts are needed and progress must be made on evaluation and control of the programmes , both before they take place and afterwards .
The Commission recognized this in the seventh annual report on the structural funds in 1995 , when it stated that it remains necessary to improve both evaluation and environmental monitoring of the programmes .
As regards the ' cohesion countries ' , the same report notes that the Commission is concentrating on water management measures and efforts should be geared towards another type of measure which promotes respect for the environment , because there is a danger that areas as important as nature conservation will be left to one side .
Still relating to the ' cohesion countries ' , we support Mr Hatzidakis ' thesis on transfer of technical resources and knowhow from the most developed Member States to the least developed , within the framework of the Union 's cohesion policies , because that can have a positive effect on the environment of those countries .
And finally , mention must be made of the primordial role the local and regional authorities need to play , because their participation in the decision-making process and the management of the programmes must inevitably be increased to achieve greater efficiency , as the environmental impact is most obvious at local and regional level and that is where the most direct work on sustainable development can be done .
Madam President , I agree that the Hatzidakis report is an excellent one , but for the Commissioner 's benefit I should say that two years ago we had more or less this self-same debate in Parliament and singularly little has improved since then .
We need to realize that a clean environment makes a region more attractive to inward investment .
So spending out of European funds to improve the environment frequently proves economically beneficial - this should really be the basis of the cohesion policy .
We note in Mr Hatzidakis ' report , but in the opinion delivered by the Environment Committee too , that this cohesion policy is responsible for a lot of environmental damage in the European Union ; that is unacceptable and it violates the Treaty .
We have to improve environmental impact assessment and make it more accessible to those concerned .
That means that the programmes too must be the subject of environmental impact assessments .
I refer you to paragraph 12 of the resolution .
In this way the principle of prevention can at last be properly applied .
Lastly , Madam President , there must be greater concern under the cohesion policy for protection of the natural world .
Too much environmental spending is still going to projects concerned with so-called water infrastructure .
And that is detrimental to nature .
Madam President , we want action from the Commission so that we do not have to keep on asking it for the same things .
Let us see the Commission buckling down to the task so that we do not have to repeat ourselves next year .
Madam President , the Hatzidakis report contains a number of important recommendations for the Commission 's future structural policy .
Regional aid goes back a pretty long way in Europe .
Its objective was always purely economic .
In other words , it was geared to increasing growth , restructuring economies and narrowing the gap between levels of prosperity in the Community .
All of these were very worthy aims but they had one serious handicap : they took hardly any account of damage to natural values or the environment .
Provided there was growth , all was well .
But things are now changing , albeit in dribs and drabs .
It is good that DG XVI has announced that the link between cohesion and environment will be made clearer .
But the Hatzidakis report reveals that this announcement has one major shortcoming ; it is not specific enough .
What exactly is the Commission going to do to now to establish economic cohesion in a sustainable manner ?
That is the billion-dollar question .
I can imagine the following points : there should be efforts to create a separate Community initiative to safeguard or improve the environment and a certain percentage of structural fund monies should be set aside for compensatory measures .
The principle of compensation should be a routine part of the planning procedure .
In some countries of the Union this is the case , but it certainly is not in those countries which receive the lion 's share of structural fund money .
It has come to my notice that some people do not even know about this principle 's existence .
So what should we go for ?
In large-scale infrastructure projects , for example , for the building of & # x02BC ; wildlife overpasses ' .
This will preserve the habitats of rare animal species at a relatively low cost .
We hear a lot of talk about a certain percentage of the total costs of building a road or railway line .
I should like to hear what the Commissioner thinks about these compensatory measures .
Does she think it feasible to have provision for these included in the structural fund regulations ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report . It is a thoughtful and well-corroborated piece of work .
After the speeches and comments of the other members , there is very little left for me to say , but it will not be futile , I think , or a waste of time , if I add a few words about certain points .
The environment is unquestionably one of the most crucial issues with which the European Union - and not only it - has to grapple , and I think everyone now recognizes that .
The time when the environment was a subject of concern to just a few people on the margins of politics has gone .
Today the requirement for economic and social choices and activities to be adapted to the environment 's capacity to withstand them is accepted almost universally .
The European Union 's cohesion policies must provide for a substantial strengthening of the environmental dimension in the framework of their future implementation .
These policies have done much to promote development and progress in recent years , but it is a fact that development very often increases the burden on the environment .
It is essential , therefore , that economic policies are targeted towards the goal of sustainable development .
Protection and conservation of the environment is now a top priority . If that priority is ignored , the results for us , in our own time , will be devastating , and future generations will be left with a massively devalued inheritance .
The supranational and , frequently , global scale of certain environmental problems demands cooperation at the local , regional , trans-frontier and international levels .
The European Union has great moral , economic and political standing in the world , and it must use its influence more effectively to promote international efforts to solve the global problems and foster sustainable development .
As I finish , let me stress this : the environment depends on what we do collectively ; the environment of the future will depend on the actions that we take now .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , human welfare is inconceivable if the ecosystems are not protected . Their deterioration would make growth unsustainable .
So environmental protection must be a crucial objective of regional policy .
Cohesion and environment are , and must increasingly be , two basic objectives of European Union action .
The horizontal nature of both and their priority application to all Community policies already appear in the treaty - articles 130 A to 130 E.
The Commission is on the right track with its communication , although it should be required to augment both policies .
The backward regions need aid to protect the environment - their environment , our environment .
We must move to real convergence in quality of life as well .
Maintaining and empowering the cohesion fund in the future , strengthening structural funds measures and Community initiatives targeted on the environment and , in particular - I want to stress this - raising awareness , not only of national governments , but also of regional and local authorities and of citizens in general , are the essential routes to regarding the environment in the rural and backward peripheries of Europe as an investment in the future , generating employment and balanced and sustainable development .
Let me end by congratulating Mr Hatzidakis on his report and on having succeeded in intelligently incorporating the valuable contributions of the Committee on Environment and the Committee on Budgets of this Parliament .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , once again the European Parliament is definitely going to reassert its commitment to the principles aimed at guaranteeing the environment dimension in the elaboration and application at all levels of the European Union 's cohesion policy .
These are the unalienable principles and guidelines which we have always defended and which we demand , and which we still continue to consider vital for making it possible to achieve sustainable development .
The introduction and observance of new and better rules in the environment field is , of course , something positive : to achieve and reinforce controls and actions underpinning their respective implementation is something which can only , obviously , be supported . Giving support to products and transfers of ecological technologies is something which is relevant and a natural approach for developing a European Union with greater internal cohesion .
These good ideas and examples , together with the good guidelines put forward , could continue to take up all of my time - and I should also congratulate Mr Hatzidakis on his excellent work .
But there is always a ' but ' .
Sometimes more than one .
In this debate there are also buts , and I should like to refer to them .
We should like to see the implementation of these rules and guidelines simultaneously applied with equal consequence and effectiveness in every aspect of Community action , from agricultural policy to agro-industrial policy to industrial activities , more generally , in particular where - in the less developed countries and regions of the European Union - it is responsible for a large share of highly harmful toxic emissions which could actually damage the future of human life .
We , therefore , find it hard to comprehend the huge relative deficit and even the virtual non-existence of basic infrastructures supporting economic activities in the cohesion countries , from transport to the infrastructures related to water supplies and provision - for example , in my country using the waters of the Alqueva - and it is incomprehensible that these should not be analysed with more thoroughness .
Insisting on subjecting cohesion policies to environmental criteria is absolutely defendable but we doubt the goodwill of those promoting it - as they support it in an almost exclusive or obsessional way .
Therefore , we have more or less serious fears that , behind the unquestionably good ideas and guidelines , lurk strategies which aim at making it more difficult to restore the balance and or at impeding genuine economic competitiveness rather than being truly interested in defending and promoting internal cohesion in the European Union .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , while travelling to Strasbourg today I read an article in a Spanish newspaper on concern about the environment amongst the international scientific community .
It has an ambitious proposal : to gear all its forces towards the century of the environment - the coming century - and provide all possible information to those taking the decisions .
The report Mr Hatzidakis is presenting today on the Commission communication on cohesion policy and the environment specifically mentions the wide concern this issue arouses , not least amongst ourselves .
The need for Community structural measures to prevent the environment deteriorating , highly rational use of environmental impact studies , sharing the cohesion fund 50-50 between infrastructure and environmental projects , more effective monitoring committees , creation of a specific Community initiative on the environment ... ladies and gentlemen , all this cannot remain a mere wish list , but has to be transformed into tangible reality .
Development and the environment - as our colleague points out in his report - cannot be opposing concepts but must be complementary .
Systematic dialogue with local and regional authorities , investment in better training for women and men working in the sector - 80 % of whom are fairly unskilled , greater attention to preventive measures , better technical assistance from the Commission and enshrinement of the principle for selecting the most beneficial or least prejudicial measures for the environment are - as Mr Hatzidakis says - fundamental factors for making progress on the road to a Community regional policy increasingly committed to our environment and with the already established principle of sustainable development .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , to avoid repetition , I will just emphasize a few points :
First , I note that the results of the cohesion policies in terms of regional development are positive overall .
Second , it is good not only for the less developed regions , but also for the rich regions - thus fulfilling the forecasts for the single market .
With criticism of the regional development policies growing , the European Commission must evaluate the beneficial repercussions of the regional development policies on the richest regions of the Union .
Existing preliminary data on the transfer of wealth and capital between more and less developed countries could surprise those critics .
Third , I agree with the rapporteur that the regulations on the cohesion fund are not always complied with , either in letter or in spirit .
The Commission must be vigilant and ensure that the 40 % of the fund allocated to environmental policies really does go to them .
Fourth and last , there should be a more binding obligation to carry out an environmental impact study , not just a formal one as at present .
Similarly , for the concept of sustainable development to be effective , projects in progress must be monitored and on completion their environmental cost must be evaluated .
I end by congratulating Mr Hatzidakis on his excellent report .
Madam President , I think that , on the whole , we have a good report before us .
It highlights several weak points in our environmental policy .
It also states categorically that care of the environment must permeate all parts of the Union 's policies .
For this to happen , there needs to be a firm legal basis .
This is why I think that point 13 in the report , which discusses the Directive and the environmental implications is especially important .
It is quite clear that this Directive , in the current climate , is too weak and vague on several important points and that it needs to be improved .
I would like to give a concrete example of this .
It concerns the building of the Öresund bridge which forms a permanent link between Sweden and Denmark and which will have grave environmental consequences .
It is extremely doubtful that this Directive was considered when the decision was taken to build this bridge .
While building work has already commenced on the bridge there is a court case underway in Denmark to establish how far the EU directive has been fulfilled .
It is quite obvious that environmental concerns are put to one side if they happen to be in conflict with greater economic interests .
It is precisely for this reason that a firmer legal basis is needed to enable us to intervene and prevent implementation of a project until we are certain that the Directive has been properly complied with as far as environmental consequences are concerned .
I would also like to express my support for amendment proposal No. 2 from the Green Group which concerns the provision of financial support for environmental organisations which participate in the supervisory committee .
I think this is a very important issue .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Hatzidakis , because I think he has done excellent work .
He has focused our attention on a key issue today and in the future .
The structural funds certainly needed a pretty strong and radical rethink , and he has done that . It would be a major advance if the proposals made in the report became reality .
When we talk about the structural funds and employment , we must recognize that the structural funds are not designed to generate immediate jobs , and we need to concentrate on what we should expect of the structural funds .
First , no environmental abuse must be committed in the use of them , as has happened in the past , and serious and far-reaching mistakes that have occurred must be corrected ; secondly , European Union cohesion policy must contribute to the protection , improvement and empowerment of the environment in Europe .
I think that is the report 's objective framework .
We must not expect things of this report that it cannot and should not provide .
We should concentrate specifically on its aim : to guarantee that environment policy is implemented along with cohesion policy .
The report also gives a clear warning - and I shall end with this point , Mr President - that the cohesive character of European Union environment policy is not always guaranteed .
It could be said that environment policy is actually liable to be accused of being ' anti-cohesive ' .
As the report states , environmental issues should not be used to disguise competitiveness .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Hatzidakis , on his excellent report and on initiating a rethink as well .
For too long environmental issues have been seen as a brake on development , as an obstacle , principally in the countries of the south of Europe which need that development most .
But this report sets out a different scenario , viewing the environment and its inclusion in cohesion policies as a development factor in itself .
First because respect for the environment helps create agreeable surroundings , which is in turn a vector of productive investment , be it industrial or in the services sector .
And secondly because the environment is a productive sector in itself , and a great generator of jobs too , with some growth indicators higher than in traditional sectors .
I also want to stress that this report seeks to involve regional and local authorities in the planning , monitoring and evaluation stages for the structural and cohesion funds , and I would add implementation , where the regions have that power .
Madam Commissioner , I imagine you are highly sensitive towards the European nations and regions which do not have statehood , but which , in full application of the principle of subsidiarity , bring decision-making closer to natural reality and the citizens .
So you will quite understand that my message to you is to pay particular attention to point 16 of the resolution .
Just as in the Middle Ages certain kings who were powerless in comparison to the feudal lords sought alliance with the towns to progress political and social development , so the European Commission and the regions must give each other mutual support to progress regional cohesion and the construction of Europe , rising above the inertia of the States in this regard .
So I am convinced that greater regional participation in the planning , monitoring , implementation and evaluation of these funds will help improve and optimize them , and that this improvement will include the deepening of the environmental aspect of cohesion policies .
Madam President , as has often been observed here , and as the rapporteur has clearly shown , cohesion policy is inseparable from environmental policy .
The environmental dimension and sustainable development absolutely must be taken into account in all Structural Fund and Cohesion Fund measures .
For this reason I do not particularly like the idea of setting up another new fund , this time for environmental policy , because the environment ought precisely to be an element in the operations of the Structural Funds .
No such step should be permitted , because it would damage the environment .
I also support the use of EU budget and Structural Fund and Cohesion Fund resources for direct environmental protection measures because employment and the environment are often seen as being in conflict with each other , but this is actually a misconception .
There are regions where sustainable development can be achieved only through sustainable development of the environment , for example where tourism is concerned - a field in which it is predicted that a great many new jobs will be created in the future .
It does not make sense to develop tourism services unless at the same time measures are taken to ensure that we have clean water , clean beaches and unspoilt nature .
Regional development or regional planning is a new element in the Union 's activities .
By means of it , an effort is being made to devote attention to environmental aspects on a European scale .
Here I should like to stress only that in order for this Interreg II C initiative to succeed fully in those regions where it is implemented , it is essential to ensure that both the EU Member States and the third countries involved in the programme can participate fully .
At present only Member States receive support under the Interreg II C programme , and this could mean that the third countries are not sufficiently motivated to play their part in this cooperation .
Madam President , environment and cohesion , two priorities which , albeit recognised in the letter , are not effectively applied to political practice in the European Union .
But why ?
Because , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , they hit at the heart of the matter .
Indeed , the thorough application of a concept of sustainable development is undoubtedly the solution for the future but it creates problems for those looking for immediate results .
If Europe wants to be a future force , or rather a force with a future , it must rely on these two essential values : protecting the environment and cohesion , not only economic but also social and educational cohesion .
These are the poles of the axis which defines a sustainable Europe .
The Cohesion Fund and the Structural Fund were not and are not questions of the European Union 's generosity .
They were an act of lucidity because strengthening cohesion is just as essential for the strong countries as for the weak members of this open and competitive society .
Let us not lower the tone of the debate by attributing the defence of this point of view to national interests .
I defend here the interests of Europe as a whole and I think that by defending a better European Union , I am defending my country .
The exceptionally high quality report by Mr Hatzidakis , which takes up many points in the equally excellent opinions accompanying it , sums up the essence in points 1 , 2 and 3 .
I shall not repeat them but I would insist on their political importance .
In points 6 , 8 , 12 , 15 , 19 and 21 he puts forward solutions which deserve the full attention of the Commission .
Instead of a 50 / 50 balance , as suggested by the report , for transport and the environment , in my view it would be better for the Cohesion Fund to stimulate integrated policies on these aspects .
And I will be the first , ladies and gentlemen , to urge my country to do the same .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , first I want to congratulate Mr Hatzidakis , because in his report he has made it clear that one of the prime objectives of the cohesion policies is to achieve sustainable development which does not destroy the environment .
To achieve it , the various cohesion programmes and measures must be directed not only towards regional development but also towards strengthening respect for the environment .
So the Commission itself must effectively respect the 50 % split between transport infrastructure and environmental measures in the cohesion fund .
We must applaud the ever greater sensitivity that exists both at Community level and at regional and state level to target sustainable development which does not regard economic development and respect for the environment as essentially contradictory objectives , but as compatible and indeed complementary .
To give just one example , the annual report on the structural funds , which I am studying for the Committee on Regional Policy , deals transversely with the environment .
The various instruments the European Union has available must be strengthened and environmental impact studies must be made compulsory .
We must give the committees monitoring work in progress greater power , and increase cooperation between the Commission and the Member States and NGOs .
The various Community initiatives and measures covered by article 10 of the ERDF must have a more profound effect on the protection and promotion of the environment , providing support systems for the SMEs involved and sectors like ecological and rural tourism , and indeed agriculture .
More extensive and continuous dialogue with the regional and local bodies is fundamental because they are the direct recipients of cohesion policies and jointly responsible for their implementation .
Unfortunately , the policy the European Commission is pursuing has not always respected the spirit in which the structural and cohesion funds were created and has occasionally been anti-cohesive , because , when presenting the various proposals in environmental matters , the Commission does not really take account of the differences that exist between the various Member States of the Union nor their consequent financial obligations for the conservation of their natural heritage .
Environmental problems are different in countries in the north and south of Europe and , logically , the economic and financial solutions will therefore be different too .
This should prompt a change in European Commission policy towards presenting the various proposals after studying - and accepting - the particular characteristics of each Member State , and their own environmental problems and particular financial obligations .
All this means - and I am finishing , Madam President - the European Union must put all the necessary resources in place to finance a new policy deriving from the Single Act - environment policy - in order to support the tremendous efforts countries in the Mediterranean crescent , like Spain , have to make to apply certain Community provisions because they have a greater natural heritage .
Madam President , I hope you will allow me to detain you for a while but I believe the careful report drawn up by Mr Hatzidakis and the discussion in this House make it urgently necessary for me to clarify one or two points .
First I want to make it clear - and you will realise that if you look at Mr Hatzidakis ' report and the communication from the Commission - that we broadly agree on the principles involved .
However , I would have hoped that you would take more account of the written information passed on to the Committee on the Environment on 3 July last year .
I would also urge you to take account in your conclusions of the fact that we are adhering to Community law currently in force and have to observe the principle of subsidiarity , which means that even if we agree with your demands we simply cannot infringe the rules that currently apply .
Finally , we must not forget that the structural funds are already promoting very substantial environmental investment , e.g. in the Objective 1 regions where this assistance accounts for about ECU 1 600 million , and I think this is indeed an example of cohesion in environmental policy .
Nevertheless , we are actively engaged on translating into practice the measures announced in the communication of 22 November 1996 on cohesion and the environment and the letter of 8 December , known as the declaration of intent .
In relation to the cohesion fund , we are aiming at dividing the funds equally between environmental and transport projects over the entire 1993-1999 planning period .
Indeed the most recent planning figures demonstrate that we can achieve this if we act consistently , thanks to the improvements in 1996 and the very strong pressure the Commission will exert in future years too .
Let me also point out that no major project is authorized without the necessary , prior environmental impact assessment and that compensatory measures are not just required but are also co-financed from the structural funds .
But , firstly , as one speaker pointed out , the environmental impact assessment directive is not as watertight as we would all have wished and secondly , I would have liked the ministers and the governments , with whom I had very serious differences on the question of taking account of the environment and sustainability in their investment policy , to have heard this debate now , for they sometimes see me as something of an environmental visionary rather than as someone who wants to carry through this Parliament 's common objectives .
For the rest , of course we also involve local and regional authorities , but unfortunately they are not always on the side for which you have fought here today either and there is some conflict among them too , which I hope we can resolve jointly by making them more aware of these issues .
At programme planning level , we want to tighten up the preventive measures in future and encourage a change of course towards sustainable development .
But I would ask you to consider that all the major programmes for 1994-1999 were already approved before this Commission took office and that this is the legal basis on which we have to work .
We had one practical opportunity and we have made use of it , namely for the second programming stage of Objective 2 for 19971999 .
In April 1996 we set out guidelines for the new Objective 2 programmes , in which the environment was one of the four priorities on which we laid special emphasis .
And we were successful in this , as can be seen today , for new programmes are only approved if they place priority on the environment and the provide the requisite environmental details in the form of what are called environmental profiles .
Progress has also been made in involving environmental authorities .
The mid-term review of Objective 1 and Objective 6 programmes which will occur this year also offers the Commission an opportunity to evaluate not just purely economic aspects but also questions of sustainable development .
However , I must point out that the cohesion fund and the structural funds are not environmental funds but that they are regional development funds and that we have to try to establish a sensible balance between what are at time very disparate interests .
For the Objective 1 and Objective 6 mid-term reviews the Commission is establishing a new matrix for qualitative environmental indicators and we hope that will take us forward a little too .
For the rest , the INTERREG 2c Community initiative also places emphasis on the environment , the protection of resources and water management .
Even the current programmes contain some - admittedly only some - qualified information on environmental objectives and indicators .
Mrs Bjerregaard , Mr Fischler and I have therefore set up a working party to work jointly with environmental experts in define certain key indicators that can be identified fairly easily and then applied .
Since the funds are administered decentrally and the Member States ' national and regional authorities are solely responsible for selecting the individual projects , we have to start with the Member States themselves ; and let me point out again that there is no obligation on them to notify smaller projects .
So we can only try to raise their awareness of these issues .
That is why we are organizing environmental seminars for fund managers and members of the monitoring committees in the Member States .
The first pilot seminar was held in Ireland in November 1996 and there will also be seminars in Portugal and in Greece in the first six months of this year .
At the same time the Commission is carrying out further training schemes for its own staff , aimed primarily at the strategic evaluation of environmental effects and environmental impact assessments , and over the past year trained environmental officers have been appointed in nearly all the services of my departments .
In reply to the call for new structures let me say that in my view we do not so much need to create new structures as to integrate the environment in all regional assistance measures and we will seriously endeavour to do precisely that .
As speaker just said , the seventh annual report on the 1995 structural funds attaches great priority to the environmental dimension .
The annual reports on the cohesion fund and the structural funds will do the same in future and we will thus comply with our obligation to make a report .
In accordance with the letter of 8 December 1995 , for new large projects of a value of more than ECU 50 million the Commission will confirm in an environmental impact note that the project in question will not have any harmful environmental effects or that any such effects will be remedied during the execution of the project .
My services , working together with DG XI , have now drawn up an improved testing document .
I will submit the new environmental impact forms to Parliament as soon as the ongoing analytical work is completed .
The project lists will also be published in the Official Journal and appear in the annual reports on the cohesion and regional funds .
Lastly , the Commission has continued its constructive dialogue with representative environmental organizations and non-governmental organizations in order to improve the transparency of structural policy projects .
But I do realise , because I have discussions on these matters constantly and almost every day , how far we still have to go and how much support we need , particularly in the Member States , if we are to achieve our aims .
So I continue to rely on your support .
Thank you , Mrs Wulf-Mathies .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.10 p.m. )
We have been told of another act of terrorism in Spain : a police officer was murdered yesterday in Bilbao .
On behalf of the whole European Parliament , I should like to express our condemnation of this act and our sympathy for the victim 's family and for the whole Spanish people .
Our thoughts are with all those who risk their lives to maintain a peaceful society , and we shall stand by all the resolutions we have adopted regarding the fight against terrorism whenever the law is broken , in Spain or in any other country .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , on page 14 of the minutes : the list of questions called .
I tabled a question on working time specifically addressed to Commissioner Kinnock .
This appears way down as Question No 100 , and not in the section addressed to Commissioner Kinnock .
There may be a simple explanation , and this may be due to a little slip-up or mistake in the administration .

However , as Mr Smith and Ms Oddy also had sensitive questions on transport covering the transport of nuclear waste and they were also put into this section , I am getting rather suspicious that there are some dark forces manipulating the agenda .
I seek your assurance that this is not the case and I seek your help in getting this matter raised properly .
Mr McMahon , I am not aware of the existence of any dark forces manipulating our proceedings .
I certainly hope that no such forces exist , and that the error you point out can be corrected .
Mr President , just to confirm what Mr McMahon said , my question was on the transport of nuclear material .
I do not know whether that comes under the umbrella of dark forces but I would appreciate an investigation into the matter .
I can only tell you that it is not we who decide which Commissioner answers questions : the Commission decides that , but , as I said before , if there has been an error it will certainly be corrected as far as the drafting of the text is concerned .
Mr President , the same dark forces have not been at work on my question .
My question on the same issue does actually appear under Mr Kinnock .
So , there is something strange going on : sexism , perhaps ?
Thank you , Mrs Ahern .
We shall pass these comments on to the Commission so that matters can be put right .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Decision on urgency
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to oppose the use of urgent procedure .
The Council began by taking some months to complete its deliberations , without any regard for the decisions of this House ; it then high-handedly amended the programme as it saw fit ; and finally it asked the Legal Service to clear up any procedural questions .
The response of the Legal Service was to issue a warning : it told the Council to consult Parliament again because the proposed amendments were so far-reaching .
This is not the proper way to proceed .
I think that the committee must carry out a fundamental re-examination of the issue .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
Mr President , I ask you to refer to the services , please .
Today 's session news - the Strasbourg Notebook - about yesterday 's opening session absolutely gives the wrong impression .
It is absolutely wrong on what happened yesterday regarding the request to change the time of the vote on the BSE motion of censure .
It states that Pauline Green , London North PSE , requested the House to delay the vote on the motions for resolution scheduled for voting on Wednesday at 12 noon .
That is absolutely wrong .
I did nothing of the sort .
It misleads the media and the outside world .
On behalf of my group could you please get it withdrawn immediately .
Thank you , Mrs Green .
Your remarks are authoritative ; of course they have nothing to do with the Minutes , but we have taken note of what you say .
Social security schemes
The next item is the report by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten ( A4-0018 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) amending , for the benefit of unemployed persons , Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 on the application of social security schemes to employed persons , to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community and Regulation ( EEC ) No 574 / 72 laying down the procedure for implementing Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 ( COM ( 95 ) 0734 - C4-0116 / 96-96 / 0004 ( CNS ) ) .


Mr President , the Commission 's proposal is designed to enable those who are unemployed to spend longer than the three months currently allowed looking for work in another country without losing their entitlement to unemployment benefit .
The Commission put forward a similar proposal in 1980 to give people freedom of movement and the best possible chance of finding work .
That proposal came to nothing , but this time , I gather , it stands a good chance of success .
The conditions for transferring unemployment benefits to another country are very strict .
You have to be really determined , because getting permission to do it and looking for work in other countries is not so easy , however pleasant they may be .
You have to have savings behind you , because looking for work in another country means that you will get the lowest rate of benefit for the shortest period of time .
This prevents abuses of the system , and means that only job-seekers who are genuinely motivated receive help .
The proposals on the amount and duration of the payments and the requirement to register as unemployed and actively to seek work have the full support of the Committee on Social Affairs and your rapporteur .
There are two more minor points on which I have tabled amendments .
What do we do about someone who is unemployed but undergoing training ?
Does that person also have the same rights if he is registered in another Member State ?
I have put forward an amendment on this .
Then there are the frontier workers .
They too are now free to choose : whereas before they had to be covered by the statutory scheme in their country of residence , they can now elect to come under the scheme in the country where they work .
This is good news , and is something which the European Parliament and I myself called for in the 1995 report by the Committee on Social Affairs .
However , there is something slightly strange here .
In one Member State , Luxembourg , where there are many frontier workers , workers are free to choose , but it is the country of residence , in other words Belgium , which foots the bill .
This is a proposal which may be fine for the workers themselves , since they will not notice any difference , but it is an anomaly in the system , and I think that systems which constantly need exceptions are not acceptable .
The Committee on Social Affairs shares this view , and I have therefore tabled an amendment to the effect that , since the Luxembourg Government will suddenly be facing enormous costs , the transitional scheme agreed should apply for no more than five years . I would point out to our colleagues from Luxembourg that they must remember that frontier workers who become unemployed in their country have also contributed to its social security budget .
So this is another point on which I have tabled an amendment .
I should like to take this opportunity to tell the Commissioner , through Mr Flynn , that Parliament has greatly appreciated working with officials at the Commission , particularly those directly involved with the very difficult dossier concerning Regulation 1408 / 71 .
I should also like to reiterate our thanks to Mr Rob Cornelissen and wish him every success in his new job .
We know that Mr Verschuren , who is now also there beside you , will certainly show the same commitment in tackling this dossier , and I would ask the Commissioner to pass on our congratulations to him and his colleagues .
There is one final comment I should like to make .
We have recently encountered a number of problems in dealing with Regulation 1408 / 71 because one Member State after another has been introducing cutbacks in social security and trying to bring it under their tax systems , which are not coordinated .
I would therefore urge Mr Flynn to bear this in mind and to make sure , if we really are to coordinate social security and taxation for frontier workers , including in Regulation 1408 / 71 , that there is only one choice .
The University of Maastricht has just produced a report on behalf of employers ' and workers ' organizations calling for this one choice , so let us try to streamline things a little better .
It is something I feel strongly about , because it could help us to solve many problems in future for our frontier workers , who are after all the daily embodiment of what Europe means .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs OomenRuijten , not only on her excellent assessment of the Commission proposal that we are discussing today , but also on her ability to look ahead .
Indeed , certain aspects of the Commission proposal , such as those concerning the unemployment benefit rights of frontier workers , were mentioned by the rapporteur in her report adopted by the Social Affairs Committee on 15 May 1995 .
Hitherto , when employed persons who have always resided in another Member State have become wholly unemployed in the Member State of employment , there has been a problem in defining their rights .
The solution adopted has varied according to the type of worker involved .
While frontier workers have automatically been subject to the legislation of the Member State of residence , other types of worker - in particular , seasonal workers - have been able to choose between the systems of the two Member States concerned .
This has been a significant form of discrimination against workers who , every morning , have to cross a border - which is often no more than an artificial demarcation line - in order to go to work in a neighbouring locality .
On the one hand , these workers have to deal with the regulations of two different countries : their country of employment and their country of residence .
And , on the other , this situation represents a major obstacle to the completion of the internal market , in particular the establishment of the free movement of workers .
In this context , the Commission proposal seeks to extend the possibility of choosing between the unemployment systems of the Member State of employment and the Member State of residence to frontier workers .
I therefore welcome this proposal , which will bring about a significant improvement in the circumstances of this group of workers .
It is true that a number of matters concerning these workers - those relating to the health benefits of their families , for example - still have to be resolved before the free movement of workers , which constitutes a central pillar of the internal market , is achieved .
But it is also true that this proposal represents a major step forward for a large number of European Union workers ; and you have the honour , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , of having promoted and fought for those workers ' rights .
This report also deals with some important matters concerning the movement of persons who are in receipt of unemployment benefit .
A system is proposed whereby an unemployed person who is in receipt of unemployment benefit and wishes to go to another Member State to look for work - or to accompany his or her spouse - will , for the first three months , retain his or her entitlement to benefits under the legislation of the competent state , namely the Member State in which he or she was last employed .
Payment of those benefits will be made on behalf of the institution of the competent state by the institution of the Member State in which the unemployed person is looking for work .
And , after the initial three-month period , should he or she not yet have found a job , the unemployed person may continue to draw benefits in the Member State in which he or she is looking for work , with some restrictions as to duration and rate .
I should like to end , Mr President , by congratulating the rapporteur and underlining the fact that this report represents a major step forward in the promotion of workers ' rights - promoting the mobility of EU workers - and in the completion of the internal market .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking on behalf of Mrs Hermange , as you have been informed .
The regulation under consideration today guarantees real freedom of movement for workers in the European Union , by ensuring that social benefits will be continued and social security schemes will still apply .
But this text is now inadequate , given that unemployment has become an inescapable reality .
Indeed , it is now more vital than ever to enable those wishing to seek employment in another Member State to do so , and to broaden their horizons , by simplifying the relevant procedures and protecting their living and working conditions .
President Chirac has , on several occasions , drawn attention to the importance of such a process , encouraging young people to look further afield and to demonstrate professional and geographical mobility .
They must , however , be given the wherewithal for this mobility , and not discouraged from finding a niche on the broader European job market .
That is why it now seems necessary to me to amend the regulation in favour of the unemployed , who must be allowed to seek work in another Member State without losing their entitlement to unemployment benefit , currently restricted to three months .
Someone seeking work in another Member State must be able to obtain social benefits in kind without any difficulty and , above all , must have access to health care .
In this way , we will strengthen both the European social model and the competitiveness of Europe 's economy , based on a skilled and well-motivated working population .
I should like to thank the rapporteur for her text and , on behalf of the UPE Group , I fully endorse this report .
I should like to add , in my capacity as rapporteur for the opinion on the Green Paper on obstacles to transnational mobility , presented by Mrs Cresson , that - as Mrs Hermange says - the scope of this regulation should be extended as a matter of urgency to cover students , since they are preparing for the future of Europe when they study abroad in another Member State .
It is up to us to give them hope by recreating the conditions for a more prosperous and more humane Europe .
Mr President , I think that Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has given us an excellent assessment of the legal aspects of this regulation and the issues arising from it , so I shall concentrate in my speech on a number of points which I think the Commission and the Council should consider .
If these amendments to the regulations are to be successful , there needs to be close cooperation between the national authorities responsible for employment and the payment of benefits .
I myself have experience of how employment organizations in different Member States cooperate , in my case Belgium and the Netherlands .
I can assure you that it is not easy to get these organizations to work together , not least because they are unable to exchange data because their computerized registration systems are not compatible , for example .
The Member States do not take account of the fact that this sort of cooperation involves extra costs , particularly in border areas , and it is often difficult for the authorities concerned to find the money .
This is a point that I would ask you to put on the agenda for the Council , Mr Flynn .
I also hope , and I would refer here to the report by the Committee on Legal Affairs , that these amendments to the regulations will also help to solve various problems that are still dragging on , such as between Belgium and the Netherlands , for example , where pension rights have been accumulated in one country , but neither country will pay the pension .
I entirely agree with what Mrs Oomen-Ruijten said about taxation , and I would go so far as to say that national legislation should not be introduced without some kind of assessment of its impact on frontier workers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this may appear to be a technical report , but in fact it is a very political one , and I should like to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for taking a step in the right direction .
Until now , border regimes have been black holes in our system of social security ; as far as people in or seeking paid employment are concerned , Europe has allowed the existing national social security systems to be side-stepped .
Mrs OomenRuijten 's proposal , which we support , is to move from that situation at least as far as a system based on the highest common denominator - and that would be better than nothing .
However , in our view , if unrestricted freedom of movement across borders is really to be feasible , we need to go beyond that model to one based on the lowest common multiple : in other words , one which effectively applies the best arrangements of both the countries in question .
Such a system is financially feasible , and it would clearly make cross-border job-seeking a more attractive option .
For this reason , we have tabled an amendment .
We take the view - and I would put this to Commissioner Flynn - that our borders must be transformed into thresholds , linking and offering access to people who are in or seeking paid employment .
Europe must become a place of greater social justice where social solidarity is ensured ; it cannot continue to be a black hole , swallowing up existing social security systems .
Mr President , the Commission welcomes the positive attitude of the European Parliament on this particular proposal .
The Parliament shares the Commission 's opinion that unemployed persons should be able to spend more than three months as currently foreseen looking for work in another Member State without losing their entitlement to unemployment benefit .
You also endorsed the proposal to grant frontier workers who become unemployed the right to choose between the benefit schemes of the Member State of residence or the Member State in which they were last employed .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has produced a very good report ; I thank her for it .
She suggests three very useful amendments .
The first is in line with the Commission 's Green Paper on obstacles to transnational mobility in the areas of education , training and research .
Mr Pompidou made particular reference to this matter as well .
The second seeks to delete an exception foreseen for Belgium .
That seems justified to me following the very narrow interpretation of the Court of Justice which it gave in the Spataro judgment just last June .
Thirdly , the ten year transitional period on the refund to Luxembourg by the neighbouring Member States of certain unemployment benefits could indeed be reduced to five years .

There is an amendment tabled by Mr Schörling and Mr Wolf which would affect the balance of the Commission proposal and we are not in a position to accept it for that reason .
So the Commission is prepared to forward a modified proposal endorsing the ammendments proposed by the rapporteur Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
I would also like to thank her most sincerely for her very kind words concerning the services and the staff and I would be glad to convey that to them .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Social protection
The next item is the report by Mrs Weiler ( A4-0016 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the report from the Commission on social protection in the European Union ( 1995 ) and on the Commission communication - The future of social protection : a framework for a European debate ( COM ( 95 ) 0457 - C4-0518 and C4-0524 / 95 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am glad that we are about to deal with an issue today that ought to have been back on the European agenda some time ago , and I am glad that the Commission has provided us with a very useful discussion document .
We have debated these matters at some length in committee , with experts and NGOs , and I am also pleased to say that both the Irish presidency and now the Dutch presidency have taken the opportunity of working with us to organize specialist conferences .
I should also like to thank all my colleagues for their constructive help with my report , and I would ask them to appreciate that I have not been able to take on board all the amendments that were submitted .
I had to disregard some of them because they would have distorted the clear line I wished to take in my report , or because they tended too far towards privatization of the social security system .
On the other hand , while I have a great deal of sympathy for Amendments Nos 27 , 28 and 29 , they are unrelated to my report , and in fact belong in another context .
Over the past six months , there has been a basic consensus throughout the debate that the European social model is a positive factor for Europe as a location for business , and that what we all need is to reform the system , not to cut it back .
I should like to make it equally clear that reform does not mean harmonization .
National parliaments will continue in future to decide what form their social security systems ought to take .
Nonetheless , the European Parliament and our institutions need to become more closely involved in and committed to the process than they have been in the past .
Demands are being placed on us , for example as regards the urgent need for directives that will ensure freedom of movement for workers .
Demands are being placed on us in terms of changing social structures and the need for measures to accompany new patterns of work in Europe : for example , atypical conditions of employment - not only part-time employment , but the many and varied individual forms of atypical employment conditions that now exist in Europe .
And demands are being placed on us - and this is the nub of the matter - in terms of working together with regional and national bodies to combat unemployment , because we all know that unemployment is the main cause of the financial problems in our social security systems .
That is also the reason why we have asked for an employment chapter in the revised Treaty .
One important call from the committee is that systems should be made more employment-friendly , in other words some of the burden should be shifted away from the labour factor , and new sources of funding should be found .
The Member States could , and indeed should , seize the opportunity to take a more environmentally-aware approach , with environmental tax reform .
We are making a proposal along these lines .
It will be up to the Member States to decide whether or not they wish to include such new sources of funding in their plans .
We have worked out responses and suggested solutions to problems in Europe that are similar in all the Member States and all industrialized countries .
These include , for example , the ageing of the population in Europe , the legitimate desire of women to have paid employment , and the new patterns of work and employment flexibility that I have already mentioned .
We wish to pursue the debate with the Commission , the Council , the social partners , NGOs and welfare organizations in the Member States .
Ladies and gentlemen , in my report I have put forward a package of proposals .
I should be grateful if you would give them your approval ; if you would support the need for further work on the subject and our desire to do that work ; if you would back our call for some type of institutional forum for jointly exploring solutions and pursuing the debate .
I would therefore ask you to vote in favour of my report .
Mr President , I should like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak to Parliament on this very important subject which is before the House today .
I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Weiler and the Commission on this report , which deals with an issue of crucial importance for the future development of the European Union , and which comes at a time when the Union and its Member States are preparing for a new phase in its socio-economic development after the introduction of EMU .
It will then be vitally important to redefine the links between economic and monetary integration on the one hand and the coordination of socio-economic policy between the Member States on the other , and this can only be done through dialogue between the governments and the European Parliament .
Mrs Weiler 's report provides some very important pointers here .
The list of the Union 's objectives in the Treaty makes it clear that maintaining high levels of employment and social protection is one of the main tasks facing the Union .
At the same time , we all realize that the process of actually putting these key objectives into practice is still in its infancy .
Although a great deal of important work has been done in recent years , not least by the Commission , we have still barely scratched the surface and urgently need to make more progress .
The White Paper on growth , competitiveness and employment , the Delors White Paper , is still extremely relevant to the further development of our ideas on this point .
Although it is now several years old , it would be a mistake to consign this report to our historical archives , since we are still working on the development of a number of the main themes it covers , and it is now our aim to put these into practice .
This was one of the reasons why the Dutch presidency felt it important to have further discussions on a number of topics arising from the White Paper during its period in office .
We organized a conference entitled ' Social policy and economic performance ' at the end of January in Amsterdam , where we attempted to see social policy not just as a social desideratum , but also as a production factor for generating growth , employment and prosperity in the Union , in order to have a clearer view of the synthesis between social policy and economic performance .
With the valuable input that we had from Commissioner Flynn and his directorate-general at the conference , I think I can say that we contributed to the discussion which Mrs Weiler 's report here also prompts .
We wish to try to make further progress during our presidency by looking in greater detail at two subjects in particular at the informal meeting of the Social Affairs Council in Rotterdam in March .
Firstly , there are the employment policy indicators which should enable the Member States in future years - using the benchmarking method - to learn from the positive experiences of other Member States , and it is hoped that this will also act as a catalyst for policy coordination at European level .
This should also make it possible to accelerate the convergence of labour market and employment policy , as a further important element of economic and monetary integration .
The second subject we intend to discuss at the informal Council meeting will be the need felt by almost all the Member States to bring labour costs down and thereby make it easier to integrate job-seekers with low skill levels in particular .
The Commission rightly points out in the report on the economic situation in the Union that the substitution of capital for labour and the low level of investment in the Union are the two main causes of the negative employment balance which has evolved in recent years and which urgently needs to be corrected .
These are the two areas in which we hope to make a contribution , and I see this as a parallel exercise to the Weiler report 's proposals for focusing attention in Union policy on the conditions for generating growth and employment .
Speaking of the conditions for generating growth and employment and also social cohesion , I should also like to mention a few points which I feel should be given priority in further policy developments and in discussions with Parliament .
First of all , there is the need for greater flexibility on the labour market .
The fact is that rigid labour markets can stifle employment growth and need to be adapted .
But it is also true that the adaptations cannot come from just one side : they need to involve both employers and workers .
This is why we wish to look at the idea of flexibility and social security at the conference in Amsterdam .
Flexibility from the workers , so that they can be genuinely available on the labour market in a way which will benefit economic growth , but also greater social security and pension security , so that the employers too help to create a motivation to work , which is also important for meeting the second condition I would like to mention : creating a higher level of work productivity .
In future , productivity will increasingly depend on training , greater possibilities for time off for education and so on , and also greater involvement of workers through information and consultation on company policy .
This is an area where we hope to make some progress during the presidency on the theme of ' Information and consultation of workers ' , taking account of the report by the Committee on Social Affairs and also , shortly , of the results of the working party led by Mr Davignon , which the Commission and the Council asked to look into this issue .
The third condition for growth and employment which I should like to mention is the establishment of greater social stability by various means , in particular the improvement and maintenance of stable industrial relations .
Social dialogue with employers and workers is particularly important here , and I hope that the Social Affairs Council will make progress in modernizing social dialogue at Union level .
We need to involve job-seekers much more if we are to utilize their talents and those of immigrant and especially female workers on the labour market .
We need to do more to combat poverty in order to safeguard social involvement and social stability in society .
These conditions must be created irrespective of the level of affluence in the Member States .
All the Member States face the same agenda , and it is also important for the Union to act as a catalyst and coordinator , and to create an agenda for achieving work and income distribution that is not based solely on market conditions or dictated by them .
In order to develop a medium-term strategy , as was also called for in the Delors White Paper , we in the Council will be discussing the issue again in Rotterdam , when we will also be looking at the role the Commission can play here . I see the Commission as a motor , examining the subject in greater detail and collating experiences from the Member States so that joint conclusions can be drawn , based in part , the presidency hopes , on a new section on employment in the Treaty which the Intergovernmental Conference is to discuss .
This would provide a platform for coordination and , ultimately , a basis for complementarity which will be not just desirable but absolutely essential once the European Union achieves economic and monetary union . People will then understand that economic and monetary integration has to be linked to employment , and it will also become clear that we cannot have a strong , internationally competitive and stable single currency without genuine economic convergence and labour market convergence in the Member States .
Mr President , first I should like to thank Mrs Weiler for her report and also Minister Melkert for his overview of the Dutch presidency 's position on matters relating to this report .
We all have a common point of departure in this debate and an understanding that social protection is the cornerstone of the European social model .
That has been very clearly stated by Mrs Weiler .
However , the challenge we are facing today is how to modernize Europe 's social protection systems and how to adapt them to a new situation in a rapidly changing world without abandoning the core values of solidarity and cohesion .
This is quite difficult and is going to be a complex task in which there is no overnight or miracle solution .
Because of the complexity and uncertainty , I proposed at the end of 1995 the launching of a new initiative on social protection which I called the framework for a European debate on the future of social protection .
The idea was that each Member State should find its own set of solutions to satisfy its own particular systems .
At the same time the ability to learn from one another and to react quickly is a key factor for success .
The European Union has a valuable role to play in acting as a catalyst in this process and in learning and in adapting , and I am grateful to the European Parliament for its contribution to this debate .
I am pleased that you have reacted so positively .
The discussion here today reminds us of two things : firstly , the future of social protection is a complex question ; secondly , the debate is an essential one and one that cannot be ducked .
In that framework for the European debate on the future of social protection , the communication from the Commission has analysed a lot of the common challenges that are facing us : how to make social protection more employment-friendly ; how to improve the financing of the social protection systems and how to cope with the ageing of European societies , especially as far as old age pensions are concerned ; and how to better manage health care systems .
There is the other great challenge which has a clear European dimension too : how to accommodate the full implementation of the internal market with the diversity of all of the national systems ; and how to better reconcile that diversity with both freedom of movement of people within the Union and the freedom to provide services .
I regard a lively debate as being fruitful and I welcome such a debate , not least because I see the rich diversity of experience , culture and opinion that exists in the Union as one of the great strengths of the Union and it is reflected in this debate .
This richness and diversity are the source ultimately not of the problems , but of the innovative solutions to the problems .
So the question has to be asked - and Mrs Weiler makes this point too - where do we go from here ?
Let us not forget that we have the clear backing of the Member States in this exercise .
All of them agree that highly-developed social protection systems are important , worth keeping and worth building on .
But they also recognize that preserving the systems means reforming them , not least because so much has changed since they were first put in place .
In 1992 the Council outlined in a recommendation on social protection what it saw as the common objectives which would determine the reform of these national systems .
The Weiler report states in Part V of its explanatory statement that today the aim must be to continue that debate , and I agree with that .
But not just to continue .
We have to take on board the need to move it up a gear , to move it up to the next step .
That is why I am so pleased to see Mr Melkert here today giving us an overview as to how he sees this debate progressing during the Dutch presidency .
He is quite right when he says that in Amsterdam just last month at the conference which was organized by Mr Melkert on behalf of the Dutch presidency on social policy and economic performance , I announced that the Commission would soon be presenting a communication on improving social protection systems in the Union .
The communication will seek to map out the next stage in this process .
This communication will have two purposes : to indicate the route along which that modernization can be pursued , and secondly to present some specific proposals for European-level support .
In all of this we must get around to finding some practical and feasible solutions .
In presenting the communication we will obviously seek to take careful account of Parliament 's contribution to the debate so far , as set out in Mrs Weiler 's report .
Today 's debate has shown that this is an issue of particular importance to all the institutions and in particular to Parliament .
I should like to emphasize that I very much welcome the active interest which has been shown in this debate and I hope we can count on the full support of Parliament as we carry forward this process .
I believe this is one of the great debates of our time .
First of all , Mr President , I should like to welcome Mr Melkert to the House of which he himself almost became a Member some time ago , but the selection committee thought he was too young and needed more experience at national level , a recommendation which he has more than fulfilled .
I thought one of the best things about the conference on social policy and economic performance was that for the first time in years , social policy came out of the shadows , and none of the speakers felt the need to defend themselves against right-wing criticism , but spoke confidently about how important social policy is in itself and for the economy .
Many studies carried out for the committee clearly show that a fair system of social security and sound economic performance are not mutually exclusive but mutually supportive , and that good social protection is not just the icing on the cake , but one of the essential ingredients of the cake itself .
There is also an implicit criticism here of the way in which the European Union has launched and conducted major projects up to now .
Whether it be the internal market , EMU , the information society or enlargement , the social dimension has always been the poor relation .
It is therefore not surprising that there should be serious discussion in the Member States , and finally also in the Netherlands , about whether it makes sense to go through with EMU .
Now , I myself support EMU and the stability pact , but we must not forget that social progress and employment are the aims , and monetary policy is simply the means to achieve them .
It is important for us to be having this debate today on the future of social protection in Europe , as discussed in Barbara Weiler 's excellent report , but we must also realize that we have to start building this future now .
This means reforming our social protection schemes , because otherwise they will not be affordable in future , and because at the moment they are not sufficiently employment-oriented , and so we need to try to find a balance between flexibility and security .
But it should also mean developing a common economic policy which is not primarily designed to meet the EMU criteria , but should also aim to create jobs .
We need social objectives and instruments at European level if we are to balance our one-sided monetary policy .
This was one of the conclusions of the conference in Amsterdam , and it is one of the reasons why we need a chapter on employment in the Treaty and why the social protocol needs to be improved and to apply to all Member States .
Many of the social protection reforms needed would have to remain a matter for the national and local authorities , but as Europe becomes more integrated and with the single market , the purely national interest is less prevalent .
Social cohesion in other Member States is now in all our interests .
One of the most controversial issues in the debate on this report in the Committee on Social Affairs was the question of convergence .
There has been quite a commotion in the United Kingdom and elsewhere about whether even the very word convergence should be mentioned in the texts , and I find this very strange .
Article 17 of the Treaty , which the United Kingdom also signed , makes it quite clear that the common market is to promote the harmonization of social systems and free trade , and is to combat unfair competition .
This is also spelt out in a 1992 declaration which also calls for progressive convergence , for the same reasons .
It is extremely ironic that this declaration was adopted under the UK presidency , and bears the signature of one of the most Eurosceptic Tories .
I hope that this will encourage all UK Members in the vote tomorrow to stop complaining about such issues .
I think this is really all that needs to be said .
It is , I think , generally accepted that the various systems need to be reformed , and the main thing now is to decide how and to what extent we can win the support of the people of Europe for this .
Mr President , there are currently several challenges facing our systems of social protection : a demographic challenge resulting from the ageing of the population , an economic challenge due to unemployment , and a social challenge , not least because in Europe we must preserve the concept of solidarity .
Faced with these challenges , it is not enough for us in Europe merely to adjust the present system by introducing rules designed to remove obstacles to freedom of movement ; the EU must also square up to its responsibilities .
The issues concerning the future of social protection are fundamental ones ; they are tangible ones too for our fellow citizens , who wish to see a Europe which is closer to them , and it is through the concept of social Europe that they will gain a better understanding of Europe 's problems .
It is now vital , therefore , to open up a debate at European level on the future of social protection , comparing our experiences and ensuring that a thought-provoking exchange of ideas will produce - if not immediately a convergence of views - then at least a coordination of provisions , whilst respecting national cultural differences .
However , I believe that social security schemes should certainly not be reformed in a rigid way , but must be adapted to new conditions of employment , particularly with regard to flexibility and mobility , as a number of other Members have pointed out .
I would also add that this notion of solidarity is compatible with greater personal involvement , with more individual responsibility on the part of our citizens .
Furthermore , given the extent of sociological and economic change , greater protection should be afforded to the family .
That is why I have my doubts about the rapporteur 's proposal that , to take account of changed family structures , there should be independent schemes for men and women .
I think that to individualize social security schemes in this way would in fact be detrimental to the cohesion and harmonious development of society .
Mr President , I too should like to thank Mr Melkert for coming here today , and I should like to take the opportunity to raise an issue of considerable concern to me : the democratic deficit in social security and employment .
The Minister said that he wants a dialogue with Parliament , on which I believe him to be sincere , and I think he has put forward some very good proposals on the convergence of the social labour market and employment policy , and on employment policy indicators .
But what guarantee do we have that once the Dutch presidency is over , the whole thing will not go off the boil and Parliament will scarcely have a say in the matter ?
In the meantime , life goes on and , in the follow-up to Essen , the first steps are about to be taken in the process of renewal and change on the labour market .
I would point out to the House that if the Member States do not achieve convergence and , as Mr van Velzen has already said , they have to make great efforts to catch up on various issues like EMU and the stability pact , we could well find ourselves in a situation where industrial unrest makes our Europe look a great deal less solid than it does now .
I would therefore urge the Minister to ensure that this dialogue between the Council and Parliament remains on track throughout the Dutch presidency .
The question here is whether we wish to preserve or change . I think the Weiler report makes a number of good points , but I also think that we need above all to dare to make changes .
My proposals both in committee and in the amendments before the House are not so much about whether we need to dismantle as whether we want to change .
On the subject of pensions , I do not think we need to worry about having capital cover schemes instead of redistributive schemes , and I would urge Mrs Weiler seriously to reconsider our amendments so that our group too can vote for this report , which contains a number of good ideas .
Mr President , when we speak of the future of social protection in Europe , we are at the same time speaking about the whole future of Europe .
In my opinion , Barbara Weiler 's report demonstrates very clearly how important it is for us to overhaul social protection systems in order to meet the requirements of a changing working environment and that we should also try to find new sources of funding for social security in order to maintain it at the same high level in the future .
The Weiler report calls for the adoption of common EU minimum objectives for social protection .
I entirely agree with this .
However , the issue is not an easy one to us in the Nordic countries , for reasons to which Mr Hatzidakis , among others , has referred here .
We are afraid that the minimum could easily turn into a maximum .
It is therefore important to ensure that common minima can always be exceeded if a decision in favour of this is taken at national level .
I also endorse the view expressed in the report that the EU 's social policy requires a stronger legal basis .
The Social Protocol should become part of the Treaty , and it should be possible to take decisions on its application by a qualified majority .
On the subject of social security funding , I should like to stress that this is not just a question of an expenditure item , as is readily assumed .
Spending on social protection pays for itself many times over .
This applies both to society and to enterprises .
Employees who feel socially secure are in a better position to place their creative abilities at the service of enterprises .
It is not only more humane but also economically more efficient to support people when they have problems rather than allowing the problems to lead to exclusion or crime .
Cuts in social protection necessitate many times greater expenditure on prisons and the maintenance of strong police forces .
If we wish to guarantee the security of Europe 's citizens , the answer lies rather in improving social security and social services than in stepping up policing .
Mr President , the Commission 's document , which formed the basis of Mrs Weiler 's report from the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment on the future of social protection , was meant create a framework for debate and to establish a basis for joint discussions .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Weiler because , in my opinion , she has put her message across very clearly prior to this discussion .
My own interpretation is that , if a society is unable to share its resources to achieve social protection and social solidarity , but creates divisions and social exclusion instead , that society has failed .
Civic solidarity is a fundamental requirement for a modern and democratic society ; it is important that we remember this in our discussions .
I also agree totally with the statement from the Economic Committee and the argument that there is reason to be deeply concerned over the future of social protection in Europe .
A large proportion of the Union 's activities actions are currently concentrated on promoting markets and competition .
Large-scale reductions in public expenditure , convergence criteria for EMU , stability packages and high unemployment create social unrest and social exclusion .
It is dangerous when economic growth and competition have to increase whatever the price , at the cost of social protection .
This is why I consider our amendment proposal No.9 to be so important , where we point out that reductions made in unemployment and social benefits are aimed at lowering the general level of wages .
Under no circumstances must this be allowed to fall below the current level of the minimum existence wage .
This applies equally to social security benefits .
I am also of the opinion that social protection should be covered primarily by collective social insurance , in other words , protection provided by the State and a system based on a collective agreement between employers and employees .
Social protection systems in the EU are all structured very differently and pitched at differing levels .
For this reason I consider that harmonisation is neither possible nor is it desirable .
There is a description of harmonisation in the report which , according to Mrs Weiler , is a translation error .
But , looking closer at point 19 , I find that I cannot support this point because it means that explanation 23 is to be included in the Treaty and it refers to Article 117 , which just happens to concern harmonisation of social systems .
On the other hand , I do think that coordination is required and also a number of minimum levels of social protection agreed between Member States to avoid social dumping and to satisfy employees ' rights and promote free movement of people .
The requirement for the regulation of unsocial working hours is also an important point in the report as is our amendment proposal on financing social systems .
We must look seriously at the idea of alternative forms of taxation , i.e. to move the burden of taxation from work to environmentally related taxes , such as the carbon dioxide tax .
Mr President , the Weiler report is an extremely important one and has come at just the right moment , in my view .
When we talk to people in the street , they often see a growing conflict between free trade and social responsibility .
They say that the free single market is increasingly abandoning its fundamental social role , and they give a number of examples of this .
The phenomenon of relocation is now on the increase throughout the European Union , technological production methods are given precedence over labour , and there is discrimination against frontier workers .
Within the Member States themselves there are widening psychological gaps , such as between those in work and the unemployed , and between young people and pensioners .
This is why we urgently need a new social model which re-establishes the link between social security and the real role of the economy .
The rapporteur proposes a very useful model in which our most valuable achievements are regarded as the cornerstone of society .
Of course , we need to recognize a number of facts that have affected most Member States in recent years .
There have been , and still are , serious problems with financing , and most of our social protection schemes are still based on social orders which are now outdated .
What I mean is that 40 or 50 years ago , it was quite reasonable for social security to be mainly financed by contributions from labour , since it was a period of high employment .
Other sources of funding were simply unthinkable .
But society has changed , and high unemployment , a falling birthrate and changes in family structures mean that there are fewer and fewer people to keep the system going , while on the other hand the need to fund the social security system from labour taxes has caused labour costs to rocket .
In my country , for example , the difference between a worker 's gross wage and what he actually receives is reaching surreal proportions .
These are the sorts of conditions that kill jobs , and they are the start of a vicious circle which will ultimately undermine the very foundations of the social security systems .
One of the central paragraphs in the Weiler report is paragraph 9 on alternative methods of financing , which I think presents a very useful and fair proposal .
There is just one more point I should like to make about this whole situation .
In all the discussions on European monetary union , there is far too much talk about taxation and far too little about social issues .
It is high time that we adopted a much more practical approach , and the Weiler report sets us an excellent example .
Mr President , when I read Barbara Weiler 's report , I was reminded of a Danish song which goes something like this :
( The speaker sings ) ' Tread carefully , young lady , because the stage is uneven ' .
I have heeded this advice , because taking careful steps in the socio-political arena is something which for me , as a Dane , is a very important point to emphasize .
As has already been mentioned , social policy is a very sensitive area in Scandinavian countries .
I agree with Mr Hatzidakis that it is important for us to have a high level of social protection in Europe and in the European Union .
But I do not at all agree that we should harmonize social legislative systems .
What I mean is that it is important to be careful when recommending in the report that , amongst other things , there should be increasing co-ordination of social protection regulations .
It is also my view that we should be careful about formulating minimum requirements , because my Finnish colleague is quite right in saying that there is good reason to fear that minimum requirements would become maximum requirements .
This is what we have experienced in Denmark in the area of the working environment where the excellent Danish employment regulations we had earlier subsequently became very poor regulations , precisely because of considerations regarding competition .
What I am saying is that there are possible grounds for fearing that coordination along the lines of competitiveness will adversely affect the social protection regulations .
I also believe it to be an extremely bad idea to introduce social insurance regulations at a Community level based on a qualified majority .
In general it is my view that one would be misusing employees ' freedom of movement in order to attribute greater legislative powers to the European Union than it currently has .
I think it too much to expect that citizens in the European Union will want to move from one Member State to another .
From my past experience as a social worker I can say that it is very difficult for an individual - especially if one has a family - to pull up the tent pegs and move from one country to another where the culture may be very different .
I would therefore ask that considerable thought be given to this , not least in the context of the conference of governments , and that we tread carefully .
You have a fine voice , Mrs Jensen , but you caused a few problems for some of the interpreters who were unable to rise to your level .
Mr President , I hope you will forgive me for taking the floor without being able to break into song like our colleague , but I do nevertheless have a few words to say .
We can welcome the repeated statements from the Commission , and in the Weiler report , concerning the need to preserve a European model of social protection as a factor of social peace .
It seems to me , however , that the Commission must be cautioned against any attempt to downgrade our social security schemes in the name of so-called European harmonization .
Since each of our countries has its own social traditions and social history , it would be more advisable to retain and restore the most advanced national schemes , and to develop the others .
It is in fact the responsibility of each state , nationally , to take clear steps to safeguard and further develop a system of social protection which guarantees everyone health insurance , unemployment benefit and a pension , but also a system that will promote and support the family .
State policy and intervention in support of the family , primarily through parental pay , should be used to boost the birth-rate , if we are to prevent our redistributive pension schemes from collapsing under the weight of our ageing populations .
In social terms , it is a matter of urgency and a vital necessity to introduce a broad-based family policy in the nations of Europe .
I would add that any policy designed to unravel national social security schemes would expose our citizens to market forces or the inevitability of private insurance , both of which are completely antisocial options .
Each national state should act as a guarantor and provider of social protection , and should reassert its social function .
I would also say to our colleagues that if they wish to maintain effective models of social protection , Europe must turn its back on its ultra-liberal , free-trade , internationalist economic policy , the main effect of which is to produce unemployment in Europe .
Opening our borders to international competition is totally irreconcilable with preserving our social security schemes , and the lack of social clauses within the WTO is criminal for our economies and social systems in Europe .
Customs duties must be reintroduced immediately and allocated to family and social policies ; a social VAT must be levied on imports so as to reduce the economic imbalances caused by differential social costs ; and the terms of trade - of which we are victims rather than beneficiaries today - must be redefined . Otherwise , the good intentions and the fine social sentiments expressed here in the House today will be swept aside by the devastating effects of international economic competition .
Mr President , in recent years the problems facing social protection systems have become dangerously acute .
Policies designed to curb public spending , the widespread tendency for companies to relocate outside the European Union and the placing of capital in short-term unproductive investments and in speculative stock market activities have led to unprecedented levels of unemployment in the Union .
Social exclusion and poverty are tending to encompass ever wider sectors of the populations . Those trends are likely to become more marked .
We should be deeply concerned at the unfavourable evolution of social protection systems - not only on social grounds but also for economic reasons .
Reducing the workforce to poverty and dissolving the social protection system cannot be a basis for any kind of growth .
Mr President , we need to be worried and to take account of the risk that an untested switch in funding from work-related contributions to alternative tax solutions could lead to a total collapse of the social protection system , particularly in the atmosphere of budgetary pressure that is prevalent in all of the Member States because of EMU .
I consider it vital that the Commission should carry out an urgent study of developments regarding the ratio of workers to pensioners which is evolving very unfavourably and with unforeseeable social consequences . In addition , a study must be made immediately of the trend in production and in employment and working hours in the coming years and of the implications for the social protection system .
The consequences of EMU and of the policy constraints that stem from it on social protection and on the financing of social insurance , health and education systems need to be made starkly clear .
We need to understand that putting everything in the hands of the market carries enormous dangers for social cohesion .
The market by itself has never in the past generated full employment , not social protection or social institutions .
It is high time we recognized that truth , for the sake of the peoples of Europe .
Mr President , the main contribution to society of the so-called ' conservative revolution ' of Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan was to attempt to dismantle the welfare state .
Fortunately , they did not succeed ; but I am not so naive as to think that the attempts to dismantle all aspects of state social protection now belong in the past .
The one-track approach , which now seems to permeate and contaminate everything , insists on reducing reality to the market-place , deregulation and individualism , denying any role for the public sector , politics or the State in the structuring of society .
The supporters of the new one-track approach have abandoned the most wanton elements of the past , but still maintain the urgent need to dismantle all aspects of the welfare state , on the pretext that it will not be viable in future .
Clearly , they see themselves administering what today is managed by the public authorities .
But why is it that individualism is viable and solidarity is not ?
Why should a private pension fund be more viable than a state social security scheme ?
Some years ago , when we in Spain were seeking to join the common project of European integration , we did so because Europe meant freedom , but also because it provided a reference point for a society which had adopted the principles of the welfare state : indeed , in difficult times , it was the European social model that provided the backbone for our society by institutionalizing the social rights of citizens .
The fiscal crisis of the State must not lead to the dismantling or reduction of a system that has provided the backbone of our societies .
It is better to think in terms of reforming , correcting and modernizing , with a view to giving rights to those who really need them .
Opting to reform , correct and modernize is the best way to shield the State from its detractors .
And the best way to avoid being conservative is to face reality boldly .
The common Europe which we champion as social democrats is built on the defence of human rights , pluralist democracy and social protection .
In the face of the challenges now before us , which are addressed by this excellent report - defending social protection , an issue closely linked to that of employment - we cannot act timidly or stay on the back foot .
Achieving a high level of employment will strengthen the prospects for state social protection . Defending flexibility and security is a commitment , just as making progress towards social convergence - and making the same efforts to achieve it as we do to achieve economic convergence - is a commitment too .
Hopefully this report - which , I repeat , is a good one - and this debate will serve the cause of progress and construction , and not that of destruction - although for that we have to continue to believe in politics , the public sector and the role of the State , to believe in ideas and values .
Mr President , the subjects dealt with by the Weiler report are very complex ones , because changing demographic realities in the Union are characterized by a general increase in the average age , a fall in the birthrate and - we must not forget - an increase in the age at which young people enter employment .
All this inevitably results in a state of crisis in the present social protection system , further heightened by the increased globalization of markets and the resulting need for greater competitiveness on the part of enterprises and of the entire European economic and production system .
The logical result of this must be greater flexibility in the regulations governing employment , and certainly not a further increase in tax burdens .
It is not the principle of solidarity that is at issue here - indeed , we would particularly stress the importance of family protection - but the current system of social protection is no longer able to continue as it is : it is too cumbersome and too inefficient .
That is why we believe it is necessary to encourage people to arrange additional , supplementary private insurance , so that in the field of social protection , as elsewhere , public and private schemes compete against each other to increase the overall efficiency of the system , and so that new , atypical forms of employment can also be taken into consideration : the Council has blocked this issue for years , but we believe that concrete results must be achieved quickly .
This report provides a solid basis for argument .
However , because it fails to satisfy us on certain points that we regard as fundamental , we do not think we can approve it , although it does include some passages of high quality .
Finally , I would like to emphasize one last point contained in Amendment No 29 , where it is stated that it is necessary for multilateral agreements to include environmental and social clauses based on the model of an international labour organization .
That is a point which we will support .
Mr President , a secure social welfare system is an important part of a democracy but it is primarily the responsibility of Member States .
The EU can assist through coordination and cooperation .
Establishing minimum standards is one way of doing this but there is always the risk that minimum standards can become maximum levels .
The principle task for the EU in this area is to coordinate activity and any decisions should , as I see it , be taken unanimously so as not to change for the worse those social security systems already in place in Member States , as there is a risk that this could happen .
Today 's society is at present demanding changes .
The level of knowledge is constantly changing .
We must establish systems and methods of ensuring that further education becomes a process for life and not , as it is today , something which takes place during the first 7-10 years .
We must develop an active labour market policy which includes further education and training as a component of lifelong improvement .
All forms of social dumping must be stopped .
Mrs Weiler 's report is very positive in many respects .
New protection systems must be developed and we must prevent variation in levels of provision .
There should be a guaranteed basic pension in all Member States , but it ought also to be possible to increase this through personal insurance .
A very important proposal is the change in the method of financing the protection system through alternative forms of taxation , which reduce income tax and increase tax on the use of environmental resources and energy .
Mr President , the Weiler report - and I must congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent work - deserves our support and should be paid our full attention .
But the fact is that people are so concerned with other things , with other areas which they see as national when in fact they are transnational , that very little attention is paid to the questions of social protection in Europe and its future , in what really should be the subject of a Europe-wide debate .
The two Commission communications , the basis of this report , offer food for thought in this debate and the motion for a resolution which the European Parliament is due to transform into its resolution makes good use of them through the Weiler report .
But no less important , quite the contrary , is the explanatory memorandum accompanying this proposal which contains material for considerable thought and debate .
Any position based on Article 2 of the Treaty of Rome , which the Maastricht Treaty did not alter , defining the general objectives of the association of the Member States , and on Article 117 , which Maastricht also did not change , or undermine , clearly imposing the principle of political orientation , almost appears strange since it is becoming increasingly necessary .
The principle of social equalisation in progress represents or should represent the cornerstone and philosophical basis of the construction of a Europe forming a mosaic of different national situations and the product of cooperation and solidarity between and on behalf of its people .
We must congratulate Barbara Weiler on emphasising this legal basis and , in particular , the progressive characteristic of a dynamic which seems perverted because all that is mentioned is technical and nominative harmonisations , and divergencies or negative convergences are confronted on the social plane .
Obviously this debate cannot be exhausted in the discussion of a report nor should it be .
But it is already positive that we can recall that these subjects are both vital and urgent .
I only have time to make one particular remark , and I would like to draw attention to point 21 in the proposal as the subject for debate which has to remain open in terms of evolutions in employment , working time and free time .
As the results of a point in the opinion issued by the Committee on Economic Questions , by Mr Theonas , I should like to say that we really must begin to look upon the social aspect as the very kernel of all discussions as well as the organisation of men and women 's free time , articulating working time and leisure time , and we should not refer to ' unemployed ' time because there can be and has to be , also , living time .
Mr President , what distinguishes Europe from the United States , Japan and many other countries today is a social model which is unparalleled anywhere in the world .
What in fact is the advantage of the unemployment rate in the USA being only 6 % , if almost 40 million Americans are without any kind of social cover ?
Let us never forget that the European social model has been shaped by history , by suffering and by the campaigns which were waged - as soon as the industrial revolution began in the late eighteenth century - in mines , in workshops and wherever men , women and children were being exploited .
Let us never forget the often unequal battle fought by the trade unions .
And now we often hear it said , in various quarters , that this system is old-fashioned , out of date and too expensive .
That is outrageous !
Some even go so far as to hope that it will collapse .
Let us not use the building of Europe and social harmonization as an excuse to call for the dismantling of our achievements , in other words to look for a ' social lowest common denominator ' .
It is undoubtedly too soon to move towards complete harmonization in the fields of social protection , pensions , family policy and health .
But it is certainly not too soon to coordinate all our efforts , and to bring about truly progressive and genuine reforms .
A social code of conduct is desirable as of now .
We do have one , but it is not being respected .
The British Government rejects both the social charter and the Maastricht social protocol , and Mr Major has taken it upon himself to undermine various directives , despite the reprimands of the Court of Justice in Luxembourg .
What is the point of the Fifteen building a house together , if one of the architects rejects the plan for the foundations ?
I fervently hope that political change will take place very soon in the United Kingdom , so as to clarify matters in a country where casualization is spreading , and where the unemployment figures have deliberately been underestimated - by the admission of none other than the Employment Minister .
Have lies become the doctrine of the British Government ?
I see three major challenges in terms of modernizing and harmonizing our social security schemes .
The first , and by no means the least important , is unemployment : 20 million people are unemployed and 50 million marginalized !
Our social expenditure is set to spiral .
We need to attack this evil at its root , by devising a fully-fledged European policy to relaunch and boost the economy in order to create jobs .
The same applies to pension schemes : we are blandly told that there will not be enough young people to fund pensions by 2005 ; pension funds and other financial mechanisms are therefore being set up , but without any thought being given to a European family policy that would break away from the individualism which is pervading society .
The second challenge is the single currency .
Once our countries use the euro , in other words when they all have the same exchange rates and interest rates , they will be left with only two weapons for attracting investment : one fiscal and the other social .
In both cases , unless we are careful , we shall see a lowering of standards .
The third challenge is the funding of our social security schemes , which are too heavily based on income from employment .
I believe that the burden must be shared , and that a system of funding through capital taxation must be introduced .
Mr President , will it be possible in the future to maintain the diversity which exists among the social systems of the different European countries ?
The Commission 's report on social protection in 1995 does not give a clear answer to this question .
Everyone will no doubt agree that discussion should be encouraged and experiences exchanged at European level , which could lead of its own accord to some degree of alignment of national laws .
But that is not exactly the question asked by the Commission .
It is in fact asking , in a roundabout way , whether a supposedly integrated economy should be matched in the near future by an integrated system of social security .
It would seem more logical to us for diversity to be maintained , so that each country keeps the right to govern itself in accordance with the real needs of its citizens .
However , this diversity will of course have to be accompanied by a regular exchange of ideas and experience at European level , and must also preserve freedom of movement for workers through mechanisms for the transfer of acquired social rights from one country to another .
The Commission does not seem entirely satisfied by this type of answer , however , since it is raising other arguments .
Firstly , its document states that transnational companies , which are becoming more and more numerous , will experience increasing difficulty in setting wages in different countries and in moving employees from one country to another .
This argument seems to us to reflect a vision of Europe which we cannot share .
It is not convincing , and must not lead to the systematic subordination of national freedom of management .
Secondly , the Commission expresses concern about the distortions in competition which could be caused by diversity in social security systems , since companies in countries where social protection is generous might be put at a disadvantage .
This is a valid question , but we are surprised that the Commission is raising it with regard to Europe , but does not raise it more often where it is a hundred times more glaring : with regard to international trade relations .
That is where the Commission could operate most usefully .
Mr President , Commissioner Flynn , Mr President-in-Office , the invitation to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs to approve a motion for a resolution on the two documents transmitted by the Commission - the communication on the future of social protection and the report on the state of social protection in Europe - confronted the rapporteur , Barbara Weiler , whom I congratulate on her efforts , with the task of clarifying the term ' social protection ' , which is not to be understood simply as social security , in the sense of collectively arranged insurance , but also as including social protection provided by the government and schemes resulting from collective insurance arrangements as well as private ones .
There are two ideas that interest me .
First , it is necessary to clarify the role of the European Union in the field of social protection , which must be more active and provide for schemes organized in consultation with the Member States , and support the gradual convergence of social protection systems in those States , developing a set of joint minimum criteria and preventing competition from causing a steady erosion of social protection .
Secondly , and I find it difficult to go into more detail here in the two minutes available to me , some agreement will have to be reached both with the Commission and with the rapporteur on the fact that the social protection schemes will have to be adapted to the changing needs of the labour market .
It is worth recalling the tendency to reduce contributions payable by employers and employees , especially those on lower incomes and , consequently , lower wages .
The buttressing of the pension system by means of supplementary insurance is to be encouraged and diversified , with a view to achieving a further reduction in the number of victims of social exclusion and guaranteeing an appropriate living standard for all our citizens , who , whatever happens , must be able to feel protected and able to look to the future with confidence .
The national parliaments must give more debating time to social security , bearing in mind the need to encourage and sustain a high level of employment .
Where there is unemployment , clearly , there can be no social security .
Nearly 20 million unemployed people in Europe can tell us about that .
Mr President , I was particularly pleased to hear Mr Melkert say that he feels it is extremely important for Parliament too to discuss social protection , because I have to say that I find it astonishing how some Members seem to be allergic to any mention of Community action in this field .
I think Wim van Velzen hit the nail on the head when he mentioned the 1992 recommendations , when it was apparently still possible to talk about convergence and financing at European level .
Now the word convergence has practically become taboo , whereas joint action at European level is actually quite possible , while still respecting the historical differences between the various social security schemes .
There are a few points I should like to make in the three minutes available to me .
There is growing consensus that we need to bring down labour costs , particularly at the bottom end of the labour market among the lower-skilled jobs .
All well and good .
However , there is much less consensus at European level about how the refinancing of the schemes is to be organized .
People are even talking about quite the opposite : ' slimming down ' the schemes , selective benefits and the privatization of certain risks .
To those who support this kind of modernization , I would say this : a very interesting study has been published in Belgium , commissioned by the OECD , on the links between poverty , the labour market and social security .
I should like to quote two of the findings of this report .
First , there is a particularly strong link between the level of social security spending and poverty .
In other words , proper social security costs money .
Selectivity has very clear limits .
Secondly , there is a direct link between the level of unemployment and the level of poverty , and between low benefits , low wages and poverty .
This does not mean that we should not be getting people back to work , on the contrary , I am all in favour of ' activating ' benefits , but it does mean that we should now consign the American model to the dustbin once and for all .
I would call for a European convergence strategy which takes full account of subsidiarity and involves at least the following : firstly , urgent measures to refinance social security .
I would urge the Dutch presidency to force a breakthrough in this extremely important area - there are already proposals on the table .
Secondly , Europe needs to tackle the issue of social rights , and the right to a minimum wage is just one part of this .
People who have less than 50 % of the average income of their fellow citizens are poor , and it is therefore clear where the lower limit should lie , in our view .
Thirdly , the Union spends on average 28 % of its gross domestic product on social protection , but this figure conceals some major discrepancies .
We should start to think about developing a European ' social spiral ' , on which Member States are positioned according to the percentage of their wealth which they have to spend on social protection .
I hope that this debate on the Commission communication will finally lead to effective European action in this field .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the communication from the Commission on the future of social protection and its report on social protection in Europe 1995 form the basis for Mrs Weiler 's resolution .
Social harmony is , in my opinion , a valuable asset .
That is something that South Korea has had to learn by bitter experience in recent weeks .
Therefore , it should not lightly be put at risk .
The fact is that we must overcome the difficulties which have emerged in Europe 's various social systems as a result of rising unemployment and the growing proportion of elderly people in the population .
It is important to discuss these issues at European level .
However , discussion is not enough .
Action is needed , and reforms are inevitable .
But they should not be viewed simply in terms of reducing or axing parts of the social security net .
Efforts to improve employment opportunities in the EU , particularly for women , have not been very successful so far , to put it mildly .
Under Article 117 of the Treaty , progress should be made towards harmonizing living standards and working conditions as we move forward .
Unfortunately , we have not yet made a great deal of headway .
There are many problems to be resolved . Some of them arise from the multiplicity of systems and the question of freedom of movement .
Earlier today , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten delivered a report on this aspect .
Unfortunately , the Council representative was not present .
Perhaps , Minister , it is not too late for you to express a view on that report .
We would be very interested in what you have to say .
Turning now to the reduction of non-wage labour costs : non-insurance benefits are a burden on labour-intensive small and medium-sized companies and , of course , on employee contributions .
This is an area where action must be taken .
Yes , working hours should be made more flexible , but not merely in order to suit employers , without regard for the needs of families and workers .
Greater flexibility should only be introduced where it takes account of the interests of both sides .
I believe that active social partnership can solve many problems .
But they will not be solved if employers concern themselves only with shareholder value and fail to see further than their profits .
Nor will they be solved if trade unions are concerned only for those in work , without giving any thought to the unemployed .
The future of social protection is a matter of great importance for the European Union .
It is time for the social protocol to be included in the Treaty .
Coordinating social protection systems at European level will not be easy .
I am talking about coordination : harmonization is something that will take much longer , because these systems have developed over more than a century .
The situation is further complicated by the impact of globalization .
In the future , appropriate clauses must be included in trade agreements to ban social dumping in the form of child labour or forced labour ; these practices simply cannot be accepted as the norm .
The WTO agreement in Singapore was a small step in the right direction , but unfortunately only a small one .
The rapporteur has done an enormous amount of work .
How the Group of the European People 's Party decides to vote on the report will depend on whether certain amendments are adopted .
Unfortunately , if compromise on these points proves impossible , we shall be obliged to reject the report , and I would regret that very much .
Mr President , the rather woolly wording of this resolution and in particular the Commission documents on which it is based actually masks a barely concealed desire to Europeanize the entire social security sector , which was , incidentally , exactly what the former Commission President Jacques Delors wanted .
As a Fleming , I can say as a matter of principle , and I speak with some knowledge , that this would be a very bad idea .
In my own country , the question of splitting up the social security system is currently very high on the political agenda .
What this means in practical terms is that both nations , Flemings and Walloons , are better off running their own social security schemes than leaving it to the federal government .
So what experience has taught us in my country is that Flemings and Walloons have different ideas of what social security should involve , different priorities and very different mentalities when it comes to using and funding the scheme .
Now , if we are already facing fairly dramatic problems within the common Belgian social security scheme , where there are only two nations with fairly similar levels of prosperity involved , think of the exponential increase that is likely if social security is organized on a European scale .
In short , a genuinely social system of social security would be best organized by the individual Member States and nations in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , and this is not being selfish and by no means excludes other forms of solidarity between nations .
I also have to say that the various social security schemes in Europe have managed to achieve genuine and extensive harmonization over the last few decades without interference from European bureaucracy , and we are not in a mess , despite what some people seem to think .
Finally , it must be said that the economic strait-jacket that Maastricht is tightening around us is threatening to lead to social disintegration in many countries , and this too is a lesson that we really have to take on board today .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mrs Weiler for an excellent report .
Our great challenge is to combine growth and employment while still maintaining , or preferably improving , existing social protection systems .
The question is sometimes asked , is there really a European social model ?
We have , in fact , three or four different social models in Europe .
It is true that there are differences , based on historical traditions but there are also similarities , considerable similarities .
Above all , every social security system is based on solidarity , solidarity with those who are sick , with those affected by unemployment or industrial injury and also solidarity with the elderly and with families .
In addition there are a number of problems or challenges for the future , and it is this which makes the discussion so interesting .
The greatest challenge is of course unemployment which affects the cost of the system and its income .
I think that we should create a social system which aims to prevent social dumping , and which facilitates as much mobility as possible .
I do not share the view expressed by many here during the debate that we should avoid minimum standards .
I think that a strategy of introducing minimum standards and the opportunity to achieve a better social standard is a truly excellent strategy for the social sector .
I also think it is important that the decisions for this sector are adopted by a qualified majority .
History has shown the necessity of this ; we have one country which is continuously obstructing and preventing social development in the other countries .
The second challenge is that of demographic development .
This can be viewed as a problem or as an opportunity .
We will have a greater proportion of elderly people in Europe but this will also introduce an opportunity to create jobs .
This point is also connected with the third challenge , that is the entry of women into the workplace ; the opportunity for men and women to be able to combine work with children which also involves the development of care for the elderly and for children .
A previous speaker said that Weiler 's report favours the harmonisation of finance .
This is not the case .
On the other hand , Mrs Weiler does indicate a number of possibilities for finance .
I have already mentioned the most important which is that we must reduce unemployment to reduce costs and increase employment to bring in a higher income to be able to finance the system .
But there is also a question of shorter working hours and changes in tax which I strongly support .
Many say EMU is a barrier to this work .
I do not think so .
Naturally , I do not fully support the economic policy , I think that there are too many cutbacks and not enough growth promoting measures .
But from a long term point of view a balanced budget is good for the social system as well .
Finally , Mr President : this is an important debate .
I do not want to see a social system with basic protection or standard security but a system which contains both of these and a system which as far as possible is financed through solidarity in order to minimise the need to look to the private sector for solutions .
Mr President , I believe that the high level of participation in this debate bears witness to its timeliness and importance .
It is rare that so many Members speak on an issue of concern to us : in this case the future of European social welfare systems , which have many points in common - as previous speakers have pointed out - in the sense that all the Member States have some kind of state and collective provision for social protection and income support for those citizens who need it most .
We believe that social protection in Europe is under threat : because there is a trend towards privatizing certain aspects of these social welfare systems ; because there is growing unemployment and job insecurity , and a rapid increase in the number of single-parent families in which the head of the household is a woman ; and because of the drive for competitiveness , the relocation of firms and the continuous movement of capital for speculative rather than productive purposes .
That is the harsh reality , therefore ; and it is a harsh reality which the European Union has to face .
We therefore share the concern expressed by the rapporteur and draftsman at the fact that economic and market considerations are being put before social considerations .
We believe that this situation must be reversed , and that social cohesion has to be our prime concern .
So we believe that there is a need for active policies on employment - a high level of employment is essential for us to meet the social security bill ; for a guaranteed minimum income for those persons that require it ; for the role of the State in social security provision to be maintained ; for the creation of a European observatory to determine whether poverty and social exclusion are increasing or declining ; and for the Member States to cooperate amongst themselves and with the non-governmental organizations working in this field .
Mr President , the two communications from the Commission and Mrs Weiler 's report prompt me to offer my thoughts on two fundamental facts which I believe must be central to our deliberations .
The first is demographic change , partly the result of social achievements and their success ; the second is the changes in the structure and forms of employment , partly as a result of the application of the IT revolution to manufacturing and the processes of globalization .
It is from these two basic facts , I believe , that the crisis in the welfare state has arisen , bringing with it the need for us to intervene across the board in this area .
The crisis in the welfare state is not just a crisis of public funding - rather , I believe , the key lies in the other aspect of the welfare state , which was the high level of employment .
Unemployment , therefore , has been the main reason for the crisis .
Development , of course , is one answer but it is not the only answer : it is necessary but it is not enough , precisely because in the present circumstances it does not automatically guarantee a return to fuller employment .
This , then , is an area in which government must intervene , both nationally and at European level .
The first task we face , as I see it , is to tackle these new problems realistically and not to be afraid of our own ideas .
I am thinking about the caution which I have noted in this House , and in the European Union , regarding such matters as reduced working hours and policies on working time . Yet these could be a valuable way of transforming restrictions and rigidity into greater freedom and greater opportunities for personal choice .
We need , then , to add new words to our vocabulary , words that could be conjugated so as to make them serve the needs of a plan for positive social change : as I said previously , reduced working hours , time policy , flexibility .
It is important to realize that flexibility is not painless or free of charge and that public funding -properly and scrupulously audited and designed to encourage productive retraining of human resources - will continue to be essential .
So , while our points of reference will continue to be social justice , equality and democracy , we need to redefine welfare to make it easier for men and women to move from one profession to another , from one job to another , from one place to another , from one age to another .
And this is where Europe comes in , with a part to play which does not usurp the functions of the Member States but is nevertheless fundamental .
Well , then , I believe that the notion that budgetary discipline and monetary stability are sufficient to survive in the world of economics is a senseless one .
The single currency and the Stability Pact , in the form of straitjackets and without a similar pact for development , will not motivate Europe ; without a pact for development and without a social Europe , Europe cannot stand on its feet .
So among those matters that call for greater commitment I would mention , specifically , rethinking the concept of Europe to strengthen - and certainly renew - its social model , its elements of social cohesion , protection and development of individuals and of human resources , which will be able to set their mark on a new , positive European identity .
Mr President , it seems to be becoming politically fashionable now to say that we cannot afford to maintain the European model of social protection .
Barbara Weiler says quite clearly and , in my opinion , quite correctly , that we cannot afford not to maintain that system and that we should not even want to .
It would be morally wrong to remove or reduce the support that we offer to people when , for whatever reason , they are in need , be it as a result of age , disability , health or unemployment .
The only way that we can act efficiently , effectively and humanely is to provide that support from the public purse and through public institutions .
Hiving it off to the private sector will be less effective in terms of meeting people 's needs and also inefficient in purely financial terms - it is more costly .
Apart from being morally wrong to abandon the social protection model that we have in Europe , it would be a huge mistake in practical terms .
Social solidarity is not just about altruism : it is about ensuring that our society can function properly and move forward progressively .
As the rapporteur says : ' social protection systems help to establish social consensus which is an important precondition for sustainable economic development ' .
I strongly endorse the call in the Weiler report for the European Union not just to debate this issue but to act to ensure that Member States respect the commitment to a high level of social protection , and to assist in the convergence of social protection systems to prevent harmful competition in the single market from eroding social protection systems .
We should look at making our systems more employment-friendly and seek to eliminate barriers to moving from benefits to work .
The most important point in the Weiler report - and this focuses on the real problem , the real reason why our social security bills are so high - is that we are faced with such a high proportion of unemployed men and women , so the real challenge to all of us here in the European Union is to create a Europe of full employment .
The rapporteur clearly knows this and knows that you do not punish the victims of society 's failures just because benefit bills are going up ; you tackle the real problem , which is to get people back to work .
Mr President , I should like to say at the outset that I fully endorse the excellent report by my colleague Barbara Weiler , and the Commission 's report .
I shall be voting in favour of both .
Since my time is short , I shall confine myself to just one very specific point of detail , but one which I believe is of the utmost importance .
Paragraph 11 of Mrs Weiler 's report states that : ' the European Parliament warns against privatization of social risks , particularly in the field of health care ' .
I would draw your attention , Commissioner , to the fact that our social protection as a whole will be at great risk unless we guard against a trend , in a growing number of countries , towards a reduction in health cover , on the pretext of making savings , improving management or giving beneficiaries more responsibility - all of which are valid arguments - and towards a transfer of risk from compulsory schemes to top-up schemes .
On this basis , topup schemes may gain more and more ground , to the extent that , as is the case in certain fields - eye care and dentistry - and in some countries , they will become a condition for primary care , since the residual burden can be so substantial .
Indeed , unlike compulsory schemes , voluntary top-up schemes are not subject to any rules ; it is the law of the market-place , of business geared to profit , which is applied to them .
The danger is that welfare institutions based on solidarity , inclusion and mutual benefit will lose out to commercial firms attracted only by a growing market , whose approach would be risk selection , exclusion and individualization .
You will remember , Commissioner , the unfortunate experience of the Blue Cross foundations in the United States , which were so full of life 50 years ago , but which are now dead and buried .
There we have the key to what has become of the American health care system .
I urge you as of now , Commissioner - and I have appealed to the authorities responsible for social affairs in the Commission to follow this approach - to subject the entire health insurance sector to rules which ensure solidarity , inclusion and non-selection of risk , and to make it impossible for providers to profit from illness .
Conflict between insured persons and shareholders must be avoided .
Health , a sector that concerns us all , cannot be regarded as a profitable market-place .
That applies equally to top-up schemes .
I would urge the Commission to take up this matter , and to generate a debate on compulsory and supplementary health schemes as they affect the population as a whole .
Mr President , I have listened to the debate with great interest , and I think it has shown that there is now greater support for more detailed discussions on the whole issue of social protection in the Member States and coordination at European level .
I have just one brief comment to make on what Members had to say .
It strikes me that in this discussion on support for social protection , it has been suggested that there are conflicts of interest where none should really exist .
It is an accepted fact , I would point out to Mr van Velzen , that it is in everyone 's interests to achieve a higher level of social cohesion , but this need not be incompatible with the existence - both now and in the future - of a wide variety of schemes .
It is not scheme diversity but a communality of purpose that should guide our policy-making over the next few years .
The suggested opposition between economic independence and support for the special situations of families need not exist if men and women have greater freedom of choice both on the labour market and in bearing responsibility for the family ; any suggestion of a conflict of interests here will simply lead to unnecessary polarization .
Thirdly , the suggested opposition between individual and mutual social security and pension schemes also does not necessarily exist .
It is true , as Mr Rocard pointed out , that where there is no statutory obligation to provide cover , the advent of individual insurers on the social security and pensions market could bring risks that ultimately undermine the very foundations of social security .
But combinations of public and private schemes are possible and are being tested in the Member States , including in my own country .
It is worth developing these possibilities further , provided that a number of statutory conditions are applied .
I would warn against attempts to contrast what people refer to as atypical forms of work and the usual forms such as full-time work , in terms of the basis for the functioning of the labour market .
Is it not the case that even the expression ' atypical forms of work ' is increasingly at odds with what is actually becoming the norm on the labour market , and will have to become the norm if work is to be divided more fairly between men and women ?
Today 's atypical forms of work may become tomorrow 's typical forms .
This is something else for the Commission to consider when it looks further at this whole issue .
In conclusion , on the subject of a European social model , I would point out that we are not yet in a position to define the broad outlines of this , but we know we must work on it if we are to be able to establish , in five or ten years ' time , a system which is truly balanced : balanced between the rights and obligations of employers and workers , between flexibility and security , with institutionalized confidence in and between the social partners that will symbolize a European system which the Member States will also use as a basis for the inevitable process of convergence between employment and labour market policy .
Mrs Weiler 's report has been a most important contribution to this whole discussion , and it is also extremely important - if I may make so bold - that the House should approve it tomorrow , since it is vital to bridge these alleged conflicts of interest with sound arguments , and to send a political signal to both the Council and the Commission .
It will also be doing justice to the visionary work of Jacques Delors in his White Paper a few years ago , which showed us exactly how greater cohesion and reliance on partnership should form the basis for the Europe of tomorrow .
Thank you very much .
I must inform you that for technical reasons it was not possible to translate , print and distribute all of the amendments to this report in all languages .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Price indication
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0015 / 97 ) on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position of the Council ( C4-0530 / 96-95 / 0148 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on consumer protection in the indication of the prices of products offered to consumers ( rapporteur : Mrs Oomen-Ruijten ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a directive on the indication of the prices of products offered to consumers has a very lengthy history .
For years now , since as early as 1979 , attempts have been made in various directives to introduce rules for indicating the prices of products , but the rules were complicated and did not seem to work .
The system included compulsory and voluntary pricing at European and national levels from which exemptions could also be granted , again at European and national levels .
The result was a jumble of different indications , and consumers were still not able to compare prices with one another , which was actually the aim of the whole exercise .
When in December 1994 , barely six months before the transitional period expired , the Commission asked for the system to be extended , Parliament could not agree , and we asked the Commission to come up with an entirely new proposal for a simple , clear system that would apply in principle to all products , a system that would make it easier for consumers to compare prices when choosing which product to buy .


The new proposal which the Commission put forward in April 1995 followed Parliament 's recommendations , which we were pleased to see .
It makes it compulsory to indicate the purchase price and , where relevant , the price per unit quantity .
I say where relevant , because exceptions are made to this requirement where the nature or purpose of the product makes the unit price meaningless , or where indicating it does not provide any clear information for the consumer .
Another point which I would like to clarify is the issue of wine , whisky and so on .
The report includes a very clear amendment in the definitions which states that with units of measurement customarily used in the Member States for certain products , such as wine in 0.75 litre bottles , the price per litre need not also be indicated .
This has meant deleting some provisions from the Council text because they were superfluous or likely to be confusing .
There are also a number of sectors which are entirely exempt from the requirement to indicate unit prices , and here I would prefer to go further than the Council and exclude from the directive goods sold in hotel and catering establishments , in hospitals , by itinerant traders , in vending machines , recreational establishments , canteens and so on .
A great deal of nonsense has been talked about price indication .
People have said that the report does not take account of small retailers , a claim which I absolutely reject .
We do take account of the corner shops of this world , which - I would point out to my British colleagues in particular - are to be given a six-year conversion period .
And unless they already do so , they do not have to indicate prices on the shelves as is customary in large retailers , they simply have to obtain a list from their suppliers to be displayed somewhere in the shop , so that customers can see what the prices are .
So I am not discriminating against small retailers by any means .
The next problem , particularly for the UK , is what constitutes a small retailer ?
We have tabled an amendment here giving the Member States the chance to determine who is ' small ' and who is ' large ' , and what exceptions need to be made .
I would urge Members to look very closely at Amendments Nos 23 and 24 which , far from making life more difficult for small retailers , actually make it easier for them .
There was also some concern about the euro .
A number of colleagues have said that introducing compulsory price indication will immediately mean having to show the unit price , the selling price , plus two extra prices during the transitional period .
And , if there is a special offer , another two prices again .
I have taken up a proposal from the Economic and Social Committee here by saying that there should be a maximum of three prices , including for large retailers .
I would also ask Members to read the report again , and you will see that the euro will be in circulation long before the completion of this transitional period .
The transitional period will last for six years , plus another two years for the directive to be transposed into national law , which makes eight altogether and brings us to the year 2005 , by which time the euro will , I hope , have long been in circulation .
Whatever problems there may be , there are answers to all of them , as people will see for themselves if they only read the directive .
In our report , I and the other members of the committee followed the lead given by the Economic and Social Committee , which delivered a unanimous recommendation . Parliament has taken this as the basis for the position it has adopted in its amendments , and I have added flexibility where necessary and where possible .
I hope that you will support these amendments .
Mr President , once again it is my pleasure to compliment Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on her emphatic pursuit of these consumer interests and the care she has taken over the amendments which we are presenting here at second reading .
I want to say at the outset , on behalf of my group , that we are supporting all the amendments that were tabled in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
We will also support , on reflection , Amendment No 24 in the name of Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and her group .
I want to say why we feel this confidence at this stage .
It is not because we have no misgiving about this proposed legislation , or indeed about the burden that it may in time place upon people , some of whom will be vulnerable .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has referred already to the position of small shopkeepers in the United Kingdom and I shall come back to that .
But the bedrock principle of this proposal as amended , which I hope it will be by Parliament , will be to give consumers the power to compare prices quickly and easily , not to be misled by packaging and to assess the kind of value for money that they are receiving .
It is absolutely imperative that they get that .
The directive can deliver it and I hope will do so .
But it has to be able to deliver mindful of the concerns and worries that have been expressed , not just in my country , but in other Member States as well .
One of these concerns has been the definition of what a unit price is and how it can indicate not merely the kilogramme , the litre , the metre or whatever , but also that unit of quantity which is widely used in the Member States concerned .
I am glad to say that I believe that the British loaf , and other items cherished in my country , can be appropriately indicated in terms of price notification .
Parliament has also said that certain products should be excluded where it would be nonsense insisting on unit pricing , such as furniture and so on .
We have an amendment here which also protects , I am very glad to say , those who are selling products where the total price is not the unit price .
This is what the consumer needs to know , particularly for home sellers and those who are going door-to-door with products , e.g. cosmetics salespeople and so on .
My last point is about the position of small shops with regard to implementation .
It is right that we provide here for a six-year delay in implementation , that we have a thorough review before that deadline approaches and that all the Member States enlist the relevant professional organizations to ensure that small retailers are adequately informed in due time of what the provisions must be , particularly in relation to the marking on the shelf of the products concerned .
There is a potential for trouble here but there also is a potential for much good for the consumer .
Mr President , I was very interested to hear what Mr Whitehead said about supporting the amendments from the rapporteur , and we shall certainly not let him forget that .
This is a very difficult directive for the European Parliament to consider .
It certainly looks as though it is a good thing .
Ostensibly the idea of giving consumers more information ought to be a good idea , but I contend that this has been ill thought out by the European Commission and is in fact likely , as Mr Whitehead said when he raised these misgivings , to mean that consumers have , in the end , possibly fewer outlets from which to purchase goods , as small shops may close down as a result of this very directive being put into operation .
I would like to draw attention to some of the amendments which I have difficulties with .
My difficulties are shared by the other British Members .
Amendment No 5 is a very curious amendment indeed .
The amendment means that the Member States will be unable to exempt sales of works of art and antiques from the unit pricing obligation .
I cannot see how you would apply unit pricing to antiques .
With the best will in the world , what does this mean ?
Does it mean that if you are selling Chippendale chairs they are quoted as price per leg , for example ?
Amendment No 7 is a crucial one where the report seeks to delete the exemption for small firms .
I have noted what the rapporteur has said on this about the transitional period of six years , but I think that would simply be a period of six years when some small shopkeepers would decide simply to throw in the towel and go and work for Honda - in my constituency - because it would not be worthwhile continuing to try to struggle with the extra weight of regulation which this directive means .
I note what the rapporteur says about Amendments Nos 23 and 24 regarding the possibility of putting up a list of products and unit prices .
I do not think that would work , given that some even quite small shops sell a very large number of things .
Amendment No 10 deals with the question of the one-year period by which time the Commission shall review the directive .
It seems to be quite extraordinary to say that the Commission shall review this directive one year before it comes into operation .
What happens if the Commission then finds that there is indeed a burden of cost on small shops ?
It has commissioned a survey on this already .
What happens then ?
It seems to me that the Commission 's text is far better than the one being proposed in the report .

I agree that Amendment No 13 contains good and sensible exemptions , but Amendment No 18 is also useful in the sense that it draws attention to my problem with the Chippendale chairs .
If it is useless and indeed meaningless to apply unit pricing to certain areas of goods , then why not allow the Commission the original text covered by Recital 7 ?
To sum up , I am afraid that this directive is not one with which I have sympathy .
I am always in favour of giving consumers more information , but I am afraid , as I say , that the likelihood is that the extra burden of regulation which it will entail will simply mean that small shops close down and consumers ' interests are hurt .
Mr President , this directive - and the rapporteur , whom I thank for all the work she has done - have set themselves two ambitious objectives .
The first is to protect the consumer , and the second is to simplify the administration of the regulations .
Protection of the consumer does not at present include the provision of clear price information , especially regarding any indication of the sale price per unit of quantity for products marketed in pre-packaged form , whose prices the consumer is unable to compare with the prices of similar products .
The second major objective , on which I would like to dwell for a moment , is the simplification of the existing regulations .
As far as simplification is concerned , this falls within the scope of the principle of subsidiarity , for which reason it will be a matter for the individual States to say what they understand by a ' small shopkeeper ' .
We can imagine two possible systems : one based on the type of service , in other words self-service or traditional , and one based on floor area .
Obviously , however , a store with 100 square metres of floor space is not the same thing in Greece as it is in Germany , and so it is right that it should be up to the individual Member States to determine what they will understand by ' small shopkeepers ' .
There is one final aspect which I would emphasize with a degree of concern - the need to help small catering and entertainment concerns , so that they are not forced to bear overheads which would eventually have an impact on the final price of the products .
The Commission has recently , and rightly , invited tenders for a product coding and reading system .
We hope that this reading system will be as close to the market as possible , precisely in order to prevent some form of technological intervention from creating irregularities and disparities between small and large outlets , and to enable the entire retail trading system to respond to the requirements of a changing market .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her work on this directive .
I think it important to stress that we must endeavour to unite two opposite views .
One of these is the perspective of consumers , and the other is the perspective of companies .
Some of the speakers from the different groups have already referred to this problem .
We in the Liberal Group are very conscious that consumers must be able to use the internal market and to compare prices .
We therefore agree with the directive and also support the Committee 's amendments .
Regarding Amendment No 24 , our group is in favour of this .
Having said that , I would like to draw the Commission 's attention to two questions .
The first is that there are some situations which are not mentioned in the directive , but which I regard as important .
The second is that there is more than the perspective of the consumer ; there is also , for example , the perspective of crime prevention .
I am thinking of the example of shops that sell gold and silver items for whom it may be particularly difficult to show prices in the window because it might encourage some people to smash the glass and steal the diamonds , gold items and precious stones on display .
If prices are shown , it is obvious that thieves will only take the most expensive items .
This is an important area and I would like to hear the Commission 's views on how we can attempt to solve this problem .
The other is the question of how the prices are shown , i.e. the question of price marking or price indication .
Price marking is a technologically poor solution if each individual item is to be marked , whereas price indication can be displayed on the edge of a shelf or in some other position .
It is important that we strive for a system which does not work against technological development in the retail trade .
All of us here in this hall have been through Brussels Airport where they have a very smart , informative system for giving prices in a display .
We must ensure that this directive facilitates technological development in the retail trade , both for large and for small enterprises .
Mr President , Parliament adopted a number of amendments at first reading , some of which the Commission has incorporated in its amended proposal .
There are just a few amendments left to which it still objects , for one reason or another .
We know what a tremendously sensitive subject this is for shopkeepers , who are all going to have to put these requirements into practice in their shops .
We feel that the rapporteur has made a number of useful and practical proposals for price indication , and I think that Amendment No 15 , which states that there should be a maximum of three prices shown on the product after the introduction of the euro , is particularly practical .
Consumers must not be confused by having too many prices on or by the product , and I cannot understand why the Commission has not accepted this amendment .
Perhaps it could give us an explanation .
I also think a clear distinction must be made between foodstuffs and non-foodstuffs .
I myself would not find it so terrible if the directive only applied to foodstuffs , since the unit price is always the most useful for consumers doing their daily shopping , whereas with non-foodstuffs there are all kinds of quality factors involved which make comparisons more difficult .
I fear that the Commission system is simply going to create a great deal of administrative fuss , and I cannot see how this will benefit the consumer .
The procedure proposed by the Commission in the new Article 6 , requiring the Member States to produce lists based on the common nomenclature , seems particularly long-winded .
We are talking about thousands of products here .
Fortunately , Article 7 offers scope for this requirement to be waived for a number of products .
In trying to protect the consumer , we could end up going to the other extreme and creating more problems than we solve .
For the rest , I am happy to support this report .
Mr President , I too would like to compliment Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on her report .
It is an excellent report and I support the call on Commissioner Bonino to initiate an information campaign dealing specifically with the difficulties of the introduction of the euro into the consumer 's pocket in the year 2002 .
It is very important that consumers are aware well in advance of the actual physical changeover of currency of the real worth of the euro compared with the punt .
One of the issues which should be raised in this consumer campaign must relate , as has already been mentioned by the rapporteur , to the introduction of dual pricing in our shops and supermarkets in euros and in punts .
This is a recommendation which I have supported as a member of the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection Committee .
The time frame for economic and monetary union has been set out and , as we all know , those countries who will be the first to join the EMU will be selected in 1998 on the basis of the 1997 economic statistics .
I am pleased to say that Ireland is well to the front in that regard .
That was initiated , of course , almost ten years ago by former Commissioner Ray McSharry as Irish Minister for Finance .
Incidentally he was aided by the present Commissioner Padraig Flynn who was a member of the cabinet in Ireland at that time .
This has , of course , put Ireland in the solid economic position which it is in today to meet the convergence criteria of EMU .
The central banks of these countries will then converge under the auspices of the European Central Bank in 1999 .
In the year 2002 the euro coins and notes will become a reality and we hope be jingling in plenty in the pockets of the citizens of Europe .
However , we must not make the same mistakes that surrounded the introduction of decimalisation in Ireland in 1972 .
Many people , especially old people , were confused as to the worth of the new Irish coins and notes at that time and were taken in by unscrupulous dealers .
We must learn from our mistakes in regard to decimalisation and ensure that they are not repeated when the single European currency is introduced .
I am confident that the Irish and European consumer organisations will support this proposal and that EMU will become a reality in the near future despite the apprehensions of certain members of the Union .
We must all face up to this fact and facilitate this process as much as possible .
Mr President , there are a few points I feel I have to make to the Commission and also to other Members .
First of all , I think it would be advisable for those who tabled Amendment No 24 to withdraw it in favour of Mr Garosci 's amendment , Amendment No 23 , which spells out for the second time the exception which applies to small retailers .
Secondly , I would point out that there is a mistake in Amendment No 15 on the euro , which states that three prices shall be indicated , whereas the recital says that they may be indicated .
The wording of Amendment No 15 should be altered to read may instead of shall .
Thirdly , there is the question of whether or not the unit price should be indicated for non-foodstuffs .
I agree with those speakers who commented on this , and I would draw their attention to Amendment No 18 , which states that the unit price need not be indicated where it is meaningless to compare a number of products with each other , such as at an auction or for items such as nails , and so on .
Finally , I would urge Mrs Jackson to look again at the entire directive and its consequences .
She has picked up a number of points from the recitals which are actually already covered in the articles .
If she does this before 12.30 p.m. I think she will feel happy about voting with the rest of her group .
Mr President , I have a question for Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
I did not quite understand whether Amendment No 24 had been withdrawn .
Is it therefore Amendment No 23 we are to vote on ?
What is meant by the words - and I will quote them in English because I have the English edition : Member States shall specify which small retail businesses shall be permitted to defer application of this Directive ?
What are the criteria we are to choose ?
Is it each individual Member State which must determine these criteria ?
I think Mr Garosci was quite right to point out that 1000 m ² in Greece is very different from 1000 m ² in Germany .
How do we ensure fair competition , and how do we ensure observance of the principle of proximity at the same time ?
I would very much like to have an answer to this .
I would prefer to leave it up to the Member States to decide on the exceptions to the rule .
The example you gave was a good one , Mrs Riis-Jørgensen .
The situation in a town with many small shops in Greece is entirely different from the situation in the Netherlands , for example .
I want the Member States to be able to decide for themselves what they classify as small and what they classify as large .
Mr President , the second reading on the proposal for this directive on the indication of the prices of products offered to consumers gives me the opportunity to say how happy I am with the very favourable attitude of the European Parliament to consumer protection and information .
That is really what this directive is about : improving consumer information and simplifying the existing mechanisms .
In particular , I want to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , for the very substantial work that she has done on all of this .
As at the very first reading , the Commission supports Parliament 's position .
Hence , I am pleased to inform you that the Commission is ready to accept the majority of the European Parliament 's amendments .
The few amendments that we cannot endorse - Nos 9 , 15 and 16 - concern the dual pricing in national currencies and euros at the time of introduction of the single currency .
This is not to say that the Commission is opposed to dual pricing ; on the contrary , I wish to stress that price transparency is a priority in the framework of economic and monetary union .
However , it is too early at this stage to lay down such detailed rules and , moreover , accompanying measures should be the subject of a global presentation .
Nor can the Commission accept Amendments Nos 23 , 24 and 25 .
Amendments Nos 23 and 24 relate to the detailed rules of application of price indication and the Commission considers that the Member States are in the best position to determine them .

Amendment No 25 cannot be accepted because it contradicts Amendment No 6 , which the Commission has accepted .
Insofar as Mrs Jackson 's point on Amendment No 5 is concerned - the recital on unit pricing for antiques - the Commission can empathise with Mrs Jackson 's observation .
However , I wish to point out again that this amendment only relates to a recital and that her point is more substantially covered by Amendment No 13 , which the Commission is prepared to accept .
And that particular amendment will cause the change that Mrs Jackson wants to be incorporated into Article 2 - rather than as a recital .
Of course , it simply means that antiques will be excluded .
I hope that , thanks to the proposed amendments , the remainder of the legislative procedure concerning this proposal for a directive on price indications can advance now rapidly without any hitches .
I wish to thank the rapporteur again for her very good work .
If I could just add one more comment , I had some very detailed discussions with the officials from the Commission on Amendment No 9 , the fifteenth recital , and the article on the euro .
The aim of the Committee on the Environment is that when the euro is introduced we should not then have a system where two , four or even six prices are indicated , but only a maximum of three .
The Commission sent me a document suggesting how we could be more flexible about the three prices , and it is now proposing to do nothing at all , which means that we will have the six prices .
But this is not what I want .
I would urge you to have another look at this with your legal experts .
I have looked at it very closely , and we actually share the same opinion on the matter , but the effect of not adopting this amendment is not what either of us would want .
Then there is Amendment No 25 .
I myself was not in favour of supporting this .
Amendments Nos 23 and 24 make it easier for small retailers to apply the system , and I would urge you to consider them .
I have no great difficulty in principle with what Mrs Oomen-Ruijten says .
What we are saying is that we would like to see it in a broader context and a little later on , dealing with the ' ins ' and the ' pre-ins ' and the whole question of the general framework of the process .
That is the only difficulty we have and we would ask you to consider that it might be better if we dealt with it a little later on .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended for five minutes until voting time )
Votes
Madam President , I should just like to make something clear to honourable Members to prevent this vote becoming a repetition of the misunderstanding which happened with the previous one .
We are voting today on three - and only three - amendments which have been the subject of a negotiated compromise between the rapporteur and the Commission .
Some Members may still have the ten amendments preceding these latest ones , which have already been voted on and adopted during the previous vote .
I would therefore ask you , Madam President , only to put the last three amendments to the vote , all together , partly because they have already been approved by a large majority in the Committee on Agriculture .
That is what I was proposing to do .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
I should like to congratulate Mrs Matikainen-Kallström , since I believe this is her first report in Parliament .
Many congratulations to you .
Madam President , the amendment regarding Recital F is quite simple : it is simply concerned with updating certain data on unemployment in order that the most recent data available can be inserted .
In Recital F , on page 4 , last line , after ' rate of unemployment ' we read : ' which is 21.3 % in the south , compared with 7.1 % in the north and 10.2 % in central Italy , the national average being 12.2 % ( ISTAT figures - December 1996 ) and the community average 10.8 % ( EUROSTAT figures - September 1996 ) ' .
So as you present it , this is both simple and complicated .
This simply means updating the rates of unemployment , but since there are seven or eight such rates , this might seem rather complicated .
There are a number of problems in the translations , and I would therefore ask that we should work from the original document and have the translations checked again , particularly the German version .
If I understand you correctly , you are objecting to the oral amendment .
I am referring to the written document .
We should use the original document for the vote , because the translations are not entirely accurate in every case , especially in the German version .
The meaning is quite clear in the original , but not in the German text .
So in short , if the House - which I am about to consult - has no objection to voting on this oral amendment , you wish the figures to be checked to ensure that everything is in line with the original version .
Madam President , I do think it is probably incumbent upon this House to produce up-to-date reports but I would also insist that the statistics are checked not only by national or regional indicators , but with Eurostat , to make sure that we have the latest , up-to-date figures and not figures which some Members may wish to insert to make their case look worse in terms of their structural funds .
Mrs McCarthy , I can assure you straight away that it is the Eurostat figures which are referred to in this oral amendment .
( Parliament agreed to the tabling of the oral amendment ) - On paragraph 4
Madam President , I asked for the floor merely to point out that paragraph 4 , in the last few lines , provided for the verification of certain data which could be done on 31 December 1996 .
This has been done , and so the proposal is to delete everything which , in the English text , comes after ' to the weak regions of Italy might be lost ' .
So the last sentence of paragraph 4 lapses .
So , Mr Podestà , you are proposing to delete the final part of paragraph 4 , following the phrase you quoted from the Italian text .
I put that to the House .
( Parliament agreed to the tabling of the oral amendment ) - On Amendment No 7
Madam President , I had asked Mr Dell 'Alba , as the signatory , to withdraw this amendment , except for the last phrase , reading : ' therefore calls upon the government to consider the matter more carefully ' .
This last phrase should be added to the original text .
In other words , you would like the ARE Group to propose an oral amendment to its own amendment .
I would therefore ask for the opinion of Mr Dell 'Alba .
Madam President , bearing in mind what the rapporteur has said , I would ask you to put the first part to the vote , as the rapporteur is clearly opposed to it , and then to put the remaining phrase to the vote .
Madam President , my group does not have a copy of this amendment , nor does it exist in the actual amendments which have been tabled .
Therefore , I feel we cannot vote on it .
I really do think that all this is becoming very confused .
There are two solutions .
Either Mr Dell 'Alba agrees to an oral amendment , in other words to his amendment being limited to the final phrase , as Mr Podestà has proposed , and I would then see if the House accepts that oral amendment ; or he maintains his amendment as it stands , and I put it to the vote .

What is your view , Mr Dell 'Alba ?
I can accept the oral amendment .
Madam President , I would simply like to make it clear that the whole original text is unaltered , apart from the addition of the phrase read out a few moments ago .
The phrase in question therefore reads : ' invites the government to give further attention to this matter ' .
Madam President , I should like you to give us the sense of the amendment again , because we are voting on a text and we must know what we are approving .
Would you be kind enough to say again to what paragraph and to the end of what amendment this phrase is to be added .
It seems to me that the situation really is very confused .
I shall therefore put the amendment to the vote in the form in which it was tabled by the ARE Group , and as it now stands .
I think that will be much simpler , since otherwise we shall produce something very confused .
Madam President , we are going to object to that .
In fact , the amendment has not been tabled and has not been circulated .
Obviously it was not tabled within the deadline and I have yet to receive a very clear explanation .
Therefore , on that basis we do not wish it to be moved and will vote against it .
The amendment was tabled , Mrs McCarthy .
I have Amendment No 7 by the Group of the European Radical Alliance which was tabled in the proper way .
Mr Podestà asked the group to withdraw it .
That has not been done , but the amendment was indeed tabled .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
I would point out that this is another instance where the translations need to be checked .
Some parts of the German version read quite differently .
It is therefore important to look again at the original text , including that of the amendment on assistance with the costs of training the monitoring committees .
This is a particularly important amendment which is needed in the report , and I would therefore ask that it should be checked again and that the House should support it .
Thank you for pointing that out , Mrs Schroedter .
Clearly , if there were to be a mistranslation of such an important amendment , or indeed of any amendment , it would be a very serious matter , and we shall check that very carefully .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , amongst other problems , Mrs OomenRuijten 's report raises that of frontier workers , whose situation , I can assure you - as a Member for northern France , a frontier region - has been deteriorating in recent years .
The more progress is made in European integration and - in theory - the less important borders become , the more national , not to say nationalist , reactions are complicating and adversely affecting the lives of frontier workers .
This is an intolerable situation !
The Commission really must take this matter up with the Member States , and the European Union must bring forward rules which are in keeping with our principles and our Treaties .
It is , after all , somewhat remarkable that in many cases frontier workers , who might be called the first Europeans , should now regard the building of Europe as a setback in respect of their own circumstances .
From this point of view , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report goes in the right direction , and I compliment her on it , but there is still a great deal of work to be done .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the European Parliament 's report on the Commission 's proposal to extend by three months the period in which an unemployed person moving to an EU country other than his homeland is entitled to receive unemployment benefit .
The Danish Social Democrats have a positive attitude to an extension of the existing three-month period in which an unemployed person is entitled to seek employment in another Member State .
There are , however , certain points in the proposal on which we would like further clarification , to ensure that an unemployed person 's situation is not made worse on expiry of the three-month period .
These have to do with the administration and control of an unemployed person 's benefit , and with the question whether , according to the proposal , it is the Member State in which an unemployed person is seeking work that is required to take responsibility for that unemployed person .
Recommendation for second reading by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten ( A4-0015 / 97 )
The two main subjects of this recommendation for second reading are : firstly , the protection of consumers by ensuring that adequate information is provided on product prices ; and , secondly , the simplification of prices through indication of both the selling price and the unit price .
This is the most appropriate - and simplest - way of informing consumers , since it enables them to compare the prices of the products they wish to buy .
Indication of the unit price will be helpful to consumers , because it will enable them to choose between products sold in different quantities .
This new system , which will replace the old system of giving only the package price , without referring to the unit price , will provide consumers with more information and increase their ability to compare and choose .
I shall therefore be voting in favour of the recommendation .
We have chosen to support the report , although we do not think that the EU has anything to say on this issue . We believe that consumer protection through price labelling on products for sale is best handled at national level .
We have chosen however to support what we consider is best for the consumer , hence our support for this report .
We cannot support the amendment proposals concerning the single currency because we do not support the principle of a common currency , nor do we believe that this will ever come into being .
As for consumers , we think it will be very hard for them to make sense of all the different prices which will be displayed .
Santini report ( A4-0337 / 96 )
Madam President , I hope that Mr Santini 's report will bring this banana saga to an end .
I would briefly remind the House that we import just over 800 000 tonnes of bananas from Guadeloupe , Martinique , Madeira and so on , and from what might be described as former European possessions in Africa and elsewhere , with two million tonnes coming to us from Central America .
In seeking to protect its company , Chiquita , the United States - for some inexplicable reason , since it does not produce any bananas itself - decided that two million tonnes , with a customs duty of only ECU 75 per tonne rather than ECU 825 per tonne , was not enough . It obtained 2 200 000 tonnes , then 2 300 000 , and is now asking for 2 500 000 .
Our German colleagues , or more precisely Germany , has always been very supportive of Chiquita 's position , probably because all the German political parties were receiving backhanders from this multinational company .
That is an open secret .
At last , thanks to Mr Santini , we have arrived not at a half-way position , but at a moderate one .
To my mind , this issue is very symptomatic : it shows how the building of Europe is completely dependent on the wishes of the United States .
An increase in the customs quota would definitely benefit Swedish consumers .
We would like to see a more open market for bananas on the world market .
Our goal is that Swedish consumers be given a choice when buying bananas .
They should be offered best quality bananas at the lowest possible price .
Naturally , we would like consumers to be able , if they so wish , to buy bananas which have been produced by the best methods from an ecological and social point of view .
There are very good grounds for opposing the EU 's current joint organisation of the banana market .
We are against the EU 's current trade policy concerning the import of bananas .
The current policy is bureaucratic , it is unfair to many countries , particularly in Latin America and leads to higher consumer prices .
We cannot therefore vote for a proposal which does not reform the current system .
We support those proposals which favour the import of fair trade bananas which have been grown under approved ecological and social conditions .
We consider the compromise proposal ( No 16 ) to be much too weak to support the import of fair trade bananas .
For this reason we have chosen to abstain from voting on the Santini report .
We , as consumers , should be able to buy whatever bananas we like and we cannot accept a quota system or any other type of restriction on the type of bananas which should be given priority .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations was opposed to the adoption of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , but supported the final resolution contained in Mr Santini 's report .
Our group takes the view that this resolution preserves the main structure of the trading preferences granted to the banana-producing ACP countries , whereas the Agriculture Committee 's amendments contain provisions which conflict with the interests of those countries .
Given the unchecked globalization of trade flows , this text has the virtue of preserving one vital and effective aspect of our cooperation policy : tariff quotas .
The fact is that for several years now , a campaign has been under way to outflank our traditional partners , for the benefit of the multinationals .
This is not a question of pitting certain economic interests against others , but of defending a tried and tested form of development cooperation .
It is also a question of protecting those producers who have opted to apply much higher social standards than many others .
I am pleased that the efforts of certain model producers have been highlighted in Mr Santini 's report .
Our group is opposed in principle to the possibility of transferring ACP quotas to other producers , especially since the definition of ' exceptional circumstances ' jeopardizing Europe 's supply of bananas from the ACP countries does not strike us as a sound basis for a lasting relationship of cooperation .
On the contrary , this constitutes a major break with a preference system which was established for the benefit of some of the poorest economies in the world .
If it is to operate effectively , this system must be based on reliability and trust , and not on constant doubt .
Matikainen-Kallström report ( A4-0041 / 97 )
The thinking behind this Energy Charter protocol is positive and the proposal contains many good suggestions and views which we support .
Regrettably , most of the positive points in the report are lost , because environmental regulations have not been included in the report , but are only to be found in an attached protocol .
In addition these regulations are not legally binding , which means that they will not be a force to help change the energy system to an ecologically sustainable system .
Unfortunately , it is our experience that non binding environmental regulations are rarely implemented .
There are a large number of examples from within the EU of countries which have not even complied with the binding environmental decisions which have been adopted .
This is not a good basis and we would have liked to have seen an energy regulation agreement which included binding environmental regulations .
Podestà report ( A4-0405 / 96 )
Madam President , I wish to make this explanation of vote on Mr Podestà 's report mainly to thank him and congratulate him on his work in producing this important summary on behalf of the European Parliament on the problem of the administration of the Structural Funds in Italy , but also because I feel that something must be said about the annoyance that we , as elected Members of the European Parliament , cannot help feeling about the way in which the Structural Funds are administered in our country .
As we know , an important meeting took place on 22 January between Mr Ciampi and the Commissioner , Mrs Wulf-Mathies , at which it emerged that Italy 's total backlog at the end of 1996 exceeded one and a half billion ECU , equally distributed among the various Funds .
Well , in a situation of budgetary rigour , in a situation where Italy and its government are asking the Italian people to make sacrifices to secure entry into Europe , the fact that one of the founding States of the Community is in serious structural difficulties , not to say incapable of administering these funds correctly -so that we are constantly having to ask for delays and extensions , and then the national authorities are forced to step in to remedy the shortcomings of the regions - is absolutely intolerable .
I would have hoped that the European Parliament would be more critical , providing more of a spur to the Italian government , not by way of intervening in its internal affairs but simply in the interests of the proper functioning of the institutions .
In particular , we believe that the Control Centre is no longer an appropriate instrument , and that what is needed is a body with greater authority and greater powers .
This is the only way in which we can make up the backlog and achieve the objective of administering the Funds with greater awareness and consistency between expenditure and commitments entered into .
In this hope , my group has voted for the resolution , motivated by the desire to spur the Italian government to greater efficiency in its administration of the Structural Funds .
Without wishing to question the objectivity of the rapporteur , I consider it dangerous , in principle , that Parliament 's rapporteur is from the same country whose support is being evaluated .
For reasons of principle , Parliament should always make efforts to use a rapporteur who has no interest whatsoever in the issue under discussion .
Botz report ( A4-0002 / 97 )
Without wishing to question the objectivity of the rapporteur , I consider it dangerous , in principle , that Parliament 's rapporteur is from the same country whose support is being evaluated .
For reasons of principle , Parliament should always make efforts to use a rapporteur who has no interest whatsoever in the issue under discussion .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.45 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

BSE
Mr President , the European Parliament 's right to set up committees of inquiry was laid down in the Maastricht Treaty of 1992 and developed further in an interinstitutional decision of 1995 .
To date , Parliament has set up two committees of inquiry : one into fraud in the Community transit system , and the other into BSE .
For reasons of timetabling , the Committee of Inquiry into BSE completed its work before the other committee , with the effect that I have the honour of being the first rapporteur to speak in the House on behalf of a committee of inquiry .
The Committee of Inquiry had to work within certain time constraints , since the BSE crisis has had an enormous impact on European public opinion and Parliament was receiving a message of social alarm . Indeed , Parliament had been receiving this message for some time , and this led it to decide last summer to set up the committee .
The Committee of Inquiry was set up for a limited period of time , in principle three months .
This initial period proved inadequate , and an extension was obtained . The committee finally completed its work on 6 February , after a marathon sitting at which it considered some 250 amendments .
The committee 's work took around five months , and its results , like those of all work carried out under pressure of time , will no doubt present some difficulties .
I hope that as Members read this report , they will take note of any shortcomings it may have , so that these can be reviewed and rectified before its publication .
As the House will be aware , the report consists of a first part , part A , containing the results of the inquiry and the recommendations , with a series of annexes comprising the minority opinions , plus a summary of the hearings and a number of other documents .
In the course of our work , we received several kilos of documentation from the Commission , the Council , government bodies , and national and international scientific institutions .
Over that period , moreover , we held a series of highly detailed hearings : we had the privilege of hearing the testimony of the Presidents of the Council and the Commission , as well as that of various members of the present and previous Commissions ; and we had the honour , in particular , of welcoming a number of distinguished members of the scientific community , who took the trouble to come to Brussels and give evidence to our committee on an objective basis , offering us their full cooperation .
I believe that our hearings , which were chaired efficiently by Mr Böge , have produced a valuable report , which will be useful to all those who care to read it .
The Committee of Inquiry is now presenting to Parliament part A of its report , which consists of the results of the inquiry , recommendations for the future , and the minority opinions .
There are seven minority opinions , and I shall not go into them in detail , because they will be presented by their authors . I would point out , however , that the report as such was adopted unanimously by those present at the vote on 6 February .
Consequently , whatever flaws it may have - and , of course , your rapporteur acknowledges those flaws - they are the responsibility of the members of the Committee of Inquiry as a whole .
The problem is that while the Committee of Inquiry had a fairly wide brief , in the sense that it was mandated to investigate alleged contraventions or maladministration in the implementation of Community law in relation to BSE , it was subject to an important restriction , which was to carry out that brief without prejudice to the jurisdiction of the Community and national courts . In other words , the committee could not act as a court of law .
There are Community and also national bodies to which recourse is available for that purpose .
On this basis , therefore , the Committee of Inquiry 's concern was to identify the responsibilities of the various institutions . In doing so , it found that , because of the European Union 's structure , whereby responsibilities are shared between the Member States and the Community institutions , it had to focus primarily on the responsibilities of the Member States , in particular those of the British Government .
There is no doubt that the BSE crisis had its origins in certain actions by the British Government which caused enormous damage , albeit unexpected and undesired .
The starting-point for the crisis was the introduction of a new method of manufacturing meat-and-bone meal from animal remains , the so-called Carver-Greenfield process .
As a number of scientific experts explained to our committee , at some point the British Government relaxed the rules governing this process , with the effect that the meal was not completely sterilized .
A number of the members of the Committee of Inquiry went to the United Kingdom and visited the plants in question ; they found that what had been happening was that animal remains - many of which were probably infected with other diseases - had been used in the manufacture of animal feeds and allowed to enter the food chain , without any kind of control .
There is also a whole series of problems regarding the lack of identification .
On the farms that we visited , for example , we saw sacks of animal feed which contained absolutely no information as to the origin of their contents .
There was no way of knowing where they had come from ; and this explains precisely the form , behaviour and development of the disease , which appears in isolated cases on farms a long way apart .
All things considered , with the cooperation of the Community institutions , the problem could have been tackled effectively from 1989 onwards , when the first scientific evidence that the disease could have consequences for human health was obtained in German , French and other laboratories - including , and above all , British laboratories .
I believe that if , at that time , the UK Government had offered to cooperate with the Community institutions , and the Community institutions had acted in harmony with the UK Government , we could have begun to tackle the problem in 1989 or 1990 , and we would now perhaps be on the way to resolving it .
There was then a second crucial period , when the UK Government attempted to prevent investigations into BSE in the United Kingdom by all means possible .
Indeed , although Commission officials carried out 37 veterinary inspections in the UK between 1990 and 1994 , none of those checks was on BSE . This leads us to believe that the UK Government actively wished to prevent such checks being carried out and that the Commission was not firm enough to impose them .
Curiously , documents relating to the period reveal that , although detailed checks on foot-and-mouth disease in Greece and similar matters were then being carried out , there was no Community research into the major epidemic in the United Kingdom - BSE - which was then beginning to concern us .
However , I shall not go into detail on this subject , as I do not have enough time , and I should now like refer to the second main set of responsibilities : those of the Council .
The Council is composed of the representatives of the Member States ' governments and acts as the legislative authority . But it also acts as an executive authority - and therein lies a major anomaly .
One of the principles of our constitutions is the separation of powers .
In order to be a Member of the European Community , a state must abide by the principles of the EC . However , the European Community itself does not abide by the principle of the separation of powers - and it has even been said that if the European Community asked to join the European Community , it could not be accepted because it does not abide by that principle .
And this raises a serious problem : the Council , which is the legislative body , delegates some executive responsibilities to the Commission , but it retains the fundamental power .
It is as if it had given the Commission a bullet , but that bullet is on a cord , so that after each shot , the Commission has to return it to the Council . As a result , decisions of an executive nature which are adopted in the Council are then counteracted by the way in which committees made up of representatives of the Member States ' governments operate - in this case the Standing Veterinary Committee .
When it comes to voting in these committees , the votes are weighted , with the effect that the influence exerted by the different governments is not a function of scientific reason , but of those governments ' political will or weight .
In cases of diseases , therefore , the UK Government has a greater say than , for example , the Greek or Portuguese Governments .
I believe that this is a totally unacceptable system , which violates the constitutional principles of all our Member States , and that it will be unacceptable if the Intergovernmental Conference results in these executive powers being retained by the Council .
I now come to the third main set of responsibilities , which are those of the Commission .
The European Parliament is accusing the Commission of weakness .
That is to say , the Committee of Inquiry considers that there was a point at which the Commission did not adopt the measures that it should have .
When , at one time , the governments of certain Member States were seeking to apply Article 36 in order to restrict the import of beef products from the United Kingdom , the Commission intervened - even threatening to bring an action against those Member States before the Court of Justice . We believe that was the correct thing to do , but that the Commission should have simultaneously taken action against the Member State in question and required it to comply with the relevant standards .
At one point in the hearings , I specifically asked the Commissioner responsible at the time if he had requested the opinion of the Commission 's legal services . His reply was that he did not have sufficient political power , at the time , to confront the Council .
In politics , Mr President , you have to be decisive .
It is a considerably more difficult activity than it appears to be , and I believe that if an institution has some kind of basic or legal power , then it must use it .
At that point , and for some time afterwards , the Commission displayed tremendous weakness .
I do not wish to go into detail on all aspects of the Commission 's responsibilities , but I would stress the fact that , in 1996 , the British Government 's threat to use its veto to paralyse Community business was met by weakness on the part of the Council and , once again , the Commission .
This weakness reached the extent that the decision to lift the embargo on gelatine seems to have been taken on the basis of an inadequate preliminary report , which was then contradicted by a subsequent report making it clear that the use of gelatine - and lifting the gelatine embargo - did indeed present a possible risk to human health .
All in all , on the one hand because of the refusal of the UK Government to accept the intervention of the Community , and on the other hand because of the concentration of powers in the Council and the Commission 's weakness vis-à-vis the Council and the Member States , we are now faced with a crisis which , as far as we know , has resulted in the death of 165 000 cattle - although there are apparently a further half a million infected cattle in the United Kingdom - the suicide of 23 farmers in the UK , the infection of 15 people with a new variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease - which is attributed to BSE - and the collapse of the beef market .
I believe it was Commissioner Fischler who said that this was the greatest disaster that the European Community had ever had to face .
The Committee of Inquiry could have restricted itself to recording these contraventions or cases of maladministration , but it seemed appropriate for it to make some kind of recommendations based on its experience and what it had learnt .
Our recommendations cover a range of topics , but one of them is , of course , aimed at increasing transparency throughout the beef sector .
The Community 's citizens are currently alarmed at the development of mysterious institutions which meet in Brussels , and in which there are possibly lobbies at work , and they have no assurance that the food they eat , the products they consume , are provided with adequate health safety guarantees .
Consequently , the citizens of the Community are now calling for increased transparency and information .
We are proposing a series of measures aimed at ensuring the widest possible dissemination of information on this crisis and on future developments .
The Committee of Inquiry is also proposing another set of measures aimed at improving the monitoring of all health issues .
At present , the very structure of the Commission , the structure of the system of scientific and other committees , is not designed to guarantee health protection .
As the Community has developed , with the emphasis being placed on its essentially economic aspects , it has been forgotten that the fundamental purpose of economic activity is to protect people and enable them to develop their potential .
If we continue to subordinate everything to the economic interests of particular business sectors , we shall ultimately condemn the common market and cause harm to the Community 's citizens as a whole .
For this reason , the conclusions of the Committee of Inquiry are based on a wish to foster cooperation between the Commission and Parliament , not least through the creation of a joint body to monitor , over the coming months , the implementation of all the measures aimed at strengthening public confidence , enhancing the protection of public health , and improving the functioning of the Community institutions .
I believe that with this report , Mr President , Parliament is making an important contribution to the development of the Community institutions and the improvement of the welfare of the Community 's citizens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this committee of inquiry has spent six months on the trail of madness , in every sense of the word .
As chairman of the committee , I should first of all like to thank our rapporteur , Mr Medina Ortega , for the effort he has put into this report .
Thanks are also due to all my colleagues for the commitment they have shown , and especially to our committee secretariat , which has worked very effectively .
This has been a new experience for all of us , and it certainly also involved testing out a number of grey areas in the interinstitutional agreement on the right of inquiry .
In accordance with the mandate given to us by the House and on the basis of that agreement of 19 April 1995 , to which all the institutions have committed themselves , we have tried to find out the truth and determine any responsibility for negligent and culpable behaviour .
Despite our limited right of inquiry , there is now a wealth of facts and evidence which make two things clear .
Firstly , this Parliament is in a position to use the right of inquiry as an instrument of control at any time , and it can be applied in other cases too .
This is a clear warning to everyone , and perhaps this alone will help us to move forward .
The European Parliament has an obligation to our citizens , and to our citizens alone .
Only by completely clarifying matters , establishing where responsibility lies and drawing the necessary political conclusions can we succeed in restoring the damaged confidence of our citizens .
Secondly , we wish to end the madness of this BSE saga once and for all , and ensure that nothing like it ever happens again .
This means , of course , that our efforts must be centred on bringing about an agricultural sector based on sustainability and on production methods best suited to each type of animal .
There is a common interest here , for both consumers and farmers .
We also need a commitment from the Commission , the Council and Parliament that the relevant precautions will be taken , through appropriate initiatives and legislative proposals , including budgetary policy .
The details of this strange and alarming mixture of ignorance , mismanagement and misjudgement are very well documented in the report through many examples .
On the other hand , of course , it is clear that errors and omissions committed in the past , in 1989 and 1990 , must be judged differently - not least given the new scientific findings made since March 1996 , which were not previously available .
However , this does not absolve the policy from its responsibility of concentrating efforts on preventive consumer protection .
In that respect , there were shortcomings .
Serious technical mistakes were made in combating BSE .
Many of the measures adopted and implemented in 1996 came several years too late , and practical errors committed in the past are still hampering us in combating BSE today - and not just in the United Kingdom .
There was an inability to make preventive consumer protection a central issue within the internal market , and a lack of interest in doing so .
I very much welcome the ruling by the European Court of Justice of 12 July 1996 , which gave internal market case law a new quality in terms of health and consumer policy .
There was a shared responsibility as regards the omissions , firstly in the United Kingdom , of course , and secondly on the part of the previous Commission in particular .
But the Council too did not particularly distinguish itself by activity at every stage of the proceedings , even if there were repeated initiatives by individual Member States .
We are naturally aware , Mr Santer , that in many areas , the Commission can only be as good as some Member States allow it to be .
I said to you during the debate in July , Mr Santer : ' Please do not cover up the mistakes of the past ' . I think that the responsibility of the present Commission is concentrated on two points .
I am referring first of all to the phoney debate on gelatine . Even if no one has suffered harm because of this decision and this toing and froing , Mr Santer , do you really think that our citizens can understand such stage management and see it as a credible policy ?
Secondly , I feel it has been somewhat detrimental to you in our assessment that people who used to be responsible in the Commission 's services were also entrusted with the task of dealing with and responding to the questions and activities of the Committee of Inquiry .
That was a strategic mistake .
( Applause ) And presenting this appalling press release of 16 December at the end of the investigations , as if this committee of inquiry had never existed , struck me as an insult .
( Applause ) The same applies , I am sorry to say , to the fact that at the end of the proceedings , the full set of documents requested from the meeting of the BSE Subgroup of 8 January 1997 was not forwarded to us in good time , but only selected items .
After Mr Fischler had given his approval , we then received these documents late on Friday afternoon , but for the first time in the seven and a half years that I have been a Member of Parliament , my trunk has not arrived in Strasbourg .
So I have not yet been able to check on this .
I think you were badly advised in this respect , Mr Fischler and Mr Santer .
Our citizens are confused and dismayed , and are saying to us in the world outside : if this is Europe , then we have some serious doubts , in view of the challenges we are all facing .
You should therefore see the recommendations made by the Committee of Inquiry as an opportunity to improve matters .
Those who recognize and admit mistakes and learn from them are strong and acting responsibly , unlike those who minimize debate and disregard minority wishes and opinions .
On the basis of this recommendation from the Committee of Inquiry , the Commission and Parliament can become natural allies once again .
Some very clear and strict recommendations were made in this respect by the Committee of Inquiry : the question of reorganization ; the question of responsibility , including disciplinary measures ; the question of a joint body to solve the animal meal problems once and for all ; and also the legal basis , Mr Santer .
Wherever the Commission has scope for interpretation , it should accommodate Parliament more than it has done in the past when determining the legal basis , even before the Intergovernmental Conference .
( Applause ) Furthermore , the fact that the British Agriculture Minister , Mr Hogg , did not attend is an insult not just to Parliament , but to all the citizens of Europe .
( Applause ) And it must be made clear that this is a breach of the interinstitutional agreement , which everyone has signed .
A more vigorous approach from the outset would also have limited the economic damage and would have turned out very much less expensive than the strategy of minimal debate , which has ultimately backfired .
A resolution has now been tabled which has the support of several groups .
You should likewise see the text of this resolution , Mr Santer , on which we shall be voting tomorrow , as an invitation , as an opportunity to improve matters .
Parliament will have to check and monitor the future progress of events , and at the moment , when things are going well , you still have our confidence .
But if things are not changed satisfactorily and we see serious shortcomings , then in the coming months there will have to be a very serious debate and some very serious initiatives will have to be taken , including the question of applying Article 144 of the Treaty .
We owe that to the citizens of Europe , as their representatives .
( Applause )
Mr President , with your permission , I rise to speak on the order of business .
Is there any reason why the Council has not deigned to attend this extremely important debate this afternoon ?
There are no political representatives of the Council present .
The Commission is well represented , and I am grateful to it for that .
The Council seems to be indifferent to this matter .
All I can say , Mrs Lalumière , is that the Council was contacted by the presidency of Parliament , but replied that it was not able or did not consider it appropriate to attend today .
That is all I know , and all that I can tell you .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are dealing with an extremely important matter .
Whatever has to be said to the Council will be said through the appropriate procedures , which anyone may use .
But we are not going to become sidetracked and enter into a question which - however important it may be - is incidental to this debate .
I give the floor to Mr Happart , the first signatory of the motion of censure .
Mr President , I should like to borrow a remark that Winston Churchill reportedly made before the war : ' You have the choice between dishonour and war ' .
Mr Santer , you have the choice between dishonour and resignation . It is not too late , and it is high time .
On behalf of the institution to which I belong , and in keeping with my idea , as a democrat , of the Europe that we are in the process of building , I call on you to cease humiliating yourself , and humiliating us , by attempting to justify the unjustifiable .
Do you not realize that you are building Europe without the involvement of its citizens , that you are building Europe in the interests of business and against those of its citizens ?
You are strangling at birth the Europe of our children , and all because you refuse to assume your political responsibilities in respect of the extremely serious affair - if ever there was one - of BSE .
In adopting this attitude , you are undermining the confidence of our citizens further still .
You should be spearheading the building of a genuine people 's Europe , Mr Santer , a Europe of the future .
However , on reading Mr Medina Ortega 's excellent report - or rather his indictment of the failures of the Commission and successive UK Governments - you will see , like everyone else , that your responsibilities in this affair require a radical and immediate sanction : the resignation of your Commission .
People will reply , and I am used to hearing this , that it is not the right moment , that there are other things to do , and that the Commission must be given a chance to put its house in order .
I firmly reject these arguments , Mr Santer , because the Commission 's actions , its serious mistakes in this affair , deserve a sanction .
Political responsibility must be assumed !
Of course , the necessary administrative steps must also be taken to punish the officials who - under your authority and that of the Commission as a whole - committed acts which exposed hundreds , if not thousands , of human lives to serious danger .
We are living in a time - it seems to be part of the current climate - in which we are obliged to make savings .
We are obliged to make things pay , to be competitive - but for the sake of whom , for the sake of what ?
For the sake , of course , of the unbridled pursuit of profit of monetarism and high finance .
By allowing a handful of - mainly British - undertakings to cheat in order to reduce the cost of producing beef , a situation was created which today , ten years on , is costing many - far too many - human lives , as well as billions of ECU to society .
Mr Santer , the way in which the Commission - your Commission - treats the European Parliament is a disgrace .
Indeed , at the very time when the Committee of Inquiry was carrying out its work - which , as Mr Medina Ortega 's report shows , was extremely useful and enlightening - you were approving the uncontrolled import of genetically modified maize .
Your Commission is in the process of approving the production and distribution on the European market of new medicinal and other products , the harmlessness of which in the short and medium term is far from guaranteed .
Please stop telling us that we have to choose between technological progress , growth and modernity and the kind of opposition to change that will mean the regression of our European societies .
What is the purpose of being modern , of making money , if in doing so we endanger human health or the future of our environment - which is the environment of our children and grandchildren ?
Mr Santer , I do not know if you are a father or grandfather - and I hope that you are - but I would ask you to consider , leaving aside purely commercial considerations , what kind of planet we are bequeathing to our children .
Do you not believe that the time has come for us to have the courage to make a U-turn , to start to give priority to people and their future , rather than to a handful of economic and financial interests ?
With regard to research , if a decision were taken for research to be funded by the community and geared to increasing welfare rather than profits , the citizens of Europe and the rest of the world would be eternally grateful to you .
Mr Santer , I am aware that the choice I am calling on you to make - that of resigning - is more difficult for you than it appears to be to observers .
Tomorrow , the Members of the European Parliament will be called upon to vote on a resolution stemming from the Committee of Inquiry 's report .
If that resolution is forward-looking and explicit , I shall vote in favour of it , because it will form the terms of reference , the manifesto basis , for the Commission that will succeed your own .
On Thursday , I shall call on all the Members of the European Parliament to imagine , leaving aside partisan divisions or whatever interests they may have , that tomorrow , in a year , in five years , in perhaps ten years , their son or daughter is afflicted by the terrible disease known as new variant CJD .
If that were to happen , how would they vote ?
I have made my choice .
In collecting the necessary signatures and tabling this motion of censure , I consider that I am fulfilling my role as a Member of the European Parliament and doing my duty .
Some people will perhaps call it populism .
But I am not a populist !
I am simply defending the health and future of our fellow citizens .
Today , we must let our conscience be our guide , and not some reason of party or state .
Mr Santer , you have the choice between staying with dishonour and resigning with honour .
For the sake of Europe and its citizens , I call on you to resign .
There is still time for you to do so !
Mr President , the Socialist Group welcomes and endorses the report and recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry into BSE .
This Parliament is today demonstrating that we take our role of monitoring and controlling the unelected institutions of the European Union very seriously .
This is the first time that the powers given to us in the Maastricht Treaty to investigate alleged contraventions or maladministration under the auspices of a committee of inquiry have been used .
My group wants to pay tribute to those colleagues who have been engaged in the committee of inquiry .
They have worked hard to identify and expose the tragic series of events which have devastated the beef industry across Europe , ruined the livelihoods of so many farmers , rural workers and people engaged in the ancillary food business and , worst of all , has led to debilitating illness and death for some of our fellow citizens and put so many others at risk .
I wish to make clear that for my group at all times the paramount concern has been the health of the people of the European Union .
The work of the committee of inquiry has demonstrated unequivocally that the blame for the BSE crisis lies fairly and squarely on the shoulders of the current British Government .
It was its single-minded , blind , ideological commitment to deregulation that led to a catalogue of disastrous decisions on which BSE evolved .
( Applause ) My group has long believed that a simple commitment to deregulation is as outmoded and dangerous a concept as is a simple commitment to regulation .
What is needed is appropriate regulation : regulation to protect the health of the public and regulation to secure the safety of consumers is , in our view , necessary in a single market .
The BSE tragedy is a sad and dramatic example of what can happen when the health of the public and the safety of consumers is sacrificed on the altar of business expediency and profit-enhancement .
( Applause ) The British Government is to blame not just for the impact in Britain but because , by its mismanagement of the crisis , far from containing BSE in Britain it allowed its contaminated animal foodstuffs and infected calves to continue to enter the market and food chains in the rest of Europe .
This really was negligence of the worst sort .
I am confident that all decent-thinking British people know that if such games had been played with their health and safety by any other government in the European Union they would be unforgiving .
The British tabloid media would do well to ponder on that fact before they indulge in any further xenophobia on this issue .
( Applause ) The sight last night of the British Minister of Agriculture , Mr Douglas Hogg , being saved from a motion of no confidence in the House of Commons on his mishandling of the BSE crisis by a disreputable political fix with the Ulster Unionist Party really beggars belief !
If , as we are assured , beef from Northern Ireland and other specified herds in Britain has not been infected in the same way as other beef in Britain , why was it not acknowledged months ago , thereby saving Northern Irish farmers from the catastrophic financial consequences of recent months ?
Why is it that the British Government only agrees to pursue so-called special measures when it faces a motion of no confidence in the House of Commons ?
It is this kind of cynical , opportunist behaviour which destroys confidence in Britain and the rest of Europe and demonstrates that the British Government does not put health and consumer safety - let alone economic good sense - at the top of its agenda .
Mr Douglas Hogg , the hapless Agriculture Minister , refused to come and give evidence to our committee of inquiry , despite the fact that all the governments in the Union - including the British Government - had given an undertaking that they would support the work of Parliament 's committee of inquiry .
Last night in the House of Commons Mr Hogg said that it would be an abnegation of British sovereignty for him to give evidence to us here .
He is one of those who argues that sovereignty in a democracy rests in its parliament .
I am one of those who believes that sovereignty resides in the hands of the people .
( Applause ) However , the Council cannot hide from criticism in this affair .
It succumbed to pressure from the British Government ; it watered down Commission proposals in the Agriculture Council and generally used the elite club of the Council to look after national interests rather than those of the people of the Union .
It reinforces the view of my group that the Council , when acting as a corporate body , hides behind the members ' individual democratic legitimacy and acts together in a secretive and unacceptable way .
I want to say now to the President of the Commission that this was a disaster waiting to happen .
The European Commission is culpable : it was not as if the Commission had not been warned that its structures and decisionmaking on food safety and public health were seriously flawed .
As long ago as 1989 in the Raftery report this Parliament stated : ' If we want a genuine single market for food then we must establish a genuine , independent , strong and open regulatory body which will be seen to put the interests of consumers above those of producers , processors , distributors and the catering industry . '
Yet again , in March 1992 , in my report on the reform of the Scientific Committee for Food this Parliament said : ' The process of achieving a satisfactory scientific base for matters relating to food safety will be judged by Europe 's consumers according to whether it is sufficiently independent , transparent and effective . '
In that report Parliament demanded a single unit in the European Commission to deal with food under the auspices of the consumer policy service , a common food policy , an independent scientific committee for food , proper consumer representation on that committee , transparency in the appointments made to the committee and proper consideration of the public interest in areas of food and consumer safety .
How much more could this Parliament have done to demonstrate that European decision-making in food safety was in a mess ?
The litany of shambolic decision-making , lack of accountability and evasiveness shown by the Commission and its officials throughout the BSE saga has left the Commission weakened and vulnerable .
So , sadly , it has taken a crisis of this magnitude to create the conditions for change .
If the President of the Commission is to be believed , then change we shall have , and we welcome his statement .
But we are not content with promises .
That is why in our resolution to wind up this debate we commit ourselves to watching very carefully just what action the Commission takes to fulfil its promises made here today by its President .
If the reforms are not genuine , appropriate or fast enough to deal with the recommendations of the committee of inquiry , then my group will join with others in tabling a motion of censure on the Commission at an appropriate time in the months before or during November of this year .
Finally , my group will not support the motion of censure on the European Commission before this House today .
We do not consider it an effective political strategy to censure this Commission before it has had the opportunity to put its own house in order .
We are interested in a serious attempt to reform in the interests of public health .
Furthermore , we are convinced that a successful motion of censure at this stage would simply lead to an institutional crisis which would last for months and not do one single thing to strengthen public health or consumer protection at European level .
( Applause ) There are those who consider that the publicity and chaos which would accompany the dismissal of the Commission would somehow cleanse the system .
My group does not believe that to be the case .
That the President of the Commission has come here today to set out before this Parliament a package of reforms which , if carried through , should go some way to really cleansing the system , is a tribute to those who have worked so hard in the committee of inquiry and a measure of the effect which this Parliament , if it takes its powers seriously , can achieve .
The committee of inquiry identified the faults and the reforms necessary to end those faults .
It is now our political responsibility in this House to see through those reforms to completion , and we intend to do so .
( Loud applause )
I should like to begin by congratulating the chairman of the Committee of Inquiry , Mr Böge , the rapporteur , Mr Medina , and all the other committee members .
Our group endorses the findings of this report .
The description of the mismanagement that occurred at the height of the BSE crisis between 1990 and 1994 is absolutely incredible .
In 1990 , it had already been scientifically proved that the infecting agent could be passed from one species to another , and this should have added urgency to the scientific research being carried out .
Yet the research results from 1990 onwards were meagre , to say the least .
Between 1990 and 1994 , veterinary BSE inspections were suspended in the UK .
The Medina report says that the then Commission attempted to hide the truth and to blame Parliament for the suspension , whereas the decision was actually taken by the Commission itself , having caved in to pressure from the UK .
During the same period , with the sole exception of the directive on embryos , no Community legislation on BSE was passed at all .
Between the extraordinary Council meeting on 6 and 7 June 1990 on the first BSE crisis and 1994 , in other words over a period of four years , there was not one single Council debate on BSE , yet it was during this period that 75 % of the cases of BSE were identified in the United Kingdom .
In mid-1990 , France and Germany considered imposing trade restrictions on British beef , but Commissioner MacSharry threatened to take them to the Court of Justice .
The Medina report also says that there is written evidence that the then Commission supported a policy of disinformation towards the general public which also affected the Community institutions themselves , in that when the supply of genuine information was cut off and the Commission was no longer doing its job , the Council too was kept in the dark .
The report identifies the UK Government as the body mainly responsible for the BSE crisis , and it points to six occasions when successive governments violated Article 5 of the Treaty and refused to obey the rules of fair and transparent cooperation .
As you know , Article 5 of the Treaty sets out the principle of loyalty to the Community .
However , the Council is also to blame for the passivity and delays in fighting the epidemic in the UK , for taking wrong decisions and providing poor coordination in protecting public health , and for the disinformation of the public .
The Committee of Inquiry 's report makes it quite plain that the previous Commission also made serious errors and showed critical failings during the period of mismanagement at the height of the BSE crisis between 1990 and 1994 , and that the political responsibility lay with Commissioners MacSharry and Steichen .

We think that Commissioner Fischler should take the opportunity in this debate to explain the two errors which he is accused of making in the report .
However , as the Committee of Inquiry said , the political consequences of this inquiry will be felt in the changes of structure , policy and personnel which have to be made in order to repair the serious omissions and errors of the past .
The Commission 's political responsibility now lies in carrying out these fundamental reforms , because , as the Medina report says , this will serve the Committee of Inquiry 's purposes better than simply dismissing the Commission outright .
Our group therefore confirms that it has confidence in the Commission to implement these reforms .
It needs to take urgent action to restore the credibility of the European Union by giving public health and consumer protection precedence over economic interests .
Ladies and gentlemen , would even Dr Faustus ever have thought of breaking with an age-old tradition and feeding meat-and-bone meal to ruminants ?
How has anyone ever dared to take risks with infant foods ?
It is quite obvious that the Commission has a clear legal basis here for exercising its powers under Article 129 in the field of public health and Article 129a in the field of consumer protection .
There is an important issue here for the IGC .
The Commission must quickly bring forward proposals for setting up an independent ' public health protection ' unit .
We must support the introduction of codecision for agricultural matters .
We must have a general ban on feeding meat-and-bone meal to ruminants or waste products from sick animals to other animals .
Individual disciplinary measures must be taken where officials have acted incorrectly , Mr President of the Commission .
Those responsible must be punished for their mistakes .
The public must not be allowed to think that no sanctions are being taken .
Our political position is this : we reject the motion of censure , and we reaffirm our confidence in the Commission to carry out the necessary reforms , but if they have not been carried out within a reasonable period and at the latest by November this year , we will be obliged to withdraw our confidence .
Mr President of the Commission , we worked together in the Maastricht negotiations on a new Treaty on European Union , and even at that stage we identified certain inadequacies .
We were forced to accept a compromise that we intended to improve at the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference .
We have now reached a stage where many of our fellow citizens no longer believe in what we are doing at European level .
Social problems , the despair that people feel when they are faced with unemployment and see no future for their children , the despair they feel in the face of international organized crime , the mafia , the drugs problems , and the despair they felt when their very health was put at risk , must make all those in positions of responsibility in the European Union who are currently preparing the new Treaty realize that not only must our decision-making procedures be changed - though this too is important - but we must also try to get to the very heart of the social problems that millions of people face and the fear they feel , and we must let them know what we are doing about it .
I hope that the BSE tragedy has brought this home to all those responsible for giving the European Union a more hopeful and human face once again .
( Applause )

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , I should also like to congratulate most sincerely the rapporteur of the Committee of Inquiry into BSE , Mr Medina Ortega , its chairman , Mr Böge , and all the members of the committee on the exceptional quality of their work , despite the numerous and unacceptable obstacles put in their way in carrying out this task .
The report before the House today is well-documented , precise and objective , and does not confine itself to recording the serious failings on the part of the European institutions but , in a very responsible way , seeks to propose measures to remedy those failings and ensure that unacceptable bad habits do not persist .
I would even say that the members of the committee have done more .
After listening to Mr Santer , I feel they have achieved a miracle : the Commission was suffering from blindness , but suddenly it can see clearly what is going on in its departments .
The committee 's report nevertheless remains a crushing indictment of the functioning of the European institutions as a whole .
The revelation of such widespread failings fully justifies the loss of confidence in the European institutions on the part of our citizens that we are witnessing today .
The total and deliberate lack of transparency in the conduct of European affairs prevents the instruments of democratic control - Parliament and the press - from performing their function on a day-to-day basis .
Furthermore , this lack of transparency allows national or private lobbies to prevail over the Community or general interest .
These lobbies have virtually taken over some Commission departments , as well as the extraordinary advisory scientific committees , whose variable geometry is determined by the particular interests that are being pursued in them .
More seriously still , the Committee of Inquiry 's report reveals a de facto abdication of responsibilities by the Commission and , to a lesser extent , the Council : by the Commission , in its inability to resist the political pressure of certain Member States ; and by the Council , in the effective delegation of powers to management committees with no political legitimacy .
Consequently , from 1990 to 1994 , the Commission carried out no veterinary checks whatsoever on the United Kingdom 's measures to combat BSE , for the sole reason that it would have annoyed the authorities of that country .
Lastly , the report reveals that , in the implementation of Community policies , there are grey areas in which the responsibility for taking action is poorly defined .
This ultimately results in each institution passing the buck to the other institutions , or to the Member States , in a show of total incompetence .
If we wish to restore the confidence of Europe 's citizens in the Union 's institutions , there is an urgent need to take action .
Should this take the form of imposing a political sanction , through an immediate vote of censure on the present Commission - which undoubtedly bears some of the responsibility for the failures identified , although a much smaller share than the British authorities - or on the previous Commission , whose President we would have liked to give evidence to the Committee of Inquiry ?
For my part , I believe that if we wish to be effective , we must enjoin the present Commission to take all the measures within its remit proposed by the Committee of Inquiry , as a matter of urgency .
It is a question , above all , of establishing transparency in the decision-making process - something which is fundamental to all democratic activity .
If the Commission does not do so within a reasonable period of time , then we must not hesitate to censure it .
We should interpret the proposals for the reorganization of the Commission 's services and for the reform of the consultation and inspection procedures , which Mr Santer has presented , as a sign of goodwill which will have to be confirmed .
Over and above this , however , I believe that the report of the Committee of Inquiry should be forwarded to the Intergovernmental Conference , so that the representatives of the Member States can draw the necessary conclusions from it as regards the structure and functioning of the European institutions .
In sensitive areas such as public health - and , in future , public security , if it is decided to bring the third pillar into the Community domain - is it not appropriate to make it absolutely clear who does what , so as to eliminate the grey areas which serve as a pretext for failing to take action when it is necessary ?
Is it sensible to transfer powers and responsibilities without ensuring beforehand that the recipients of those powers and responsibilities are able to take them on ?
Is it possible to guarantee that a Commission with 30 members will be capable of functioning in accordance with the principles of collective responsibility and independence from the Member States that are laid down in the Treaty ?
The Member State governments that will soon be facing national elections , and the Members of the European Parliament who will be standing for election in 1999 , will be judged by their answers to these questions .
Let us take advantage of the coming months , ladies and gentlemen , to give a positive response to the concerns of our fellow citizens , which the BSE crisis has highlighted to an extraordinary degree .
( Applause )
Madam President , the report from the Committee of Inquiry is now been presented , and it is our responsibility to determine what consequences the report will have .
We have already heard a response from the chairman of the Commission , Mr Santer , and I would like to refer back to this .
In 1986 BSE was quite unknown .
No one knew much about it , but it was thought to be similar in nature to scrapie in sheep , not infectious and not transferable to humans .
This was at the start of the disease .
But on 20 March 1996 the British Government admitted that it could not be ruled out that the disease could be transferred to humans .
At the same time there emerged a new form of Creutzfeldt Jakob 's disease which affected young men in particular .
These announcements spread panic amongst consumers and the beef market collapsed .
It is clear that consumers were nervous , since the disease - if it could be transferred - did not manifest itself for 3 to 7 years .
The Commission was very hesitant in dealing with this , and Parliament was not satisfied .
It was therefore decided , as a provisional solution , to set up this Committee of Inquiry to determine whether , on the basis of the Treaty , this new Committee could really serve the purpose of resolving those problems in the Commission which people felt were unresolved .
On behalf of the Liberal Group I am able to say that the task has been resolved by the Committee .
This has involved very intense , but justified , criticism of the Commission , about which more can be read in the report .
There is also strong criticism of the British Government .
Most of all it is difficult to understand how the British Government , which initially took the right decisions , allowed 5 years to pass before implementing them .
This is why BSE was able to become so extensive , and why it was carried over to France , Switzerland and Portugal .
But it is not we who elect the British Government ; that is the responsibility of others .
We are left with the question of how we are to protect consumers .
I can say that our proposal to separate consumer protection and veterinary control is a right solution .
I must say , however , that it is not so easy to implement because we come up against the principle of subsidiarity , and states tend to defend this jealously .
But I am in favour of having a supranational body which can control the national authorities and inform them as to what the problems are .
Finally we come to the question of confidence and loss of confidence .
Parliament has shown that it is equal to the task of controlling the Commission .
It also has power to assume the Commission 's role if it feels that the latter is not fulfilling it correctly .
The Committee 's work shows that we have brought to the Commission a number of proposals which we expect it to examine and to resolve on the basis of the principles we have put forward .
I can now state that the Commission is ready to go a considerable way , further than I had expected .
Before the autumn comes we will see how far it is able to go in practice .
Otherwise we have the weapon of article 141 , namely that of bringing a vote of no confidence , preferably after the summer holidays , if the Commission does not live up to what it promised and to the wishes we have expressed .
So I believe Parliament has been given significant powers , and these are being used , but they must be used sensibly .
One must never misuse the significant powers one has been given .
They must be used with care , and I believe that this is what will happen in the autumn if the Commission does not live up to its own formulations .
Madam President , the members of our group have signed the motion of censure after reading the conclusions of the Committee of Inquiry .
However , I can assure you - and I can assure the Commission - that we had no preconceptions with regard to this motion .
The Medina report lays bare the serious political and administrative errors committed above all by the British Government , with the complicity of the Council , but also by the Commission , both in the days of Mr Delors and under the current presidency of Mr Santer .
The report leaves no room for doubt .
The way in which the Commission dealt with the serious BSE problem , which turned into a crisis with incalculable social , economic and health consequences , was disastrous .
The Commission is charged with having put economic and political interests before the protection of public health and consumers .
The previous Commission failed to ensure the necessary veterinary controls , and it is clear that absolutely no checks on BSE were carried out in the United Kingdom between May 1990 and June 1994 .
As for the present Commission , there is the unacceptable lifting of the embargo on gelatine , and its attempts to conceal the truth and shift its own responsibilities onto Parliament when the latter decided to carry out this inquiry .
The fact that the Commission 's mishandling of the crisis has had consequences for human health , cattle breeding and the Community budget which to a large extent can no longer be rectified is particularly grave .
For all these reasons , we are fulfilling our difficult duty of tabling a motion of censure .
The European Parliament must fulfil its obligations and exercise the powers of control conferred on it by the Treaty .
The British Government is subject to the control of the House of Commons .
The European Commission must answer to this Parliament - which has repeatedly called for increased powers , without having exercised successfully those it already has .
The Committee of Inquiry 's conclusions make clear the vital need for this motion of censure , which calls for the Commission to assume responsibility for the errors and omissions in its handling of the BSE crisis over a period of seven years , in accordance with the principle of the continuity and collegiate nature of the Commission , although the actions of the successive Agriculture Commissioners are particularly reprehensible .
Today , we should be expressing political condemnation of acts committed in the past - the recent past - before putting forward recommendations for the future or giving such a favourable welcome to Mr Santer 's statement , which was more like an optimistic speech of investiture .
While recognizing the good intentions of those who are confusing the past and the future in their resolutions and threatening to table a motion of censure in a few months ' time - in November , so they say - we profoundly disagree with their approach , which is not in keeping with the European Parliament 's basic duty to exercise control , or with the priority of tabling an unconditional motion of censure , without any strings attached .
In a democracy , the majority decides , but the minority may be in the right .
Today , the rightness of our stance is based not only on proper parliamentary procedures or Parliament 's unavoidable duties .
Beyond opportunistic motives or party discipline , it is based on our position as Members of Parliament and defenders of the health and interests of the European citizens who elected us .
I should like to end by adapting a traditional saying : ' Friends of Plato , but friends of the truth even more ' .
The European Parliament must be a friend of the Commission , but a friend of the truth and Europe 's citizens even more .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee of Inquiry has carried out its task .
I should particularly like to thank the chairman , Mr Böge , and the rapporteur , Mr Medina , for the excellent work they have done .
There was a good atmosphere in the Committee of Inquiry .
Every effort was made to bring the truth to light , and this is also reflected in the report we have presented .
When we began our work , we were almost speechless at what we encountered .
You tell us , Mr Santer , that it could not be known at the time how dangerous this BSE disease was .
If this was not known at the time , then no measures could have been taken , and we would have had to say : we do not know this , or we take a different view .
But that did not happen .
Measures were taken , but they were not implemented .
The ban on feeding animal-based meal was ignored .
What did happen ?
Animal-based meal was used as feed up to 1995 .
One has to assume that all the mad cows went through the cycle of being fed animal-based meal , and 700 000 , a million or one and half million animals at risk from BSE - we do not know how many - entered the human food chain .
It was said to us : we had no powers to carry out inspections .
It finally turned out that between 1990 and 1994 , 37 inspections were carried out in the United Kingdom . However , BSE was removed from the check-list , in other words tests were carried out on meat quality in the United Kingdom , but no longer on BSE .
It is quite clear that an inquiry report in 1990 revealing scandalous conditions in British slaughterhouses was deliberately mislaid in the Commission ; it did not reach the political leadership .
So far , we have not been able to establish where it went astray .
Attempts have been made to discredit scientists , the opinions of minorities have been trivialized and the WTO has been used as a tool .
I do not need to spell out the details once again .
You have seen the report of the inquiry - and in any event , it is incredible .
And all this justifies a vote of censure against the Commission .
If we are saying that we do not wish to hold this vote of censure now , it also has to do with the fact that we know you are an expert when it comes to making announcements , Mr Santer !
You have made an excellent speech today , and it is somewhat difficult to send you packing after such a speech .
But while we hear the message , what we lack is the belief .
We want actions , not words .
That is why there was quite a long and intense debate on this vote of censure in the Committee of Inquiry , and I then made a proposal to suspend the vote .
It was thought that you might say today : this is of no interest to us .
Then we would have tabled the motion of censure . The votes are here , and we have collected the necessary one tenth of Members ' signatures .
But it was clear to us that you would make these announcements today , so we are putting you on probation for a year , and we shall see what is produced by these demands .
You have dealt with them today , and I have to say I am surprised at the generosity and also the determination with which you have announced reforms .
If they come , there will not be a vote of censure in December , that is fairly clear .
If they do not , then the vote of censure will be held .
Make no mistake , Mr Santer - you cannot , as in the past , pick all the good things out of Parliament , do what suits you and file away the things that do not .
Through this committee of inquiry , Parliament has gained a new degree of self-confidence .
After BSE , nothing in Europe is the same .
We shall have our say on issues of health , nutrition and agriculture .
We shall no longer allow an arrogant administration - which is still in place and of which you are now the political leader , namely this Commission - to think that it does not need to take any account of the proposals and initiatives of the European Parliament .
If Parliament 's proposals had been implemented , if we had had a right of codecision when the mad cow problem was at its peak , then this BSE crisis would not have assumed such proportions .
We should very probably not have had to deal in this way with the consequences which may lie ahead of us .
So I would say that the point is definitely to use this crisis to move forward , to give the European Parliament the rights it needs in order to exercise legislative control over the administration and to ensure that the Commission moves in the right direction .
I am particularly grateful to you , Mr Santer , for saying that we must embark on a fundamental overhaul of the agricultural policy .
These have always been our demands .
If we proceed in that way , we shall not experience another crisis , but benefit the people of Europe , do our job properly and assume our political responsibility .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , when , despite strong resistance , Parliament decided to set up a committee of inquiry into this affair , I did not expect the facts revealed to be so serious .
The final report , which is an excellent piece of work , is utterly damning .
And I note that the comments made since the beginning of the debate this afternoon have all been extremely critical .
What is to be done ?
Will words be matched by deeds ?
What can Parliament decide on this issue , which relates to human health and demonstrates the extent of the aberrations that can be produced by an economic system which puts profit above all other considerations ?
More than other people , perhaps , I am strongly affected by these aberrations , since the similar - though less serious - tragedies which I had to face when I was France 's Minister for Consumer Affairs , from 1981 to 1984 , have left their mark on me .
We should like to apply sanctions to those principally responsible , which - as the report makes clear - are the Council and certain national governments , first among them the British Government .
Unfortunately , however , the Treaty provides us with no means of imposing sanctions on the government of a Member State .
Nor do we have any power to bring civil or criminal actions against the presumed culprits .
Only the victims or their families can do that .
We do have a political means available , however , which is to adopt a motion of censure against the Commission , on the grounds that the report indicates that it too made serious mistakes .
We are afraid of this high-profile and powerful weapon .
So we are turning to the idea of a conditional or deferred motion of censure .
Certainly , I endorse the recommendations put forward by Parliament with a view to improving the way in which the Commission is run .
Let me point out , however , that the proposed approach of a qualified motion of censure goes both too far , and not far enough .
It goes too far , in the sense that it will allow Parliament to pursue its recommendations to the extent of interfering in the Commission 's areas of competence by leaving the constant threat of censure hanging over it .
And it does not go far enough , in the sense that we fear that many of the advocates of this approach do not actually wish the motion of censure ever to be adopted .
Furthermore , the qualified motion of censure only concerns the Commission 's future conduct , and not its past actions .
However , the report lays bare the Commission 's past errors , including the incontestably bad organization of its departments .
Moreover , Mr President of the Commission , the reforms that you have initiated - which are a step in the right direction and will be of help to the Commissioner responsible for consumer affairs - clearly demonstrate the extent to which the controls were badly organized .
The report also reveals the damage caused within the Commission by this culture , by this productivity-driven approach geared solely to the market , in which the protection of consumer health is pushed into the background .
Ultimately , Mr President of the Commission , it is because we wish to have strong European institutions that we also wish those institutions to be politically responsible .
The two things are connected .
Mr President , your admissions , your promises of reforms , your commitments are not enough .
There is a need for a more powerful political gesture to exorcise past misdeeds .
We believe that the Commission is not so fragile that it is in danger of being shattered by a political crisis .
On the contrary , we are convinced that the Commission 's authority , its credibility in the eyes of public opinion and its confidence will only be increased if it acknowledges its mistakes and fully assumes its responsibilities , including those relating to the period prior to the new team taking office .
Clearly , this need to assume responsibilities applies equally to Parliament , which must adopt the motion of censure , since failing to do so would make it seem inconsistent .
Madam President , I never , in the first instance , believed we needed a committee of inquiry .
Unfortunately , what I have listened to today has proved that to be correct .
I have listened to the debate and my worst fears have unfortunately been confirmed .
No one can claim any glory from the present problem , not the United Kingdom Government and most certainly not Mr Hogg - I would not defend them for one moment - nor the Commission or the Council .
Yes , mistakes were certainly made .
We must learn from them and make sure they never occur again .
We help no one - certainly not the consumer or the farmer - by further hyping the situation and making outlandish statements that are unprovable and are simply designed to get into the newspaper headlines .
The benefit of hindsight is the most wonderful thing of all .
We all can sit here today and be total experts and make no mistakes .
I agree with the chairman of the committee when he said that we must bring BSE to an end once and for all .
BSE must be wiped out but that will take time .
We have seen other outbreaks in other countries recently .
I would , like to address one point to Mr Santer , because he stated here today - and I think it is important that he made that statement - that he wants a better environment and higher standards of control in food .
I agree with all that but will he ensure that the food imported to the European Union will be of the same high standards ?
Will he also ensure that the farmers of the European Union do not have their hands tied behind their backs while others in the world are allowed to produce what we are not allowed to produce in the same way ?
If you want high standards then make sure it is universal and right across the board .
It is also unfortunate today that Mrs Green decided to turn this very important debate into party politics .
I welcome her recognition of the high standards in Northern Ireland .
I welcome the fact that she said that our farmers have been unfairly treated because they never should have had the ban placed on them in the first place .
I have no doubt that Commissioner Fischler will take that very much to heart .
I am not going to be parochial today but I am sure Mrs Green would not deny any small political party anywhere the right to achieve the best for all their people , would you Mrs Green ?
Could I suggest further to Mrs Green that she takes another look at the figures because the figures I saw this morning showed that Mr Blair lost by 13 votes .
Now there are nine Ulster Unionists in the House of Commons and maybe Mr Blair should have got all his as Labour members out if he wanted to win .
Could I also say to Mrs Green , as a final point , that some of her former party leaders were also very generous to my party when they came along to have discussions with them .
And I have no doubt that some day in the future they will be back again if the occasion arises .
I thank you , Madam President , very much for your patience and I want to make it very clear that I will not , in any way , be supporting any motion of censure against the Commission .
Madam President , after the death of more than 167 000 cattle - a veritable massacre , the infection of a further 800 000 cattle and their entry into the food chain , the suicide of more than 20 farmers , the death - their brains destroyed - of some 20 young people , after a six-month inquiry and two hours of debate , what stands out is the hypocrisy prevailing everywhere .
And the explanation for this - perhaps the only one - is the belief in a Messiah which lies behind this whole affair .
What do we see ?
Hypocrisy across the board !
Hypocrisy , in the first place , with regard to the civil liability : after all , someone manufactured this meal !
It did not fall from the sky , as the representative of the British Government would have us believe .
And that someone is the de Mulder brothers in the United Kingdom .
No one talks about that - except perhaps Mr Medina Ortega , who says somewhere in his report that he has his doubts .
And someone , or some people , imported this meal into France !
Again , they could have been traced from customs documents .
We know their names - Caillot , Glon - but we do not talk about that .
The British Government just stood by , it let things go , it allowed exports - it let people be poisoned !
And now compensation will be provided on the basis of solidarity , rather than responsibility .
The British , pure as snow , will not have to pay - not even for their international responsibilities .
But their hands are not clean .
And there is hypocrisy with regard to the political responsibilities .
You are not alone , Mr Santer , I will grant you that .
Fortunately for you , you have accomplices - because if you did nothing , the Council did nothing either !
And the European Parliament : what did it do ?
Mr Happart alerted it to the problem in a number of oral questions in the House .
I myself said to Mr MacSharry in this House , on 11 September 1990 , that there was a risk of a zoonosis , that the source of the infection would spread from the United Kingdom to the rest of Europe , and that there was a need to take preventive measures !
Parliament was aware of the problem .
Mr Vasco Garcia drew up a report on the subject , and Parliament said and did nothing !
At the same time , the media remained silent for six years .
The Castille note , which ' Libération ' published in 1996 , had appeared in the consumer magazine ' Que choisir ? ' as early as 1990 .
But what had they all got to hide ?
What were they covering up ?
Why , Mrs Bonino , as they say in Italy , the ' omerta ' ?
The explanation is the belief in a Messiah !
The obscurantist Euro-federalist sect is like the Jehovah 's Witnesses .
Young people die of new variant CJD , and there is silence .
There was silence between 1990 and 1994 because the Messiah - the single market , the Maastricht Treaty - was coming .
But if in 1992 , the people of France had known that cattle were being fed the remains of sheep that had eaten the remains of infected cattle , the French President could have bleated all he liked about his prostate : the Maastricht Treaty would never have been ratified in the referendum of 20 September 1992 !
That is what they were protecting .
And what are they protecting today ?
I listened to your speech , Mr Martens . You have a prodigious talent , but what do you use it for ?
You suggested that we should remain silent once again , because this time it is the single currency which is at stake !
So poisoning was allowed in the name of the single market and the Maastricht Treaty , and now it is continuing to be allowed in the name of the single currency !
Mr Santer donned a penitent 's robe with a cord of British leather .
He came shuffling his feet .
He humbly begged our forgiveness , it is true - but then there is the question of genetically modified maize .
He forgot to wear his penitent 's robe then .
Nothing has been learnt from the BSE tragedy .
The same mistakes are still being made .
Adopting the motion of censure is the least that we can do .
What is now at stake , ladies and gentlemen , is the credibility , the legitimacy , of the European Parliament .
If you refuse to understand that , you will , like all members of religious sects , create a rod for your own backs .
I have received eight motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , on 16 July 1996 , in response to a request from Parliament , Mr Santer made a statement on behalf of the Commission on the BSE affair .
He attempted to calm things down , although we were confronted with evidence that certain Commission departments had pursued a deliberate policy of disinformation and concealment , during the time of both the previous and present Agriculture Commissioners .
It is true that Mr Santer declared unequivocally in his statement that the protection of human health was the Commission 's paramount concern .
In fact , however , it took Parliament 's painstaking inquiry to force the Commission to take action .
Mr Santer said in his statement , as he is saying now , that he wished to involve himself personally in this matter .
I sincerely hope that he is successful , but we should not attempt to conceal the profound lack of confidence that has taken root in this Parliament , as well as amongst the general public , in the Commission 's ability to turn things round .
The Committee of Inquiry 's report reveals maladministration on a breathtaking scale by the main players in this affair - the British Government , the Commission , and also the Council .
Reading it should be widely recommended , as a kind of civic instruction manual for the future citizens of Europe .
It strikingly illustrates the fact that the single market - whose praises we sing - can produce the worst excesses if the market is allowed to regulate itself and the rules on health and consumer protection are not applied .
I should like to draw four conclusions from this inquiry and report .
Firstly , the very existence of this document is an inescapable fact for the Commission , as well as for the Council and the British Government .
It should be made very clear to the general public that the European Parliament 's right of inquiry , and the way in which it has exercised that right , represent a step forward for democracy in Europe .
It demonstrates that impenetrable European and national bureaucracies can be forced to become more transparent .
It demonstrates that the elected representatives of the European people can make the truth prevail in the face of compartmentalized and arrogant administrations .
Secondly , we should not try to conceal the terrifying truth that emerges from this report .
The pursuit of profit and the logic of economics have prevailed , to the detriment of consumer health , because the main political actors - the British Government , the Commission and the Council - wished it to be that way .
Overcoming this philosophy will be extremely difficult .
You will need a great deal of energy and willpower to do this , Mr Santer .
Above all , you will need the support of those European political forces which do not talk solely in terms of profit , deregulation and liberalization , but which wish to see a prosperous Europe in which human and natural values are respected .
Thirdly , a number of Members are seizing on the BSE crisis in an attempt to discredit the Europe of the Maastricht Treaty .
From the far left to the far right , there are many people who wish to take advantage of this affair to push Europe into a crisis that will permanently weaken it and give rise to the widespread re-emergence of nationalism , the ending of the process of economic and political integration and , ultimately , new confrontations between the countries of Europe , weakening it for good .
The Socialist Group will not join in this game .
It will not support the motion of censure , because it embodies the very opposite of a desire for reform .
We wish to give Mr Santer and the Commission , and the Council too , an opportunity to put their house in order .
In a few months , we shall be able to assess the changes which they will have set in motion .
Fourthly , the general public is clearly entitled to ask how Parliament intends to follow up the report of the Committee of Inquiry .
In other words , what means does Parliament have available of bringing pressure to bear on those principally responsible ?
As regards the Member States ' governments , it is of course up to the national parliaments to assume their responsibilities .
But the Member States must also stop protecting senior European officials who were appointed from their national administrations .
If the head of the Commission is unable to take the action he thinks fit in respect of these officials , in the interest of the Community , then it will never be possible to establish a different culture .
Mr President of the Commission , I personally am confident of your success .
I am not sure whether it is enough that are you are personally bringing all your weight to bear on this issue .
You must also have strong allies within the Commission .
We can only hope that the President of the Commission is successful . If he is not , he will emerge discredited and weakened , with his powers diminished .
No one wishes to see that .
So go ahead , Mr Santer !
Do not hesitate to be ruthless this time !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , what we are discussing today is not just another of those political and technical problems , some important and some less so , that normally occupy us , but a matter which has almost certainly cost the lives of 16 people to date and has plunged the single market into the deepest crisis it has faced since the day it was first set up .
In the light of that , what matters is not political tactics or defending one 's own party : what matters is the need to do everything possible to ascertain the truth and prevent any possible repetition of these events , and here we must be guided first and foremost by our own consciences .
That was the principle which motivated the work of the Committee of Inquiry , and the results presented to Parliament today bear witness to that .
The basic conclusion which I am sorry to have to draw from those results is that both the United Kingdom and the Commission and Council of the European Union , which bear the main responsibility for what has happened , have in essence attached more importance to commercial interests than to the protection of animal health and , above all , human health .
What we have learned makes it absolutely obvious that a radical change is needed in the way such crises are handled .
As far as the United Kingdom is concerned , it is only recently that there have been positive signs of this change occurring ; now it is the turn of the European Union .
We need to see a structural change in the internal organization of the competent Directorates-General : we therefore welcome the plan to create a single unit for the protection of public health which will undertake the functions previously entrusted to various administrative personnel , between whom there was absolutely no coordination .
In addition , the powers of the veterinary inspectorate must be increased , guaranteeing it what it has certainly lacked previously , which is a stable function and adequate independence .
Similarly , scientific research must be stepped up into BSE and into the variant of Creutzfeld-Jacob disease , something on which the European Union has hitherto spent very little .
I also hope that an immediate start will be made on a complete review of the comitology , involving the Intergovernmental Conference where necessary .
This will allow matters to be handled less secretively and more efficiently in future , which is essential if the citizens of Europe are to regain confidence in their institutions .
Finally , to relieve some of the pressure on the beef and veal market and do something tangible to set consumers ' minds at rest , everything necessary should be done immediately to introduce compulsory labelling enabling everyone to identify the origin and quality of the beef or veal he is buying .
All the initiatives I have called for here are included in the reforms promised today by the President of the Commission , and that gives us cause for optimism .
However , I now come to consider more specifically what emerges from the report regarding the responsibility of the European Commission , and it is clear that the Commission was unable , or worse still unwilling , to act sufficiently quickly to deal with this crisis .
Although it is true that we cannot censure the Commission that is now in office , because it bears only part of the responsibility , most of which lies with the previous Commission , it is equally true that we can nevertheless require the Commissioners , subject to a very precise time limit , to adopt a policy of reform and rectification , unless it wishes to share the responsibility of its predecessors and of those others , headed by the United Kingdom , responsible for the general mismanagement of this crisis .
In calling upon the European Commission to follow the lines recommended by the Committee of Inquiry , with the threat of censure if it fails to conform to those recommendations , our intention is not to discredit the Community system but , rather , to strengthen it .
After all , a Commission and Council that are more transparent , more attentive to the needs and protection of the public , and freer of the pressures exerted by lobbyists and national governments , together with a European Parliament exercising democratic vigilance over the actions of the other institutions , cannot fail to provide the sound basis that we want Europe to have .
Madam President , anyone rising to speak after two hours of debate obviously has a problem in finding anything new to say .
I shall try to find something new , by expressing a regret felt , I believe , not only by myself but also by many other members of the Committee of Inquiry - a regret that we did not hear the person who might perhaps have been the best witness to , and was a participant in , the events of the recent and more distant past .
I refer to the former President of the Commission , Jacques Delors , whom some of us would have liked to question .
The proposal to call him was put to the vote , and those of us , myself included , who were in favour lost by the narrow margin of seven votes to six .
I believe that many clarifications that we would like to have today , for which we are asking the present Commission , could have been obtained from that dominant figure , and that the decision not to involve him was probably prompted by an excess of respect .
Speaking at this late stage , now that the questions of responsibility have been clarified and the history of this affair outlined , I have the opportunity to look directly to the future and put forward a number of concrete proposals .
So I shall begin by asking the President of the Commission to apply Article 169 of the Treaty , whereby the Commission over which he presides may call upon the United Kingdom to make some form of reparation - not merely moral reparation , I hope - to Europe 's citizens as an appropriate penalty for the harm caused to the other Member States .
And I also call upon him to draw the attention of Europe 's citizens to the content of Article 215 of the Treaty , which tells them how to take action against the European Commission and the other institutions to obtain compensation for damage they believe they have suffered because of the malfunctioning of the European institutions .
I believe that if the Commission were to take this action it might make it clear to the public that there is a desire to make good the damage caused .
I believe , ultimately , that although there are some who want to see heads roll immediately , there are many who would be more interested in seeing proposals in place that might remedy the damage .
The result of this would be a more appropriate and controlled application of Article 175 , by the terms of which the European Parliament can bring an action against the Commission for its failure to act and indeed may do so precisely because the Commission has not invoked Article 169 .
None of this , clearly , rules out - I have specifically clarified this with the Legal Service - the possibility of applying Article 144 .
We in the UPE Group are in favour of the deferred censure , partly because of practical considerations .
As has already been pointed out several times in this House today , dismissing the Commission would , among other things , prevent it from taking immediate and concrete action to implement the conclusions of Mr Medina Ortega 's report .
We would like to see immediate action , and we cannot help wondering how that could be achieved in the absence of an operational Commission .
At this point I turn to look the Commissioner , Mrs Bonino , straight in the eye .
Public health : the burden will be yours , and I do not envy you your task !
I call upon the European institutions to have the courage to approach the crucial subject of safeguarding the health of the public , with resolution and with all the available scientific data .
Their first task will be to try to answer a fundamental question : what causal relationship is there today between BSE and the old and new forms of Creutzfeld-Jacob disease ?
At the outset of the inquiry , some six months ago , the answer offered by the scientists seemed to be a macabre echo of Pontius Pilate : ' There is no reliable scientific proof of the existence of transmissibility to man , but nor is there any proof to the contrary . '
Good , or rather bad !
After six months of effort , the testimony given by a handle of courageous scientists enables us to rewrite that verdict , more or less as follows : ' There is no reliable evidence that the old form of Creutzfeld-Jacob disease derives from the BSE epidemic , but suspicion is growing , in the light of evidence of vertical and horizontal transmission between animal species . '
That suspicion is growing , especially , with regard to the new form of the disease , which has taken fifteen human lives within a few months - fourteen in the United Kingdom and one in France .
Just a statistical freak ?
I can 't believe that !
Similarly , our doubts increase if we look at the older statistics .
In the last five years , in the European Union , there have been 302 cases of death caused by the ' old form ' of this disease in the United Kingdom alone , as against a Community average of 30-50 cases .
Another coincidence ?
Once again , I do not think it is just a case of misleading statistics .
So this research is needed urgently , and that consideration will be in our minds as we vote tomorrow .
We will vote for a ' soft ' censure , or else the day after tomorrow , on Thursday , we will vote for a censure involving immediate resignations .
Let me remind you that , whatever our decision may be , we must be aware that the choices of the European public will depend upon it for at least 15 years .
Because , Mr President , that is the grim length of time which the scientists have said will be necessary to verify the effects of the possible spread of BSE , through Creutzfeld-Jacob disease , to thousands and thousands of European citizens - not just the British !
Madam President , I am absolutely sure that an immediate vote of no confidence against the existing Commission would be absolutely wrong .
It would be futile in that the culprits are elsewhere and go further back in time .
Having said that , and having heard the President of the Commission 's speech today , if that is ruled out and the things that have been demanded in this report are performed upon , then that judgement on this Commission should be left to another time .
If this Parliament decides to go for the soft option we have to follow through if those targets that we set are not actually met .
One of the things that has struck me particularly during this hearing is the situation between 1990 and 1994 when the BSE crisis was at its height .
The UK Government passed the correct legislation in good faith but then failed to make sure that it was implemented properly .
In addition the Commission failed to check that those particular regulations were being implemented .
It is indeed ironical that while inspections were taking place throughout countries outside the European Union to make sure that the imported products were in order we had a major problem and a major health risk in our own animals here in the European Union .
One of the other things that has particularly suffered is the credibility of government .
In the United Kingdom we had assurances from scientists for many many years who said there was no risk to human health and then that was overturned very suddenly .
There was also supposed to be no risk of maternal transmission and yet that was changed and what we have now is a lack of confidence among consumers and the population generally about what the government is telling us and the scientific evidence we are being given publicly .
I am particularly concerned that Douglas Hogg did not come to the Committee to give his opinions .
That was a sign which was interpreted by my own constituents as being cowardly .
He was seen as not representing the views of the British Government sufficiently and as saying ' I am guilty ' by implication .
I am concerned that there is still under-reporting elsewhere in the European Union and we have to make sure that this is seen as a European problem and not just a British one .

Madam President , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Medina , the committee chairman , Mr Böge , and all those colleagues with whom I had the pleasure of sharing many hours of hard work in the Committee of Inquiry into BSE .
Mr Santer , the seriousness of the Commission 's failings in its handling of the BSE affair , and the risks to public health which they produced , are clearly demonstrated by the Committee of Inquiry 's report .
The Commission neglected its legislative and monitoring duties during much of the period in which the disease was developing , placing political and economic interests before the protection of public health and giving rise to serious human , social and economic consequences .
Moreover , in their appearances before the Committee of Inquiry , the Commission 's representatives sometimes acted in bad faith , concealing information and often preventing the committee from carrying out its work effectively .
The fact that the Commission even attempted to shift its responsibilities to Parliament is extremely serious .
Mr Santer will recall his appearance before the committee and the series of exchanges that we had with him concerning Parliament 's supposed denial of funds for research .
The Commission is a collective body , and the principle of continuity within the institutions makes it responsible for all its actions , regardless of the particular composition of the College of Commissioners .
It is argued that not all Commissioners bear the same degree of responsibility , but the collegiate nature of the Commission makes its responsibility a collective one .
As part of the institutional framework , the European Parliament must call for responsibilities to be assumed , and if Members read the Committee of Inquiry 's report carefully , they will have no doubts about calling on the Commission to assume its political responsibilities in full .
The fact is that the extent of the committee 's recommendations was made necessary by the scale of the responsibilities incurred by the Commission , the Council and , of course , the British Government .
Only part of Mr Santer 's speech referred to the committee 's recommendations .
However , I should like to ask Mr Santer a question before the House : why now , at the last moment , these measures , these administrative changes , this desire for transparency and improvements ?
Why now , Mr Santer , given the seriousness of the BSE affair ?
I have absolutely no doubt that the conclusions of the Committee of Inquiry , as well as the threat of a vote of censure , have forced the Commission into presenting these proposals now .
I have no wish to call into question the good intentions of the majority in the House , which wishes to introduce the new procedure of a suspended and conditional vote of censure .
But while my group offers to cooperate fully in ensuring that the committee 's recommendations are implemented , I should like to draw attention to certain factors that are inherent in a motion of censure .
A motion of censure can be tabled to call for responsibilities to be assumed that were incurred in the past .
The effects of the mishandling of the BSE crisis are irreversible , and the seriousness of the Commission 's failings in its handling of the affair , and the risks to public health to which they gave rise , are clearly demonstrated by the Committee of Inquiry 's report .
I believe that this is the fundamental question , therefore .
In my view , any other course of action by Parliament will side-step the issue of calling for responsibilities to be assumed for what happened in the past in relation to BSE .
The Commission must fulfil its role , but not under the threat of a vote of censure or any other means of coercion .
Moreover , I do not believe that it is Parliament 's role to exert this kind of pressure .
With regard to this matter , Parliament must not engage in considerations of political expediency .
If we fall into that trap , we shall be guilty of the same sort of behaviour for which the Commission is being criticized .
In the face of such serious responsibilities , I believe that the only instrument of control available to Parliament is a vote of censure .
That is why my group supported the tabling of a censure motion .
Mr Santer , you made a slip , at the end of your speech , when you said that the time had come to create a Europe of health .
This highlights , to my mind , in the clearest and most basic terms , the issue that we are debating today : the fact that the protection of public health and of consumers is a fundamental principle of European integration should never have been called into question .
Consequently , Mr Santer , I consider that the Commission should now perform an act of dignifying European political life by submitting its resignation .
If it submits its resignation and , tomorrow , the Council ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , on a point of order .
I thought this House should know that just a few minutes ago in the House of Commons the British Prime Minister John Major , in answer to a question about the report from the Committee of Inquiry which we are discussing this afternoon , referred to it as ' a load of tosh ' .
For those of you who do not know that word it means complete and utter rubbish .
So the British Prime Minister considers the report we are discussing this afternoon to be a load of rubbish .
When Mr Nicholson accuses me of making this partypolitical , perhaps everybody can now understand why .
Let me avoid using an agricultural expression , since this word rubbish refers to our specific findings . One of the expectations of the European public is indeed that we should make progress with the major goals of European integration , but another is that , where necessary , we should take our pitchfork and clear out the stable .
That is what is involved here , not least as regards the detail .
Madam President , in view of the comments which have just been quoted , one can only hope that the Prime Minister 's political career will one day be buried underneath this rubbish .
You have asked here today , Mr Santer , where we would be if common sense had prevailed in the past .
Certainly , we would be living in a more democratic , more social and more ecological Europe , instead of in an uncontrolled market and under the rule of technocrats .
However , it is not the task of the European Parliament to bid a sad farewell to common sense , but to demand it and to exact retribution when it is ignored .
Did it really take you 16 deaths and 23 suicides among ruined farmers in the UK , Mr Santer ?
Did it really take you the necessary , but nonetheless barbaric destruction of more than a million cattle ?
Did it really take you the amount of ECU 10 billion in compensation to realize that there was a lack of common sense in the EU 's policy , to discover the need to control economic interests through that policy and to safeguard human dignity ?
But common sense has not simply ceased to prevail in Europe - people in positions of responsibility have stopped behaving sensibly .
The Commission too has given economic interests and political considerations priority over common sense .
Who forced the Commission , Mr Santer , against all common sense - and here I quote from the report - to play down the problem of BSE from the outset ; to give the beef market priority over human health ; to pursue a policy of disinformation which ultimately interfered with the Community 's ability to legislate ; to ignore the warning voices of scientists ; to have blind faith in industry lobbyists ?
Who forced the Commission into inefficiency , political weakness , and a policy of concealment and obstruction towards Parliament ?
Perhaps it is the fact that , in its heart of hearts , the Commission also believes in and has committed itself to an aggressive neo-liberal ideology .
Is it not true to say that this dominance of economic interests over common sense and human dignity extends across the whole agricultural sector ?
Do we not see the same attitude in the brutal imposition of the convergence criteria for entry into monetary union , with its acceptance of escalating unemployment figures , growing poverty and social crises ?
Do we not see the same attitude in the Commission 's decision to authorize genetically engineered maize , with the same disregard for warning voices and the same subservience to industry ?
Do we not see the same attitude in the role played by the Commission at the Intergovernmental Conference , where it has not put forward dynamic proposals on the comprehensive democratization of the EU , the development of a social area in Europe and an ecological alliance ?
Make no mistake about it , Mr Santer . If the Greens are proposing a qualified motion of censure today , it is not because the Commission does not deserve to be censured , but because there was no prospect of us securing the necessary majority , because the failure of such a motion would have been portrayed by you as an acquittal , and because through a qualified motion of censure , we see a slight chance of opening the door for the return of common sense , after its period of exile from the European Union .
Madam President , as well as being highly damning of the UK authorities and the Council , this report also proves that , through its failure to act and its negligence , the Commission played along with the ultra-liberal system which is at the root of this crisis , without regard for animal or human health .
People have died in this affair , but we do not have the courage to make legitimate use of our powers with an immediate vote of censure !
How many more cattle will have to be slaughtered , how many more deaths will there have to be , for some of our colleagues to stop regarding - with unacceptable contempt - the immediate tabling of a motion of censure as mere posturing ?
Let us not confuse the past and the future .
There is no point in shilly-shallying with a delayed-action motion .
What is done is done .
Let us come to the House on Thursday to censure the Commission unequivocally , by virtue of its continuity as an institution , and in spite of the pressure that is being brought to bear on some Members .
Let us not disappoint the European citizens in our countries , regions and constituencies , whom we represent .
They are expecting us to defend them with courage and determination .
Let us not give them further cause to doubt the political establishment .
They must be able to believe in us , so that they continue to believe in Europe .
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , a few hours before the vote on the motion of censure , my personal opinion today - harking back to Mr Castille 's personal opinion , to which you referred last July - will be a positive one .
Cast your mind back , Mr President .
On 16 July 1996 , in view of the information that he had in his possession , Mr de Villiers threatened to table a motion of censure if a committee of inquiry was not set up .
That same day , despite numerous reservations on the part of some colleagues , the decision to establish a temporary committee of inquiry into the handling of the BSE crisis was taken .
Today , now that its work has been completed , what conclusions can be drawn ?
Undoubtedly , Mr President , the Commission made some serious mistakes in its handling of the BSE affair .
It consistently favoured the internal market .
It consistently neglected consumer health .
It also discredited the breeders , who were justifiably proud of their stock , and condemned European taxpayers to spending considerable sums of money which could have been better used in other , job-creating , sectors .
And when I say that the Commission made some serious mistakes , I am of course thinking of both Commissions : the one headed by Jacques Delors , and your own .
Mr Medina Ortega 's report is undoubtedly damning for the Delors Commission , but I would also point out that , at the beginning of June 1996 , you yourself authorized the lifting of the embargo on gelatine .
When I questioned you at your hearing , Mr President , you stated , and I quote : ' The decision of 10 June to lift the embargo on gelatine was taken subject to certain conditions ' . You went on to say , and again I quote : ' This shows that we have exercised all prudence in the matter ' .
In that case , Mr President , why was the fact concealed from the Committee of Inquiry that the lifting of the gelatine embargo made it possible to authorize the export of British food , cosmetic and pharmaceutical products containing gelatine ?
Why did I have to wait for press reports to inform me of the results of the Commission 's meeting of 8 May ?
Why did the representatives of the Commission 's services deliberately attempt to conceal the facts from the Committee of Inquiry by passing the buck back and forth as the hearings progressed ?
One might think that the man in charge was not bold enough to dismiss those who were not fulfilling their duties .
For the future , Mr President , are you able to assure us that the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products in London has carried out an assessment of the risk of transmission of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease through pharmaceutical products such as vaccines , and that the results of its research will be published ?
Can you tell us if the Commission intends to implement measures involving the destruction of high-risk or contaminated products ?
As regards the Committee of Inquiry 's conclusions , I should like to put Members on their guard against the attempts of some people to take advantage of this institutional crisis to do harm to the common agricultural policy .
Some people are already calling on the Commission to support their bid to obtain codecision powers in agriculture at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Finally , Mr President , you will have noticed that the very large majority of our group had the courage to sign the motion of censure .
It goes without saying that we shall be voting in favour of it - an act which , until proved otherwise , amounts to a major show of political responsibility .
I hope that our responsibility will be matched by yours .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Alleanza Nazionale delegation fully endorses the conclusions reached by our Committee of Inquiry .
There is no doubt , after all , that the Commission underestimated the seriousness of the epidemic , gave precedence to commercial interests over the protection of public health , failed to ensure that the interests of Europe as a whole took priority over the specific interests of Britain , and mishandled the conclusions of the expert reports and scientific opinions , failing to translate them into the appropriate and obvious political decisions .
We should remember that the Commission , despite various alarm signals and questions - I recall one by Mr Muscardini from 1994 - was unwilling or unable to provide detailed information on the market in bone-meals , at the very time when those meals were being identified as the pathogenic agent of BSE ; it was unwilling or unable to relate the information and warnings coming from the European press , among other sources , to the possible connections between the disease affecting cattle and the transmissibility of that disease to man ; its handling of relations with the British political and health authorities was suspect to say the least , perhaps even ; it proved excessively vulnerable to pressure exerted by the manufacturers of bone-meals and companies operating in the beef and veal industry .
But this relates to the past acts of the Commission , and only the learned authors of the Maastricht treaty could do worse than this Commission .
The worrying thing is that these negligent attitudes , in spite of the verbal assurances from the new Commissioners of their complete availability have been repeated at least in the behaviour of some of the Commission 's officials and services , who have supplied only some of the documents requested and have given testimony designed more to defend the personal positions of their colleagues than to help uncover the truth .
Ladies and gentlemen , in this predicament what is at stake is our credibility - the credibility of a European Parliament whose prerogatives , powers and representative status are unknown to the European public , or at least not seen by the public in their true light .
If the present Commission - which clearly has no political responsibility for the acts charged against the previous Commissioners - were to fail to censure , in decisive terms , those of its officials who have not only committed culpable and criminal errors in the past but are still , even today , persisting in a conspiratorial and perverted attitude , then this House would suffer grievously in the eyes of European public opinion .
The Alleanza Nazionale delegation , then , condemns the performance of the previous Commission , considers that a motion of censure against the present Commission would be inappropriate and excessive , but proposes that the European Parliament should - if the Commission disregards the content of the Medina Ortega report - set in motion a whole series of measures , including obstructive measures , designed to block and scale down the prerogatives of the Commission in the field of Community legislation .
Mr President , the media have often referred to the subject of today 's debate as the ' mad cow business ' .
If it is a business , I must say it has been a very ugly business .
I believe it will be very much your responsibility , President Santer , to explain to us today whether this ugly business can become a good opportunity for the future of the Commission .
More than many other debates , which are often comprehensible only to the initiated , dealing with pillars and harmonizations , today 's debate is an acid test of our willingness to voice the concerns of the European public .
I believe it depends on you , President Santer .
I am well aware that the greater responsibility lies with the former Commissioners , but the fact remains that you represent an institution whose essence is its continuity , and its duty today , first and foremost , with all due solemnity , is to undertake a serious and self-critical analysis of its conduct in the BSE affair .
I take due note of the fact that today , for the first time , you have referred to ' errors ' including errors in the Commission 's conduct .
That , however , is the necessary condition to give credibility to proposals for the future and the new undertakings which you have given , and for sending that clear message that European public opinion is waiting for .
I am one of those who value some of your decisions regarding the future .
They may be seen as steps in the right direction . But I do have two serious doubts .
The first is that transferring the controls and committees to DG XXIV does not solve all the problems because it leaves the examination of legislation with DG VI and DG III .
It is therefore likely to prove to be merely a partial adjustment , not the radical change that it should be - a change which , incidentally , should in terms of strict logic have taken place some years ago , on the basis of normal principles of proper administration .
The point is , in essence , that we must know not only who processes the opinions but who commissions them and what use they make of them after they have been obtained .
My second doubt is that the idea of groups of Commissioners for human health or the creation of super-Commissioners , however much they are personally appreciated , would not make a great deal of difference .
We need strong political direction of the Commission as a whole .
President Santer , that is a task for you , and for you only !
After that , you are free to organize things as you see fit .
The important thing is that you should take political responsibility for what is your task .
It is the continuing impartiality of the Commission , as such , which must be guaranteed .
The handling of BSE under both your predecessor 's and now your own leadership , at least as regards the lifting of the gelatin embargo , has shown how fragile that impartiality - which is enshrined in the Treaty - really is , and the extent to which it yielded to political pressure exerted by the British Conservative Government , in the name of that Realpolitik of power relationships which , when you meet at the Breydel , should be kept strictly outside the doors .
Those who oppose the censure motion are right to fear the danger that , by dealing a blow to the Commission , the symbol of supranationality , they will give too much free rein to the national governments , which are incapable of cooperating among themselves .
We on the Committee of Inquiry know something about this - a British minister felt that we were not worthy to meet with him .
But this argument does hold water if the Commission demonstrates every day that it is supranational , especially regarding those fundamental questions on which no concessions can be made .
Otherwise , it is we who will become the Eurosceptics .
Why keep all this apparatus in being if the Community technocracy is going to yield whenever it wants a quiet life ?
Mr Medina Ortega 's excellent report has highlighted the fact that the greatest responsibility lies with the government of the United Kingdom .
Recently , John Major thought he could teach a lesson to this old Europe of ours by pointing out the superiority of his own country 's social model .
It was sufficient to remind him of this ugly business of BSE to show him how much his social model costs .
This was chance happening , but the result of unbridled deregulation which has drastically impoverished the public , veterinary and health services .
But the Commission too has failed in its duty , and that is a serious matter , Mr President .
I cannot see that the Commission 's responsibility for its acts is greatly mitigated by the stubbornness of the British .
That is why I consider it impossible to reconcile the desire to defend the virtues of the acts of your former and present colleagues while at the same time announcing credible adjustments and changes .
We cannot wait ; BSE is not the only issue .
There is the whole subject of transgenic plants - soya and maize .
The fact that one of your Commissioners , President Santer , has denounced hasty decisions cannot set the European consumer 's mind at rest .
Not only that , but there is the whole business of the Common Agricultural Policy , There is the problem of Parliament 's right of codecision .
But problem number one is the problem of decision .
Too many declarations by Commissioner Fischler , too few decisions consistent with those declarations .
Impressive documents , from Madrid to Cork , but once again no action to follow .
Instead , when it comes to the facts , I have a feeling that reverse gear may already have been engaged .
So there is a need for clarity .
Unless the whole arsenal of market politics is reduced , it will be difficult to concentrate on other priorities such as the environment and the safeguarding of consumer health .
Subsidiarity is not valid .
If you try to keep everything alive artificially there is a danger that you will kill off the old without creating the new .
I should like to offer my congratulations to my friend and colleague Mr Medina Ortega for his report .
It constitutes proof of the fact that the European Parliament has been able to combine democratic representation with efficient operation .
Now it is up to this Parliament , as a whole , to make use of its legitimate supervisory powers to ensure that the work done by the Committee of Inquiry is something more than a handsome but futile gesture !
Mr President , first I should like to thank Mr Böge for the very competent way that he chaired the many meetings of the committee .
I would also like to thank Mr Medina Ortega for reflecting in his report the many views that were put forward by members of the committee , many of which we have heard repeated ad infinitum during the course of the day .
I have to take issue with many of the points that have been made .
Unfortunately , because of personal reasons , I was not present at the final vote .
The chairman understood my position .
I would have voted against the report had I been there .
I have submitted a minority report which sets out the chronology of the action taken in the United Kingdom since 1986 .
To do this , having been a member of the committee , would not normally be my style .
Indeed , as many members will accept , I tried to convince by argument and amendment within the committee .
However , at the end of the day I was confronted with a text which was so blinkered in its approach , so faulty in its assertions and , it has to be said , so unfair in its criticism of the efforts that were made in my country at all levels to combat BSE that I felt I had to put the record straight .
I cannot summarize that report now because there is not enough time but I wish to make one or two points .
At the outset I declare an interest .
I speak as a farmer whose cattle herd has suffered from BSE .
I have , therefore , witnessed personally the action programme and the dedication of the scientists and veterinarians in trying to get this problem and the measures taken to try to control it fully understood .
One recognizes of course the overriding factor of human health .
From 1989 to 1990 the measures that were taken in my country were designed to protect human health .
It should be emphasized again and again that no scientist has yet been able to establish a conclusive link between BSE and the new variant of CJD .
The report recognizes the amount of money spent on research .
Mr Medina referred to this .
There is also the related research and the amount of money put in for the Meat Hygiene Service .
More has to be done , as Mr Santer himself accepted , in this whole field of research .
However , the assertion that obstacles were put in the path of scientists is certainly not supported by the evidence that I heard and to suggest that nothing or too little was being done to eliminate the problem from our farms , is an insult to our farmers .
It is a slur on the professional integrity of all those involved in the eradication programme .
So the idea that there has been sort of British conspiracy within the Commission is utterly fanciful and unworthy of a report of this House .
Never in the history of agriculture - and I have been there for quite a long time - have so many healthy animals been destroyed and in such a short period of time .
A further cull , as we know , is on the way and this clears the way for the five points that were agreed at Florence .
From this committee 's work , the public was entitled to expect establishment of the facts and acknowledgement of the efficacy of the measures taken .
Criticism of past mistakes is certainly important .
We can all benefit from that in the sense that we recognize its importance .
But I regret that not more members of the committee felt able to visit Britain to witness the level of progress and the achievements which have been made over the last ten months .
Those who came were positively influenced by the measures they saw in operation .
Today I welcome the proposal that has been made by the President of the Commission to hold an inter-disciplinary conference so that consumers can look forward with confidence to the quality standards we all want to achieve and to a Europe devoted to health .
Mr President , concern for public health must the overriding consideration for everybody associated with the food industry .
In this regard the role of farmers and processors is crucial .
The role of legislators and their enactment and enforcement of food and public health regulations are also central to a safe food industry .
The BSE crisis is a disaster for both consumers and producers alike .
Consumer confidence in beef is at an all-time low , and consumers expect and deserve better from us .
The Committee of Inquiry has made an important contribution to the debate and in this regard we must congratulate the rapporteur , the chairman and the members of the committee .
My colleagues , in my group from Ireland , will not be voting in support of the censure on the Commission .
However , while I agree with the general thrust of the compromise resolution , I would like to express my reservations regarding paragraphs 4 and 5 .
I would certainly prefer if the references to manipulation and culpability were amended .
The link between meat and bonemeal and BSE is clearly established .
The enforcement of the ban is central to the elimination of BSE .
More importantly , the implementation of an effective traceability programme from producer to consumer is crucial to the overall success of our campaign to restore consumer confidence .
This raises the question of the safe disposal of offal from the meat-processing sector .
It has huge environmental and cost considerations .
At the outset of this debate I advocated an urgent research programme into the safe use of this material .
I now reiterate that call .
I was pleased to hear President Santer acknowledge that mistakes were made by the Commission .
Of course mistakes were made .
And mistakes were made by this Parliament .
We are all human and we belong to human institutions .
It is my view that no Commissioner , from MacSharry to the present Commissioner Fischler - and I include as well Commission officials - would deliberately embark on a campaign to endanger public health .
Nothing I have heard in this debate would cause me to change my mind .
Judgement on the action of the Commission must be based on the circumstances at any given time .
It is easy to be the hurler in the ditch .
It is easy to evaluate past events with the wisdom of hindsight .
I believe that all of us who are committed to resolving this issue now have a profound responsibility to work together in a cohesive manner , with the interests of the consumer and producers in mind .
We have correctly spent time examining the origins of this crisis .
Now is the time to set out a comprehensive strategy to address the situation in relation to the future .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate not only the Committee of Inquiry but also all the national parliaments , including the House of Commons in the UK , for ratifying the Maastricht Treaty which made this committee of inquiry possible .
I think we can say that no national committee of inquiry could have achieved what this one has , and I think it has clearly extended the vital powers which this House enjoys .
I naturally also share the view that public health must always take precedence over market interests .
As every speaker has already said , many mistakes were made , but I do not think it right to table a motion of censure at this stage .
We can do so later in the year , if necessary .
I agree with what the Commission said , that there must always be a division of responsibilities between the policymakers and the policy monitors .
I welcome the plans outlined by President Santer , and we look forward to seeing them implemented .
I also think that we need more research at European level .
In the past - and with BSE this was too much the case - it has only tended to be carried out in the United Kingdom , which might make people suspect that the results were given a one-sided interpretation .
I too am in favour of having a quality assurance policy for agricultural products , but I only hope that farmers will also benefit from this , which has by no means always been the case .
Finally , we have seen that the non-public decision-making procedures in the Commission , on the CouncilCommission circuit , in the management committees and so on were not enough to prevent the most major crisis imaginable in the beef sector in Europe from occurring .
The only solution is to have more openness , which means greater codecision powers for the European Parliament .
Mr President , the Committee of Inquiry 's damning conclusions make the responsibilities clear : the primary responsibilities of the British Government - whether Lord Plumb likes it or not - which cynically allowed the export of contaminated meat-and-bone meal that was banned on its own territory ; the responsibilities of the manufacturers ; and those of the Member States ' governments - and there are no representatives of the Council here today .

Moreover , the report is a complete indictment of the Commission : negligence , administrative failures , a policy of disinformation and , above all , deliberately cynical decisions .
During your hearing , Mr Santer , you took cover behind scientific opinions in an attempt to justify your decisions .
But scientists as such do not take the decisions , and I would quote Guy Debord : ' However much they participate in the decision-making process , they can only influence it by associating themselves with one of the clans , or by gaining the confidence of one of the politico-bureaucratic cliques which vie for power and take up important scientific and technical issues for show , or which , far more often , need experts to dress up in scientific clothing decisions that have already been taken and have other motives ' .
You have confessed the motive for these decisions - and I mean ' confessed ' , because this was indeed a crime , and may prove to be a crime against humanity if an epidemic has to be declared in a few years ' time .
That motive was the establishment of the single market .
That has been the Commission 's priority since 1989 .
The dogma of the free movement of goods was transformed into the freedom to contaminate cattle and humans .
And what of public health ?
It was , as Mr Santer told us during his hearing , a matter of concern to the Commission .
No , Mr Santer !
Public health is a duty , a responsibility , and as the philosopher Emmanuel Levinas put it , responsibility does not sleep and leaves you with a furrowed brow .
That is why our group has used the procedural means available and joined with Members from other groups in tabling a motion of censure .
We need to set about reforming the CAP in such a way as to free it from an economic rationale which is leading to an over-intensification of farming , resulting in damage to the environment and product quality .
We need to curb the measures to liberalize and deregulate public services in the areas of human and animal health , we need to provide for funding to compensate the victims and , above all , we need to ensure the continuation of research .
Because the only way to compensate those suffering from the disease , Mr President , is to ensure that they can be treated in the future .
Mr President , I have a minute 's speaking time left , which I should now like to devote to you , Mr Fischler .
The main thing is for a different agricultural policy to be introduced which serves to strengthen a rurally based economy .
That is what is said in the report , and it was confirmed by Mr Santer .
I should like to point out here that we have adopted a number of decisions in Parliament , for example the one on clover in relation to set-aside .
You will know that baby food is now only meant to be produced from organically farmed products .
You know that Parliament does not wish to see the use of genetic techniques in the area of organic food .
You are aware of the House 's views on genetically engineered maize .
You know that some points are still in dispute as regards the legislation on trade in seeds .
On the whole , you support the socio-ecological approach to the countryside . I therefore think we must take Parliament 's decisions seriously and engage in cooperation , not least with regard to milk .
If we can manage to get the cows back in the fields through a reform , then the bull will carry off Europa once again , of that I am quite sure !
( Laughter and applause )
Mr President , with mad cow disease we have seen ten years of total unconcern and criminal slackness , for the sake of ever greater profits .
The main blame lies of course with the United Kingdom , which allowed meat-and-bone meal to be produced under extremely dubious conditions .
Decisions were taken on the basis of biased recommendations , and studies were commissioned and paid for by the beef industry itself .
This seems incredible in itself , yet the Council of Ministers just stood by and watched .
For years , the Commission allowed a situation to continue where no veterinary checks on BSE were carried out , and the present Commission too must share responsibility for this .
Senior officials said that they were forced to give in to political pressure .
There were even attempts to sabotage the Committee of Inquiry , and the truth about gelatine was simply brushed under the carpet .
In any normal democracy , those responsible for blunders like this would be dismissed .
That is why we support the motion of censure , but the text which goes furthest is not even being put to the vote , on the orders of the biggest groups , which is an example of Parliament too evading its responsibilities .
President Santer has now made a public confession , and I only hope that he puts his statement into practice .
Mr President , the report by the Committee of Inquiry blames the UK Government and the Commission for a number of serious errors .
The Commission is accused of taking too much account of the market and too little of public health , of not having obtained independent scientific recommendations , of having made light of the problem for too long , and so on .
Although the previous Commission was to blame for most of this , the present Commission does not escape the criticisms .
While scientists advised caution , the Commission lifted the ban on exports of gelatine , tallow and semen from British bulls .
However , as far as we are concerned , there is no question of a motion of censure : it is easy to condemn with hindsight .
What matters now is how far the Commission assumes its responsibilities with regard to the failures mentioned in the report .
Its announcement that it is to set up a new directorate to coordinate consumer policy and public health is a step in the right direction , but it still needs to make its policy much more transparent , and to improve research and monitoring in cooperation with the national authorities .
The recommendations in the Medina report will be an excellent test here .
However , not everything it contains has our backing .
Its calls for the codecision procedure to apply to the CAP would certainly increase Parliament 's powers , but have nothing to do with the BSE problem .
And the recommendation to restructure the CAP by promoting extensive agriculture is not relevant to the beef sector .
Discussions on this must take account of broader issues such as food supply , farmers ' incomes and environmental protection .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the BSE affair has cost many human lives and jeopardized or indeed destroyed the livelihood of many cattle farmers .
It has created uncertainty among consumers throughout Europe and has cost the European taxpayer billions of ECU .
In its report , the Committee of Inquiry into BSE - for whose excellent work I would express my great appreciation - has drawn attention to the failings on the part of the United Kingdom , the Council and the Commission .
The report makes these clear through numerous examples .
However , I do not wish to become absorbed in the detail of the report , which shows above all the great shortcomings of the present concept of Europe .
My concern is to demonstrate that the shortcomings which have been identified are symptoms of a sickness that is inherent in the system .
The report of the BSE inquiry shows that the institutional structure cannot function as it exists at present .
The control mechanisms cannot work , where they exist at all .
My concern is the fact that the Commission has assumed de facto responsibility for legislation , without ever securing democratic legitimacy from the citizens of Europe .
My concern is that the Commissioners and the officials of the EU are acting without transparency , that they arbitrarily pass on or withhold information .
My concern is the way in which responsibility dissolves into a labyrinth , so that ultimately no one is responsible .
Finally , my concern is whether , even though all these defects have been revealed by the committee 's report , there is any realistic chance of holding the Commission and all the other players to political account .
I very much regret that , on the basis of the present legal situation , the motion of censure on the Commission also affects Commissioners who have no responsibility in this matter .
However , the findings of the Committee of Inquiry into BSE do require measures to be taken .
Only in this way can the European Parliament live up to the image it seeks to have .
For this reason , we shall support the motion of censure tabled by Mr Happart .
Mr President , Mr Santer , you have been praised here by one of my colleagues , whom I respect , for making a courageous speech .
Admittedly , the thought did occur to me that he had received the text of a speech from you which you had not given me .
I also listened to you carefully .
Considering that from tomorrow , as is to be hoped , the sword of Damocles will be hanging over you and your Commission in the form of a vote of censure , I found what you said to be no more than a speech of advance notices .
And at no point did you say anything specific , as I should like to illustrate from a number of examples .
For instance , you said that the Commission 's services are being reorganized , staff are being reallocated , and there will be changes in posts .
You said for example that there will also be redeployments in positions of responsibility within the Directorate-General for Agriculture , involving individuals who have held responsibilities in the past and who are still working .
Is that what you announced ?
You said that the budgetary resources would be examined so that Mrs Bonino can actually do the work which she will no doubt perform extremely well .
What do you mean by examined ?
How is she to do the work if you do not give an assurance that the budgetary resources will be made available ?
You said at another point - I am sorry , now I have intruded on the territory of the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , and so with great regret I take that sentence back , but you and Mr Samland know what I mean - but we do not need lip-service , what we need apart from a transfer of responsibilities is a transfer of money - cash , to put it quite bluntly .
You said elsewhere that Mrs Bonino was to be involved in the legislation .
That would be excellent - nothing would have more support from me .
But did you say , for example , how you intend to deal with something as simple as the dispute over the paper on future food policy , which the Commission announced over a year ago and which we are still waiting to see ?
And why are we still waiting for it ?
Because the Commission cannot decide between Mr Bangemann , Mr Fischler and Mrs Bonino .

I shall tell you how you should decide , and you can announce this here today , Mr Santer !
This belongs to Mrs Bonino !
She handles consumer policy , she represents the interests of consumers , more so than Mr Fischler has so far - with apologies to him - and in any event more than Mr Bangemann does .
So say something specific to us on that , Mr Santer !
You said that a food agency is under consideration , a kind of FDA .
You have often said this .
You have already said it on other occasions in a similar way : it will be considered !
I do listen to you with some degree of attention , Mr Santer .
It may not always be an undiluted pleasure to do so , but I do it all the same .
You have already said this before .
So do something about it !
Do something and say to us : we shall set up an FDA , a Food and Drug Agency or a Food Agency .
Do it !
We have been calling for this for a long time here in Parliament .
As you will be aware , Parliament is generally light years ahead of the Commission , and that applies here as well .
You said at another point that at the Intergovernmental Conference , you would support a change in the legal basis for the agriculture sector from Article 43 to Article 100a , and that you would support a separate legal basis for health policy .
I know that you will only be able to persuade the Heads of Government to accept this with the backing of your own institution , and with our support .
So please first try to persuade your own colleagues !
Persuade Mr Fischler that Article 43 is not the right legal basis , and also Mr Bangemann .
Above all , please persuade Mr Flynn that we need a separate legal basis for health policy .
During the investiture of the Commission , he denied that there was any such need when answering a question from me on the subject in the relevant committee .
Please do that , Mr Santer , and also tell us exactly what you have in mind on these issues .
Tell us also , Mr Santer , how you intend to change the common agricultural policy .
Tell us here and now that you will support , in principle , the idea of subsidies now only being granted for quality , and no longer for quantity ; that from 1998 , the budget will be framed differently , in conjunction with ourselves and the Council .
Say that to us !
These are all specific things which you could have said .
If you had said just two things from this whole list , I would have been satisfied and grateful .
But you did not do so .
Do a favour for us , Mr Santer : you have brought a gentle breath of air into the Chamber and sent a light breeze through it ; try to raise a proper storm for once , one which really blows through the minds of your fellow Commissioners and those of the Council of Ministers .
That is really what we need !
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating the chairman of our committee , Mr Böge , on his work , and the rapporteur , Mr Medina , on steering his excellent report to a successful conclusion .


We are currently engaged in a long and momentous political debate , in which I shall endeavour not to repeat what has already been said .
Momentous , because of the importance of the subject under discussion : BSE , about which hardly anything is known - neither what the pathogenic agent is , nor how it is transmitted .
Momentous , in terms of its unusualness in this House - since this debate is being followed throughout the European Union , as it concerns human health , and that is an extremely serious matter .
Momentous , in terms of its development - from the establishment of a committee of inquiry to the tabling of the first ever motion of censure on the Commission , because of the seriousness of the facts revealed by the inquiry .
The first ever motion of censure tabled in this Parliament , ladies and gentlemen : that is no laughing matter .
This affair has a past , a present and a future .
It has a past , in which the facts and the responsibilities of all the main players are clear : the British Government , as the main protagonist ; the Council , with its silent support in meetings of ministers ; and the Commission , as the institution which not only gave others a free rein , but did not do what it should have .
It has a present , and here I should like to be more specific .
We are dealing with an issue which we now know affects human health , and in respect of which neither silent support , nor giving a free rein - or turning a blind eye - nor political alliances are acceptable .
The obligation to safeguard public health is paramount .
And we would give a bad impression - and even worse , abuse the democratic mandate bestowed on us by our electors - if we failed to condemn these events .
In this affair , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioners , there is a great deal for which the Commission must be called to account .
With regard to the gelatine issue , for example - a phoney debate , as Mr Böge calls it - it is once again clear that political decisions are being taken over the heads of the scientific committees and against their advice , for reasons which at best are purely economic .
However , what is more serious , especially serious in my view , is the lack of openness and cooperation on the part of certain Members of the Commission , who have still not provided all the documentation requested by Mr Böge , even though we shall be voting on the matter tomorrow .
Mr Santer , this is not a responsibility of the previous Commission .
It is a responsibility of the present Commission : it is your responsibility .
We all know how the College of Commissioners works , and if it has failed to abide by the interinstitutional agreement - as it has done - which requires it to make such documents available , it may be by accident or for some other reason .
But even if it is by accident , it is still unacceptable .
If this is the way it has behaved in this affair , what are we , or the Union 's citizens , to think of the lack of coordination , information , control and transparency that prevails in DG VI , or the demotivation of its officials , who see responsibilities moved up and down and back and forth ?
The Commission should have made a gesture of magnanimity and self-sacrifice by assuming the individual political responsibilities which exist and by subordinating these individual interests to the interest of the institution as a whole .
Because sometimes , Mr Santer , you have to lose a battle in order to win the war .
And the war , in this case , is a war for the credibility of the European institutions - and more particularly the Commission , which as a result of this sorry affair is losing its accumulated stock of credibility and giving ammunition to the critics of European integration , whose numbers have understandably increased as a result of the Commission 's lack of sensitivity in some of the policies that it presents .
I would urge you to bring forward a practical , viable and forward-looking plan : not cosmetic changes , but genuine reorganization .
Changing the Directorate-General is not enough .
Do not increase the amount of bureaucracy .
Discuss the plan with everyone involved , and do not expect miracles or individual saviours .
Stand by it , and require everyone else to stand by it in equal measure .
That is your challenge , Mr Santer , and your duty .
In any event , Parliament will know how to make good use of its powers and fulfil its duties , the first of which is to demand that the protection of consumers ' health should be guaranteed .
And that is what all the citizens of the European Union are calling for and insisting on today .
Commissioner , if I had not signed the order paper for a motion of censure , I would almost be on your side and apologise to you for the tons of words which come out of this Parliament .
In fact we are a ' word factory ' !
And you , at the Commission , very often are not an ' action factory ' .
In this respect I should say that , at this moment of truth , which reminds me slightly of a certain type of Spanish or Portuguese spectacle , there is a whiff of adrenalin , as some people seem to be afraid of others .
Of course , I think that the Commission should be punished because , as it is the body chosen by governments , it is also a sort of joint government commission .
And , of course , it is not an elected body .
It is meant to be the guardian of the treaties and to do its work .
But there have already been too many censures .
Censures could also be made against the European Parliament because , instead of cruelly passing an immediate censure motion it has opted for an even crueller system , that of delaying the killing .
People have been afraid in the past .
They have raised all kinds of arguments - that there was a government vacuum in Europe , that the market has been given preference over people 's health , as we all know that the Commission could have defended both the market and public health , in the same way and at the same time .
One thing does not prevent the other !
The fact that is that impunity was used and it still exists throughout the European Community because , for example , I am against making the United Kingdom the only ' scapegoat ' .
The truth is that other countries also could have reacted !
The truth is that the Commission could have reacted !
The truth is that when Commissioner MacSharry - who is also in the dock now - prevented countries from blocking the sale of meat , the countries could have done it themselves .
Political cowardice does exist , and there is nothing to be done about it .
That is why there is now that whiff of adrenalin I spoke of !
And of course , it seems that we are in a minotaur situation .
I must confess that I cannot see any labyrinth at my door , I do not see any need for Ariane 's thread to get me away from the minotaur and , of course , for that reason I voted against the censure motion .
I think it was high time for the European Parliament to shoulder its responsibilities , shake off its fear and get rid of this smell of adrenalin .
I know that it is very difficult to do so .
But personally I find that it is not so hard for me to do so and also I rather like many of the present Commissioners .
Mr President , a vote of censure on the Commission at the present time is inappropriate .
This motion of censure is not only regrettable , but will be counterproductive for our image , since it forces Parliament to adopt a confrontational stance towards the Commission , although we know that it will ultimately back down .
Furthermore , Parliament is aiming at the wrong main target .
The villain of the piece is not the Commission , and certainly not the present College of Commissioners .
The Temporary Committee of Inquiry 's report is quite clear on that , moreover .
I have no wish to play down the serious operational failures on the part of the Commission 's services during the period when it was headed by Jacques Delors .
However , as everyone knows , the villain of the piece is first and foremost a national government over which we have no say .
That government , which is currently approaching an electoral campaign , should celebrate the fact that it is the Commission that is in the dock , whilst its own clearly documented crimes are quietly forgotten .
In these circumstances , a vote of censure is inappropriate , disproportionate and excessive .
Furthermore , the Commission is making amends for its past mismanagement and implementing a series of internal reforms designed to prevent a repetition of the mistakes that were made in its assessment of the seriousness of the crisis and in its handling of it .
This is the price of maintaining an institution 's credibility , and I believe that Parliament has successfully performed its monitoring role by stirring things up and forcing a reorganization .
I am confident , Mr President , that in similar circumstances in the future , the imperatives of human health will take precedence over any other considerations .
This call to order as regards the priorities which must always be observed is a fine victory for Parliament , which has essentially won its case .
Mr President , there is a rather grim joke going around the Palace of Westminster that the British Government 's interpretation of BSE is ' blame someone else ' .
How can anyone place any trust whatsoever in the present UK government ?
First of all , we have Mr Hogg who has boycotted the Committee of Inquiry set up by this Parliament .
He is matched by Michael Forsyth , the Minister responsible for Scotland , who has been boycotting Brussels for many months .
His only contribution was to try to ban the flying of the European flag in Scotland on ' Peace in Europe ' day .
These are the people that are asking us to blame the Commission and not them .
Yesterday , Mr Hogg said , and I quote : ' There is a strong case for Northern Ireland .
The case is very powerful and I will urge the Commission accordingly ' .
On the same day , Lord Lindsay , his junior Minister was saying in Brussels : ' I categorically deny that there has been any special deal for Northern Ireland ' .
We hear today , on the grapevine , that £ 9.4 million is being spent in Northern Ireland .
I would like some confirmation , if the Commission has it , of these details .
Five months ago , the same Lord Lindsay had the effrontery to tell the Scottish farmers that Scotland can lead the UK out of the beef export ban .
Such irresponsibility and contradiction has to be recorded in the annals and in the record of this House .
What concerns me most is who pays the price for this incompetence ?
It is , of course , the beef exporting farmer that I represent in Aberdeenshire and Angus and also the Northern Ireland farmers .
They are being made the scapegoats and it is time we pinned that blame where it belongs .
Mr President , in the absence of Mr Paisley which is duly noted , may I say that this is an important day for Parliament and for the institutions we are building .
Both the chairman of the committee and the rapporteur rose to the level of events .
This report has been described today in the British House of Commons as ' tosh ' by our Prime Minister .
I would translate tosh as a term of infantile abuse that has no place whatsoever in our deliberations on this report .
It is up to us to make the Commission put its own house in order and to say to the Council of Ministers that a catastrophe like BSE has to be tackled by common measures , not by recourse to national pressures , however powerful they may be , or nationalist prejudices , however extreme .
Nor do we want witch-hunts or soundbite sensationalism when we are assigning blame .
BSE has devastated my country and when I assign blame in this I do not shirk the United Kingdom 's responsibility .
I am the only British member of the committee who is prepared to say , not with perfect hindsight but with sober judgment , what we should have done after the Southwood report in 1989 : in the matter of tackling infected feed , in removing it from the animal food chain , in not preventing the continued export of this material , in the arrogance with which we looked at scientific advice if it came from independent sources and - most of all - in the failure to examine the possible links between BSE and CJD , something which was described as inconceivable by a British Minister only six months before he had to get up and admit to its likelihood , there is a measure of blame for the United Kingdom .
We cannot bluster about the previous ten years .
Things have changed since April 1996 and rightly so .
However , the refusal of the Minister to come before the committee , like the so-called beef war that was waged against the European Union , has wasted precious goodwill to no purpose .
Having said that , we found no evidence whatsoever of a sinister conspiracy between British officials and their compatriots in the Commission .
What we did find in the Commission was a dreadful inertia - all those notes about no more meetings on BSE and so on .
The President of the Commission has to take that into account now in what he does .
We should hold the Commission to a programme of institutional reform which separates producer interests from consumer concerns .
I shall vote against an immediate vote of censure , but President Santer knows that the jury is out on the reform programme he has outlined today .
We want to see throughout Europe that our food concerns and our health concerns are placed in the hands of those who are not themselves too beholden to the great producer lobbies , however legitimate those may be in their own right .
It is because of this that I want to dissociate myself from those who say either that the Commission should be immediately censured or that reparations should be sought from the United Kingdom , without the slightest heed for the legality or practicality of such a measure .
What we are trying to do is find European solution for what is - like it or not - a European problem .
It needs a strong consumer directorate and Mrs Bonino 's personal involvement in the monitoring of human and animal health backed by changes in the common agricultural policy to bring about a food sector that is humanely and effectively run .
I want to echo my colleague Mrs Roth-Behrendt in saying that the real test is how much strength the President of the Commission is prepared to put behind the consumer directorate .
When we see the dreadful shilly-shallying over a Green Paper on food policy over the past year , we have to say not just : ' What are his words ? ' but ' What are his actions ' .
I say to him today that green rhetoric is not enough , red-blooded action is needed as well .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioners , the main part of my speech will take the form of a letter - I hesitate to say a satirical address - to Mr Santer and his team , but firstly I should like to say something to the President of Parliament .
I do not believe that Parliament has increased its stature by its choice of date and time for the vote on the motion of censure .
Indeed , scheduling the vote for Thursday afternoon seems to me to be particularly provocative , when we know that the majority of Members leave Strasbourg after voting time at 12 noon on Thursdays .
I fear that , once again , we shall have the air of opportunists , if not political schemers .
You are a convinced European and an optimist , Mr Santer , and I also know that you are fond of Bordeaux wines .
That is why I like you , and why I wish to do you a favour .
I shall therefore be calling on my parliamentary colleagues to vote in favour of the motion of censure against you and the Commission .
And why ?
Because , while the responsibilities that can be laid at the door of the British Government are enormous , while those borne by the Delors Commission are clear , your Commission also bears a share of the blame .
The Commissioner with responsibility for agriculture , Mr Fischler , is sitting next to you .
He deliberately put the BSE dossier under wraps for at least two years .
Six months ago , he started to relax ; then he clamped down , and he sometimes concealed important information , as you well know .
Mr Fischler , you are of the same political persuasion as me .
You are a man of honour .
If , as I think you do , you believe in Europe , you will resign .
You will do us a service , and you will do a service to the Europe in which you believe .
Mr Santer , this is a damning report .
I believe that the European Union has failed in its duty to protect public health and its citizens .
All of Europe knows it .
The Union 's citizens will therefore fail to understand why such a serious misdemeanour is not punished .
That is why I shall be voting in favour of the motion of censure .
The moment that you and your Commissioners leave , the Union 's citizens will begin to have faith in a Europe that is courageous and transparent enough to dismiss you . And by going , you will enable the Europe in which you believe to move forward .
And then - rest assured - very quickly , in a few months , because the Member States ' governments will wish to see you return - you are a good administrator and a good politician - you will come back with most of your Commissioners : Mrs Bonino , for example , who performs her duties extremely well , and even Mr de Silguy and Sir Leon Brittan .
Of course , you will have to let some of them go - especially Mr Fischler , and perhaps certain others - because their time is up and there is a need for change .
At that moment , the European Union will make a fresh start with a better image - thanks to you .
And that is why , Mr Santer , I shall do you a favour and support the motion of censure .
Mr President , perhaps this is a dream .
In any event , please ensure that it does not turn into a nightmare .
Thank you , Mr Bébéar .
Let me give you a provisional answer to the part of your speech addressed to the President of Parliament , and remind you that Rule 34 ( 5 ) provides that the vote on a motion of censure shall not be taken until at least 48 hours after the beginning of the corresponding debate .
I think the timetable is tight enough .
Secondly - and I regret to have to say this , Mr Bébéar - it should not be forgotten that Thursday and Friday are also working days during the part-session , and as valuable as any others .
Mr Brinkhorst now has the floor for one and a half minutes .
Mr President , this debate may be of historic significance if it means that , as Mr Santer said , the iron ring that has surrounded the CAP for 40 years is finally broken .
This may happen , but I have seen no conclusive evidence of it so far in this debate .
The Commission has finally realized that power and monitoring power are two different things .
Consumers have been ignored for far too long , and this is why so many people here in the House are keen to see action instead of words .
Do we really have to wait until November ?
It is not in the interests of either the Commission or Parliament to wait nine months for practical steps to be taken .
The Commission will not have Parliament 's confidence until these measures have been implemented , as Mrs RothBehrendt said .
How many people will be involved ?
What will the budget be ?
Whom will it really be monitoring ?
People 's suspicions will not be allayed until these measures are in place , so I hope we can agree on September rather than November .
I see that the Dutch presidency has sent a representative , and I have to say that as a Dutch Member I am extremely sorry that the presidency is not here in person , since it gives the impression that it is covering up for the stonewalling attitude of the UK Government The fact that the Council is not here simply shows the arrogance of power .
I would have expected my presidency to behave rather differently .
Mr President , the responsibility for the BSE crisis is shared by many , but real responsibility lies with the Common Agricultural Policy and all EU institutions are responsible for that , including Parliament .
It has created production conditions of an extreme , stressful and artificial nature .
It has crossed national boundaries and facilitated the spread of disease via animals and foodstuffs .
It has encouraged an imbalance in the location of slaughter houses leading , as a result , to animals being transported over unreasonably long distances .
It has , to put it bluntly , been developed on the belief that plants , animals and the soil can be treated as dead material .
BSE is the first great warning to those who have conducted this policy for decades .
The free agricultural market is an outdated idea , it must be replaced , root and branch , before an even greater crisis befalls us .
Mr President , everyone is joining forces today to condemn a serious operational failure on the part of the Community institutions . In an attempt to be objective , however , I would point out that the Commission proposed a ban on the export of British meat-and-bone meal to the markets of the other Member States as long ago as 1989 .
That proposal was rejected by the Council .
There was therefore a known risk .
The Commission should have adopted a different , more cautious approach , it is true ; but this is a very long step from saying that we wish to lay the principal blame in this affair at the door of the Commission - a step which I believe it would be absurd , if not dishonest , to take .
The main culprit in this affair is undoubtedly the British Government .
It is clear that if , from 1988 onwards , it had adopted the necessary slaughter measures and banned the marketing of meat-and-bone meal , the outbreak of the disease could have been halted .
The BSE crisis was caused firstly by the criminal negligence of the British Government , which only acknowledges the existence of Europe when it wishes to promote its own interests .
It was also caused by the conspiracy of silence on the part of certain Member States , which instructed their experts in the Standing Veterinary Committee not to divulge information regarding the affair .
In these circumstances , an immediate vote of censure on the Commission does not make sense .
A conditional vote of censure is appropriate , however .
But who should be punished , and how ?
Sanctions must be imposed on the British Government , which is guilty of seriously violating the rules of the internal market and organizing a large-scale economic crime , and which should be brought before the European Court of Justice .
Sanctions must also be imposed on those Member States which connived in the trafficking of British meat-and-bone meal , especially Belgium , which was at the hub of this trade , as revealed by the Mattei report to the French National Assembly .
I believe that it is important to get to the bottom of things , and to identify the real culprits and punish them .
The prestige of Parliament and the Union in the eyes of the citizens who will ultimately be our judge depends on this .
Mr President , as we all know last night in the House of Commons the British Agriculture Minister , Douglas Hogg , survived a vote of censure by the skin of his teeth .
All the more reason , therefore , for us to explain here today , from a European perspective , the crass incompetence of the British Government 's handling of the BSE crisis .
There can be no question but that the Medina report is a trenchant condemnation of the British Government and a powerful exposé of the mistakes of the Commission .
Like Mr Whitehead , I have reservations about some of the recommendations in the report , but in a most graphic way I recognize that it shows that the British Government was slow to respond to the unfolding crisis .
The reports demonstrates how measures were enforced half-heartedly and it highlights the sheer incompetence of Douglas Hogg 's vacillating administration .
Last week the British Government made a highly emotive attack on the Medina report .
But what was significant was that no attempt was made to contradict one of the central messages of the report : that it was the British Government which was principally responsible for BSE because of the deregulation of the meat-rendering industry in the early 1980s .
Similarly , I have to say that I have yet to hear a reasonable explanation of why Douglas Hogg was unable to attend the committee of inquiry 's meeting .
Given that the Permanent Secretary , Mr Packer , who attended in place of Mr Hogg , informed us that BSE was an act of God , we perhaps should be grateful that Douglas Hogg did not attend .


If Mr Packer blamed God for what happened , goodness knows whom Mr Hogg would have blamed !
This report shows that the buck stops with the British Government .
As was stated in yesterday 's Financial Times , for 11 long years the government continued saying that British beef was completely safe , despite the contrary evidence which was emerging .
The result has been that 15 people have sadly died of Creutzfeldt-Jacob Disease ; farmers and farm workers alike have suffered unprecedented hardship ; the British taxpayer has had to fork out £ 3.3bn , and over one million cattle have been culled .
The British Government 's policy of non-cooperation was , as we all know , a farce .
Douglas Hogg 's charm offensive throughout Europe was a disaster and the British Government declaring that the Florence agreement was good , then bad , then good again served only to cause confusion and dismay .
Despite all of this , the ban on British beef remains to this day .
Surely the lesson for the British people is that for the ban to be lifted the Conservative Government has to be removed .
Let us hope that this will happen in the very near future .
Mr President , one of the most important roles of the European Parliament is the monitoring of the actions of the Commission .
The monitoring by the European Parliament 's Committee of Inquiry of the various aspects of the bovine spongiform encephalopathy affair , involving the United Kingdom , the Council and the Commission , has been assiduous , despite the shortage of time and the fact that certain circles in the Commission were not always helpful , principally with regard to the furnishing of important documents , some of which have still not been made available .
The Committee of Inquiry has carried out its monitoring without bias , and the results are clearly stated in its report , which presents the facts , attributes responsibility as appropriate and makes recommendations to prevent the same sort of thing and the irregularities in the workings of the Commission happening again .
Allow me to recall that one of the labours of Hercules was to clean the Augean stables .
I believe that the chairman of the committee and its members and the rapporteur have performed a similar , herculean , task .
Ladies and gentlemen , at this crucial juncture , as the work of the intergovernmental conference nears completion , we must examine the European Union 's priorities and ask ourselves how best we can serve the interests of the citizens of Europe to whom we are responsible .
We must be scrupulous and satisfy the citizens ' sense of justice . The Commission has to be put on a new course , and that can be achieved only through a restructuring of its services and , above all , through the adoption of new basic principles .
To that end , the fairest way forward - one which combines sanctions with the requirement for a new approach - is a conditional expression of censure .
Acceptance by the European Parliament of the report of the Committee of Inquiry into BSE will entail , of itself , the attribution of responsibilities as between the United Kingdom , the Commission and the Council and , also , to senior officials . In my view , Parliament should adopt a rigorous and condemnatory approach .
That approach will also be constructive because of the things that are being demanded from the Commission . Firstly , that it should put its house in order and initiate the requisite disciplinary action against the persons responsible for the mismanagement , regardless of their seniority .
Secondly , that it should forward a proposal , in the context of the intergovernmental conference , concerning the application of the co-decision procedure to the CAP .
Thirdly , that it should move quickly towards full reorganization of the scientific committees and to ensure that their operations are based on purely scientific criteria .
Fourthly , that it should reorganize the directorates-general , in cooperation with the European Parliament , in order to establish a suitable structure for effective protection of human health and the environment .
Espousal of the precept that the health of human beings is the fundamental priority , and that it must , of course , take precedence over the financial expedience of the common market , is imperative .
We believe this to be the only way of ensuring that the citizens of Europe can regain full confidence in the actions of the Commission and be convinced that it is the true guardian not only of the treaties but also of their health and the environment .
If the Commission fails to act quickly , and in accordance with the Committee of Inquiry 's recommendations , you can be sure , Mr President of the Commission , that December will be the final month of your Commission .
Do not think that you can fool us with half-measures .
We want full compliance with the committee 's recommendations and immediate withdrawal of your authorization , which is still applicable , of the lifting of the ban on gelatin .
We ask you to rescind that decision immediately .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to concentrate on three points .
Firstly , of course , the relationship of trust between many Members of the House and the Commission has been shattered .
However , the most important thing has to be that political conclusions are actually drawn from this whole scandal , that reforms are introduced .
Here I would like to address Mr Fischler personally as the Agriculture Commissioner .
I sometimes have the impression that you are in a rather protected position , because there is no vote of censure on individual Members of the Commission .
But you will be judged on whether you do two things now .
And these are my second and third points .
It will not do for a country or a government to cause enormous damage and then not to have to pay for it .
A great deal of money has been spent on repairing the damage .
This must be retrieved - if necessary through an action before the European Court of Justice .
That is very important .
And there is another point on which you should be focusing , as Mr Santer also said in his speech : the principal mistake in this series of events was a misguided agricultural policy .
And you are responsible , Mr Fischler , for seeing that a change takes place here , a move away from an industrial agricultural policy and towards an ecological policy .
You will be judged on that basis , and we shall link the question of censure to that point .
Mr President , despite the lack of clarity in your announcements , Mr Santer , most Members will no doubt attach your speech to the decision which I hope we shall adopt by a large majority tomorrow , because then in a few months ' time we can check what has become of them .
I have the impression that there is a large measure of agreement with the Commission here in the House that there can be no cost-cutting when it comes to protecting the health of our citizens .
That has always been the case , but the principle has not been observed .
The policy has not been adapted to it .
The British Government stands at the head of the chain of cause and effect in this failure , and the Commission has failed as well .
The Council of Ministers has not covered itself with glory , and we should also exercise some degree of self-criticism : despite early warnings from the committees , for example , we did not produce a majority for any radical change in agriculture policy .
So , was BSE a matter of chance ?
Was it an accident ?
It was not .
One of its causes was the British Government 's complete misunderstanding of deregulation , and also to some extent the mistaken idea of deregulation put forward by the Commission and some sections of Parliament .
Another cause was the misguided agriculture policy .
I am not speaking out here in favour of some wonderfully cosy form of small-scale agriculture .
We have large units ; if we have large herds , then large areas go with them .
These too can make ecological sense , but we certainly do not have both things at the moment !
I am quite sure you need a new Director-General , Mr Fischler .
If someone is responsible for fire prevention and does not do his job properly , you cannot then employ him as a fire-fighter !
That is not on , believe me !
I would say quite clearly once again : we in Parliament cannot simply make demands .
We need to play our own part in the forthcoming reforms , and I will certainly be appealing to many colleagues on these lines .
When we come to tackle a reform of the agriculture policy - and not just here in Europe - I shall be reminding them of what has been said here in connection with BSE .
BSE was not a matter of chance !
And the Union must play its part .
We first have to change what is no longer acceptable in our European Union , for example the way in which we produce meat .
We do eat meat !
We are omnivores , after all .
But then we must consider certain things with regard to animals , and also with regard to human health .
And we need to do this throughout the world .
Unless the EU , with its strong market and from its general position of strength , also uses international agreements to try to change this way of producing agricultural goods , then not only will BSE have been a painful and unpleasant warning , but there will be worse to come , since if we go on behaving as we have done up to now , worse things are guaranteed !
Mr President , as a member of the Committee of Inquiry I voted for and I fully support the Committee of Inquiry 's findings and recommendations .
The British Government was found to be responsible for starting the disease , for taking inadequate steps to prevent its rapid spread and , up to very recently , to eradicate it .
I hope that has now changed .
In particular it was found that the British decision to alter the manufacturing process which lowered sterilization standards for meat and bonemeal used in compound feeding stuffs for cattle allowed the emergence of the disease .
Whatever savings in fuel were achieved , this reckless change in standards has now cost consumers , taxpayers and especially farmers several million times more than any possible savings .
Having eventually banned the use of meat and bonemeal the British Government then completely failed to implement its ban .
Worse still , it allowed contaminated meat and bonemeal to be exported without restriction , thus contaminating herds in neighbouring EU countries .
I welcome President Santer 's statement today , but since 1989 the European Commission has been slow to recognize the seriousness of this disease and it failed to supervise the British response .
It allowed contaminated meat and bonemeal to be traded freely throughout Europe .
Furthermore , the Commission carried out practically no veterinary inspections in the UK at a time when tens of thousands of animals were being infected annually in that country .
The Commission 's lack of activity since 1989 in respect of BSE must rank as one of the greatest failures of public administration in recent history .
Most , but not all , of the fault lies with previous Commissions , as the report clearly establishes .
The report from the Committee of Inquiry incorporates a number of amendments which I tabled because I believe that BSE spread outside Britain mainly through exports of contaminated meat and bonemeal .
I have therefore included in the report a call for legislation to ensure meat and bonemeal is never again used in ruminant feeds and that ruminant feeds cannot be produced on any premises where meat and bonemeal is present .
The committee also accepted my proposal that meat and bonemeal be sold only under special licence and that , in addition , a full list of ingredients be displayed on all compound feeds .
Obviously these rules must be implemented in all Member States and backed by strong legislation .
Moving to the future , for the future we must double our efforts to eradicate the last remnants of this disease and restore public confidence in the high quality of our food products .
We must work incessantly to convince our own consumers and customers in exports markets that our beef is safe and wholesome .
The Commission must implement all the recommendations in our report and this must be done efficiently and immediately .
I will support the conditional motion of censure if the Commission does not satisfy our demands .
Our position is very clear .
We require strengthened monitoring and a reinforcement of current eradication measures .
We require a reorganization of the Commission 's personnel and a refocusing of policy .
We require immediate progress in setting up the veterinary agency in Ireland to accurately supervise this work .
Mr President , the report by the Committee of Inquiry gives a clear picture of the major problems underlying the BSE crisis , the events which led to the problem and its causes .
I should like to thank the Committee for this .
The BSE crisis has understandably shaken consumer confidence in beef .
To restore that confidence will be the Commission 's principal task in dealing with the crisis from now on .
According to the report , the previous Commission underestimated the BSE problem and concealed its seriousness .
The Commission neglected its duty to monitor compliance with veterinary rules in the internal market .
Under the Treaty , the Commission is responsible for monitoring compliance with Community legislation in the Member States .
The Commission is responsible for instituting legal proceedings against any Member State which violates Community legislation .
I should like to know how the Commission intends to shoulder this responsibility .
At the various stages of food production in the Union , the BSE crisis has already cost more than ECU 2 billion .
Those who have been forced to foot the bill are innocent farmers , whose support has been cut and is continuing to be cut .
What damages should be paid by those who made mistakes ?
I support the conditional vote of no confidence to compel the Commission to take those unavoidable decisions to enable it to monitor Member States ' compliance with Community legislation .
The effectiveness of the common market is at stake here .
This is particularly important because food safety and human health are affected .
If necessary , the Commission should introduce heavy , conditionally suspended fines for breaches of Community legislation wherever there is a danger to human health .
Mr President , BSE is an extremely serious and unprecedented issue , which has incalculable implications for human health .
This epidemic was only able to reach the proportions that it did because the necessary measures were not taken in full .
Can you imagine there being an outbreak of swine fever without the health authorities taking determined action to eradicate it ?
Similar action to eradicate mad cow disease should have been taken from the outset .

The Committee of Inquiry 's excellent report , drawn up by Mr Medina , has a twofold merit : firstly , it lays bare the responsibilities of all the main actors in this affair ; and , secondly , it proposes a set of measures designed to prevent such a crisis from ever happening again .
Responsibility must first be laid overwhelmingly at the door of the Conservative British Governments of Mrs Thatcher and Mr Major .
Those governments promoted deregulation , with disregard for any considerations of public health .
The disease first developed because the British authorities relaxed the rules governing the manufacture of meat-and-bone meal , in order to reduce costs .
The appearance of the disease did not perturb either the authorities or the agri-foodstuff industry , which regularly dismissed any thought of a crisis and , in particular , any risk to human health .
Subsequently , the British authorities failed to carry out the inspections necessary for the introduction of eradication measures .
Then , once meat-and-bone meal had been banned , the UK Government made no attempt to prevent its export to other EU countries .
Lastly , the UK Government brought unacceptable pressure to bear on the Commission not to carry out any inspections , and even when , in spring 1996 , the BSE crisis turned into a public health catastrophe , the Conservative British Government displayed an incredible lack of good will in its implementation of the measures to eradicate the disease .
The European Commission also bears responsibility , though to a lesser extent .
The Committee of Inquiry revealed the serious mistakes made by Commissioners MacSharry and Steichen , and certain members of their departments ; but the present Commission is not exempt from blame either - especially Mr Fischler .
The Commission at first opposed the imposition of an embargo on British beef and meat-and-bone meal .
Subsequently , it slowed down the adoption of simple precautionary procedures designed to inactivate the infective agent in meat-and-bone meal .
Then it lifted the embargo on gelatine .
I was listening to what you said earlier , Mr Santer .
That decision was taken , and it was only suspended because the industry decided that the embargo should be maintained .
In any event , I think that this raises questions concerning the Commission 's political responsibility .
Finally , let us not forget that the Council of Ministers also bears a share of the responsibility .
In the light of such a damning report by Parliament 's Committee of Inquiry , sanctions must be imposed .
We cannot stop now .
They must be imposed on the Conservative Government of the United Kingdom , in the form of an order to pay damages , but also on those who were guilty of errors within the Commission .
But it is not only a question of punishing past mistakes ; it also a question of preventing such a crisis from ever happening again .
In your speech earlier this afternoon , Mr President of the Commission , you announced your reforms .
Placing health safety matters under the authority of Mrs Bonino : excellent !
Tabling reforms at the Intergovernmental Conference , along the lines of what I proposed three weeks ago : excellent !
But that is not enough .
There is also a need to punish the failures which have been identified and , first and foremost , to make an issue of the UK Government 's financial responsibility , as called for in the Committee of Inquiry 's report .
Mr President , given that Parliament , through Maastricht , has acquired the right to use a collective vote of censure as a parliamentary weapon , every Member of this supreme representative body within Europe should handle it responsibly .
In the vote on the Medina report , 16 members of the Committee of Inquiry voted against the limpest of motions from the Socialist Group , so that the report which is now before the House was adopted without the planned recommendation for a qualified vote of censure .
The press was full of this , as we know .
Now we are retrieving the situation with some appropriate resolutions , which we shall be voting on tomorrow .
This opposition - on my part too , I would point out - was not ducking the issue and did not reflect a lack of courage , quite the opposite .
The motion in question amounted to an even more toned-down vote of censure , no time for it being set and the date of December 1997 being deleted .
Those who threaten to use a vote of censure - of whatever kind - from the very beginning of an inquiry , and then in the end produce only the limpest forms of words , are damaging not only themselves , but Parliament as a whole , since everyone can see the reason for the lack of enthusiasm which has been mentioned : most of the Commissioners who would have to go would be from the ranks of the social democratic group !
Furthermore , the main point at issue here is surely not to demonstrate the guilt or innocence of the Commission which is now in office .
For us as elected representatives , the point must rather be our duty to restore to European consumers the confidence which they demand and deserve .
In other words , we MEPs would be well advised to join with the Commission in forming a counterbalance to the Council , rather than acting against it , above all in the light of the negotiations currently taking place at the Intergovernmental Conference .
That does not prevent us from expressing our views to one another plainly and frankly , and that is the point at issue today here in the House .
What is to be done ?
On the basis of the recommendations in the Medina report and Parliament 's resolution , the Commission should now rectify its omissions as quickly as possible and correct the flaws which have been highlighted by the Committee of Inquiry .
The statements by President Santer indicate that the Commission is ready to do so .
However , should this not be carried through within a reasonable period of time , contrary to expectations , in other words by the end of this year , then we should not just raise a warning finger , as was the case with the vote in the Committee of Inquiry , but would really be obliged to hold a vote of censure pursuant to Article 144 of the Treaty .
Many positive things can be said about mad cow disease .
Without mad cow disease it would have been more difficult to incorporate animal welfare as a key principle in the new EU treaty .
Regard for animal welfare could have hindered the EU 's and Great Britain 's acceptance of an epidemic with hundreds of thousands of sick animals .
Without mad cow disease it would have been more difficult to stipulate that cows should only be fed with food their digestive systems can tolerate , i.e. one should not try to turn herbivores into carnivores , which is what happened when lorry-loads of meat and bonemeal were sent out from factories to cattle breeders .
Without mad cow disease attention would not have been focused on the fact that Great Britain has failed in its monitoring of meat and bonemeal companies and has not ensured that export bans were complied with , preventing EU inspectors from checking for mad cow disease on their visits to Great Britain .
Without mad cow disease not so much attention would have been focused on the special committee system which is decisive for much of the agricultural policy , or on the fact that scientific experts are actually regarded as merely an extension of the authorities themselves .
Without mad cow disease not so much attention would have been focused on the fact that the EU decides on agricultural policy in a more restrictive manner than for other areas of policy , even though the agricultural policy is one of the longest-standing areas of cooperation and this remains the area which accounts for half of the EU budget .
The general directorate for agriculture is certainly in need of a good airing .
Article 43 is now out of date , and the European Parliament does not have any influence over this .
Witnesses from the Commission have constantly spoken about taking account of the internal market , but they have made recommendations against the background of article 43 .
This is not consistent .
Without mad cow disease we would not have had this golden opportunity which can now be used to the advantage of openness and democracy .
We do not want a Committee of Inquiry which is able to provide us with masses of documents which we should have received automatically .
The EU must have transparency in its administration , and mad cow disease helps to illustrate this need .
Without mad cow disease there would not have been the same drive in favour of a real consumer policy .
Our appreciation that the regulations governing marking must be in order has increased .
What we most need now is a reform in which those responsible for agriculture take account of health , consumers ' rights and animal welfare , and in which they are not allowed to shirk their responsibility .
Those responsible for agriculture must also be made jointly responsible for a policy on foodstuffs .
The production of foodstuffs is , after all , the main point of an agricultural policy ; one should not therefore be able to shirk responsibility for ensuring that food products are healthy .
When health and consumers ' rights are the main issue , any reasonable person will understand that we must have the necessary time for the Commission and the Council to alter their routines and for the government conference to change the legal basis .
A vote of no confidence now will divert attention from the necessary reform of the EU in favour of a superficial debate on scapegoats , and this would be senseless .
Mr President , as members of the Committee of Inquiry we have carried out our work honourably , we have gathered facts , exposed abuses , identified those responsible and made recommendations .
Now the House must decide on the political follow-up to all this , and I hope that common sense will prevail .
An immediate motion of censure condemning the Commission 's policy naturally appeals to some people 's imagination , simply because they hope it will look good in the media , but it would be a destructive step to take at a time when we are trying to give people constructive reasons to have confidence in us .
What is more , the mistakes which caused the problem to escalate are not the fault of today 's Commission , but of the United Kingdom , previous Commissions and the Council , whose presidency is conspicuous by its absence here .
And an immediate motion of censure would mean postponing other measures which cannot be delayed .
What we must do , ladies and gentlemen , is not provide bread and circuses for the public , but prove that we are capable of using the instruments of power available to us as they were intended , so as to ensure that we have a policy which guarantees the highest possible food quality .
We have already heard a great deal of talk about how to achieve this .
If everyone comes to realize that the long-term interests of farmers and consumers go hand in hand and acts accordingly , then we shall be back on the right track .
It is also time to put the spotlight back on ethics again .
Ethical considerations make life easier because they rule out certain choices from the start .
This is not one of my own ideas , it was an idea that was put forward by the President of the present Commission at a bioethics conference at the end of the 1980s .
I leave it to you to judge whether actions speak louder than words .
Mr President of the Commission , Commissioners , for the time being we are happy to accept your statement of intent , but we also expect you to act on it .
How far you succeed will determine whether concern for the public interest is restored to its rightful place , which is why we shall have to monitor your actions very closely .
But there is another reason why we must hope that you succeed in implementing your planned reforms and Parliament 's recommendations : our vote of confidence at the end of the year will depend on it .
Mr President , reading the excellent report by Mr Manuel Medina was a shocking experience .
It revealed the tangled web in which all concerned are involved in one way or another .
Behind everything else , however , one senses the urgent desire of the government of one Member State to play down the BSE problem , even to the extent of blackmailing the other institutions .
It is unfortunate that at least the previous Commission 's officials and the Council , partly for this reason , on a number of occasions actually covered up the suspicions which had arisen , thereby preventing prompt measures to resolve the problem .
The investigating bodies set up by the Commission with an advisory and monitoring remit later turned out to be very one-sided , and their scientific competence has also been called into question by Parliament 's Committee of Inquiry .
The main responsibility for the BSE crisis rests with the British Government . The previous Commission also bears a large measure of responsibility for the cover-up and for its indifferent management of the affair .
Now it is necessary to carry out quickly the measures which Parliament 's Committee of Inquiry has recommended .
The present Commission should be judged above all in the light of the seriousness with which it bears the responsibility now conferred on it and how quickly and effectively it acts upon the Committee of Inquiry 's proposals for improving administration and monitoring .
The most important thing is the health of the European public .
Mad cow disease must be eliminated and at the same time measures must be taken to ensure that nothing similar can happen in the future .
A vote of no confidence in the Commission would not now promote the attainment of these objectives .
In future it must be possible for Community decisions on human and animal health and the required Community legislation to be based on scientific knowledge which is as sound and impartial as objectively possible .
Decisions which have been taken must be adhered to , and it must be possible to check effectively enough that they are watertight .
The subsidiarity principle must not mean that one Member State has the right to deceive the others and to ignore Community legislation concerning human health while at the same time expecting the others to display budget solidarity , so that it is the others that end up having to pay .
This is also a serious reminder to the Intergovernmental Conference of the areas where flexibility must not under any circumstances be permitted .
It has already been said repeatedly here what is basically at stake : an agricultural policy in which it is imagined that nature can even be altered so as to turn ruminants into carnivores .
Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by quoting from Karl Valentin : ' Everything may already have been said , but not yet by everyone ! '
An unqualified motion of censure on the present Commission is not an appropriate political means of doing justice to the findings of the Committee of Inquiry .
The committee has indeed identified some serious breaches of consumer protection , but at the same time it has become clear that too little effort was made to prevent the spread of the disease , with its disastrous consequences .
Many farmers in Europe have therefore had their livelihoods seriously damaged , and some have been completely ruined .
That point has not yet been made today .
Meat processing businesses have gone bankrupt , because at times the trade in beef came to a complete standstill .
Furthermore , an unprecedented degree of uncertainty has been created among consumers .
This is a question of general responsibility .
In the forefront there is one Member State which bears a large proportion of the blame for today 's debacle .
However , both the Commission and the Council of Ministers , together with the scientific committees , have also seriously neglected their duty of care .
The Committee of Inquiry has clearly demonstrated the inability of the authorities in question to take effective measures to combat the disease .
With our motion for a resolution , we wish to usher in a new beginning , so as to avoid such catastrophes in future .
Although Parliament , through Mr Böge , myself and many other colleagues , sent specific proposals to the Commission and the Council as long ago as 1989 and 1990 , these have never been taken into consideration .
The European Parliament is therefore calling for a full right of codecision in all areas of agriculture policy , since effective combating of disease must involve animal marking , clear guidelines and certification in the production of feed , and also strict controls .
The internal market can only function with appropriate legal bases .
Through our resolution , the Commission is being given an opportunity to introduce an improved strategy for combating disease and for protecting human and animal health .
You now have the chance , Mr President of the Commission , of doing precisely this in conjunction with Parliament .
Finally , I should like to thank Mr Medina Ortega and Mr Böge .
Your work has been excellent and exemplary , and we have gladly played our part in it .
Now it is your turn to do something sensible with us !
Mr President , I should like to join previous speakers in congratulating both the committee chairman , Mr Böge , and the rapporteur , Mr Medina , on their work in the committee .

I believe that the objective of investigating alleged contraventions or maladministration in the implementation of Community law in relation to BSE has been met in full , and that reading part A of this report will answer any questions in that respect .
We are also bound to mention a factor which is noted in the report itself , and that is the obstructive attitude adopted by the Commission and the British Ministry of Agriculture , which could surely have cooperated more fully in clarifying certain points .
I should like to underline the three sets of responsibilities highlighted in Mr Medina 's report .
Firstly , there are the responsibilities of the British authorities , in terms of their failure to implement stringent animal or human health measures , their total lack of control over the manufacturing of meat-and-bone meal , their indifference to the fate of British meal exports , and the pressure they brought to bear on the Commission and the governments of other Member States - including my own - to relax or lift the embargo on beef and , subsequently , on gelatine , tallow and semen .
As the rapporteur makes clear , it was not so much a question of a lack of standards or legislative provisions , as of a refusal to abide by the rules of fair and open cooperation which must govern relations between the Member States of the Union .
Secondly , there are the responsibilities of the Council .
And , thirdly , there are the responsibilities of the Commission , mainly its mishandling of the BSE crisis , which is closely linked to Commissioner MacSharry , and in which the stability of the beef market was given priority over the protection of human health , and a clear policy of disinformation and minimization was conducted .
There was a widespread lack of coordination between the relevant Commission departments , and a failure to attach sufficient importance to the protection of public health in the Union .
Lastly , there were no veterinary inspections .
All in all , the Commission left a great deal to be desired in its handling of the BSE crisis , and committed serious errors and omissions .
I therefore support all the rapporteur 's recommendations for the future - although at least two of them , in my view , deserve to be highlighted .
The first concerns the need for the Commission and Parliament to set up a joint body to monitor and review the measures to be adopted , including those that President Santer has set out in Parliament 's debate today .
And the second concerns the need to ensure the transparency of the debates of the advisory scientific committees and , in general , to reform the rules governing their work in such a way as to safeguard their independence and advisory function .
Only if we draw the necessary conclusions from the mishandling of this crisis will we be able to prevent a repetition of the errors that were made .
I shall conclude by saying , Mr President , that as the rapporteur points out in his report , since the creation of the European Community , no single issue has affected people 's daily lives as much as this .
We are obliged to repair the damage which the BSE crisis has caused to the idea of Europe throughout European public opinion .
Mr President , mass livestock farming , mass consumption , mass culling - this road to disaster needs to be avoided .
There is no doubt that there have been serious failures of crisis management with regard to BSE : firstly by the British Government , as our group chairman Mr Martens said , and by the Commission in the period from 1990 to 1994 .
It is therefore essential for the Commission as an institution to be called to account , on the basis of the joint motion for a resolution tabled by the PPE and PSE Groups .
This does not mention blame , but specifically invokes the Commission 's responsibility for implementing the recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry .
Moreover , individual and disciplinary measures must be taken in respect of the officials concerned .
The fact that the President of the Commission himself , Mr Santer , has admitted to mistakes reinforces our belief that this Commission is able and willing to do all it can to avoid a repetition of the errors of the past , and to justify the confidence which our chairman Mr Martens expressed in the Commission on behalf of the 15 delegations in the PPE Group .
The declaration that priority will be given to consumer protection and health policy in the EU is an important signal , not least for the citizens of Austria .
I would particularly highlight the Commission 's intention only to have recourse in future to scientists whose independence is guaranteed .
Another welcome reform is the checks introduced between this stage and legislation .
We are pleased to see that the European Parliament , as the representative of our citizens , is gaining increased codecision in matters of health , consumer protection and agriculture , and also that at the Intergovernmental Conference , Article 129 will be amended so that our citizens ' health will take priority over all other interests .
It may be that today we have seen a turning-point in the relations between the European Parliament and the Commission .
Perhaps these can now be placed on a new footing , after the salutary shock provided by the BSE crisis .
Like the chairman of the PSE Group , Mrs Green , we too are ready to put our trust in the Commission for the time being , but we shall remain vigilant in the interest of our citizens .
Mr President , the development of the European Union will depend on whether its citizens espouse the idea of European integration because they feel that their interests are being represented .
A policy which gives priority to business over people and which puts the functioning of the market above public health is letting down the citizens of Europe and thereby ultimately calling into question what it professed to support .
Mr Santer , you have spoken of a health union today and announced many changes .
But surely these changes , or at least some of them , would have been possible at the start of your Commission 's term of office ?
Was a crisis such as BSE really necessary to prompt you to act and introduce reforms ?
The report of the Committee of Inquiry , for which I am extremely grateful to Mr Medina , has identified omissions , errors and shortcomings and - just as importantly - made proposals for the future : reforms which are necessary to protect public health , to restore the confidence of our citizens and to allow for democratic controls .
However , that means giving responsibility for food issues to the Commissioner who deals with consumer protection , together with all the necessary resources !
It means using Article 100a as the legal basis for all the legislation on food !
It means having public access to the reasons behind decisions , with transparency in the scientific committees and advisory bodies , and in the allocation of studies and the organization of seminars .
It means creating a European equivalent of the US Food and Drug Agency , with all the independence that is required .
I therefore expect that the green paper on the future of food - which was announced a year ago , and to which several of my colleagues have referred - will contain these necessary reforms , since otherwise there is no point in discussing it .
I now expect that action will be taken quickly , and that the Intergovernmental Conference will be used to discuss with the Member States the necessary reforms of the institutions .
For this reason , I am opposed to a censure motion at the present time .
If heads are made to roll , it does not mean that reforms can actually take place , but without these reforms - which have been announced , and which I hope will not remain simply announcements , and Parliament will be monitoring this very closely - there can be no further development of the European Union .
But surely that is what we all ultimately wish to see !
Mr President , as we near the end of the debate , I should like to say that , on the whole , we have had a discussion which has taken due account of the seriousness of the crisis , and of the results of the Committee of Inquiry .
If the cow is sick in the head , Mr Santer , you will not persuade anyone that the meat may be good to eat , even if that were to be the case .
The fact has simply been underestimated that in matters of food - and they deal with it every day - the citizens of Europe are extremely sensitive in their reactions , sometimes even hypersensitive , and react much more strongly than in many other areas where the risks to health could well be greater .
Firstly , Mr Santer - and I very much welcome the fact - you have already adopted a number of absolutely essential reforms and , secondly , you have made some important announcements .
I see that as extremely positive .
I would also point out that , after a great deal of toing and froing , there has been some movement on the part of the Commission both as regards the question of the ban on avopacin and the assessment of limit values for baby food .
These are what one might call side-effects of the inquiry into BSE , and we take a positive view of them .
But I am also bound to say , Mr Santer , that there is of course a certain discrepancy in terms of the acknowledgement of mistakes which we have identified and the multitude of announcements .
I would make it very clear : we could have saved ourselves two months of work in the Committee of Inquiry if we had been given the whole truth in September in the initial answers on gelatine , in that phoney debate .
Likewise , we could have reached better conclusions in our work if we had not been given a cover-up answer on the absence of checks in the period 1990 to 1994 .
We could have saved a very great deal of time .
And this continues to justify the criticism of the way in which some findings were dealt with which we uncovered .
However , that is why it is so important - and I am finishing , Mr President - firstly that we in Parliament do not release ourselves from the obligation , having achieved this common ground , to now also take things forward together ; and , secondly , that we do not release the Commission from its special duty of care , on the basis of paragraph 7 of the joint motion for a resolution .
Mr President , as I listened carefully to Mr Santer the following scene came into my mind : a ship , caught up in a great storm , is in danger of drifting on to rocks and breaking up , and the captain , instead of sending out an SOS to try to save the situation , sits in his cabin writing in the ship 's log the provisions that he intends to buy in the port , assuming that he arrives there ...
The arguments put to us here today by Mr Santer concerning the political responsibilities of the present Commission as regards the gelatin issue are the ones that he put to us at his previous appearance here before Christmas , when he failed to convince any of the members of the Committee of Inquiry which has since unanimously pointed the finger of blame at the Commission .
I cannot understand why he did not propose today one of the measures that the committee recommends , namely the rescinding of the decision on gelatin .
It is not because of the Commission that the decision has not been given practical effect , but because the United Kingdom government has not requested an export licence - and I point that out in order to acquaint this House with the true facts .
The Commission has referred to changes in its working practices , but there has been no mention of the counterarguments of the commissioners who disagree with the changes , and nothing has been said about which changes are to be made at Directorate-General V1 . We agree that appropriations and money are required for the investigation not just of BSE but also of new diseases .
We understand the situation . Having violated nature in the name of economic growth , we are being faced every day with new problems and new , unknown , diseases , and those diseases have to be investigated as well , of course .
In the course of our own investigations something else quite deplorable took me by surprise : the 15 Member States are equal under the Treaty , but we noted that some are more equal than others .
One such is the United Kingdom : effectively it rejected Community controls , and the Commission acquiesced in that situation .
Yet at a time when BSE was wiping out the herds of the United Kingdom , 34 of the 40 inspectors - and be reminded of the Commission 's claim that it is short of inspectors - spent a long time in Greece .
Why were they there ? They were investigating swine fever .
And quite rightly so , but it did not need so many of them because the presence of the disease in Greece and Germany had already been notified and a general ban had been imposed on meat from all of the regions from the very outset .
A month ago , Mr President , in Strasbourg , I met the mother of a young British man , aged 19 , who had died from Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease .
With great dignity , she said to us : ' I cannot get justice from the government of the United Kingdom , and I just want your Parliament to tell me who is to blame . '
I believe that Mr Medina Ortega 's report , this splendid report , gives the answer .
The material that we gathered with such difficulty under the guidance of the committee chairman , Mr Böge , is , I think , material that can be used by any interested party for the attribution of criminal and civil responsibility , since we ourselves do not have that competence .
Mr President I want to put on record one part of the United Kingdom that has been seriously wronged in all of this awful mess that we are in , and that is Northern Ireland .
No part of this Community has a traceable system like the system in Northern Ireland .
No part of this Community has a better health record and no part of this Community has done everything in its power to conform to what this Commission has said .
Yet we find that part of the United Kingdom is sinned against not only by the British Government , but also by this Community .
I hope that this Community will take note of what I have said .
I have said it to the Commissioner - and the Commissioner agreed with Mr John Hume and myself and Mr Nicholson - that we were streets ahead of other parts of the Community as far as animal health is concerned .
I hope that this great wrong which has been done to Northern Ireland will be put right .
Thank you , Mr Paisley .
Ladies and gentlemen , with Mr Paisley 's speech , we have come to the end of the list of speakers , and I am informed that the Commission now wishes to speak .
Mr Fischler will speak first , then Mrs Bonino , and lastly President Santer .
I therefore give the floor to Mr Fischler .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have reached the end of this debate , which for me has had four distinguishing features : it has been a very clear debate , a very constructive one for long periods - I would even say the most intellectual debate I have experienced since I began attending Parliament - and an extremely exciting debate .
President Santer has set out the Commission 's policy very clearly , and there is no need for me to repeat all of that here .
At the same time , this policy provides the answer to most of the questions which have been raised .
I too will try to state my views clearly and concisely on a number of points .
Mr Martens put two questions to me . Firstly , there was the decision on gelatine .
Mr Böge himself said in his speech that there had been a phoney debate on this issue .
I can only agree with him there , because not an ounce of British gelatine has left or will leave the United Kingdom without every possible guarantee of safety .
As I have already explained to the House , the decision on gelatine has been put on ice .
The Commission based its decision on the opinion of the Scientific Veterinary Committee , which enlarged on the scientific knowledge available at the time .
In the meantime , however , the state of knowledge has changed .
Therefore , until all the new questions which have arisen have been clarified , the de facto export ban remains in place .
The second question was the provision of information to the Committee of Inquiry .
Mr Santer has referred to the instructions which I gave .
I do not think any further comment is needed on my part .
However , Mr Böge also drew attention to the key point here today , which is that we should learn lessons for the future from this debate - all of us !
I entirely agree with that in substance , and I would even stress that much more is at issue here than just the question of BSE .
For some years now - not least in my previous activities - I have been pursuing a new concept , a new approach to agriculture policy which I have to say has not always met with unqualified approval .
Let me mention some of the principles which I regard as crucial for the future .
Firstly , in my policy I am building on the alliance between the consumer and the farmer .
Secondly , I think we must all recognize that quality is more important than quantity !
Thirdly , protecting health and the environment must be our constant concern .
What do I mean by that ?
Today , the consumer has a right to expect that , from the barn or the field to the table , continuous checks and quality assurance are guaranteed .
It is also a question of farmers embracing the principle of sustainability , which includes animal protection and keeping livestock in an appropriate way .
These are not merely statements and announcements , ladies and gentlemen .
I have also launched a series of practical measures .
I would remind you of the hormone conference , of the conference in Cork , of the extension of the organic farming regulation to animal products , of my initiative to simplify all the veterinary legislation , and of the ban on veal crates .
I am pleased to say that several of these proposals were also received favourably by Parliament , and I am counting on further cooperation in the future , as has indeed been called for .
I have a further comment in this context on BSE .
I should like to point out that some important initiatives have also been taken here by the Commission .
I would remind the House that before the crisis was discussed in March last year , the so-called Weissmann Group was set up by me to devise a new research programme for this entire sector .
And I would remind you that it was the Commission which introduced the export ban in March .
It was the Commission too which proposed the packages of measures which the United Kingdom has to implement , and a proposal is also now before Parliament for improved animal marking and better labelling of meat products .
I do agree with one thing , however : we need much more transparency .
I believe that here too our model , for example the way in which we organized the hormone conference , has been a pointer for how to deal with such questions publicly in the future .
A reform of the advisory committees for agriculture is now imminent , and controls in the health sector have also been proposed , as Mr Santer mentioned .
I believe that the Commission and Parliament need to chart this new course in agriculture policy together .
One thing must be clear : to do this , we first need the expression of confidence which you have given us today and , for my part at least , I shall do all in my power to do that justice .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall be quite brief at the end of this debate , since today I mainly wish to let you know my feelings , which are that there are no miracle solutions , and we must all be aware of that .
However , on the part of the Commission there is a firm political commitment , a wish for transparency and good will .
The challenge which the Commission and Parliament must take up is enormous : we have to invent a European model of public health monitoring and protection .
It is indeed a challenge , because no such model currently exists .
We must all display a spirit of inventiveness and responsibility .
According to my initial understanding of this dossier , we have no more than an embryonic capacity for inspection and control .
I wonder , for example , if there is not a need to revise the inspections mandate .
I am also wondering about the legislative process , since it must result in overall coherence : it is not enough just to transfer the departments of DG VI to DG XXIV .
There are enormous problems to resolve , therefore .
We must get the mix right : we have the ingredients , let us first see if we have enough of them , and then let us turn them into policy - and that will be no easy matter .
Nevertheless , an initial set of measures have been adopted at administrative level .
And , as President Santer rightly said , this is only a first step .
For the rest , we have sketched the broad outlines . We still have to flesh out our proposals and give ourselves the means to implement them - and that is also a challenge .
We have launched an internal audit to determine the scale of the resources needed .
I wish to say that I am entirely prepared to have an initial meeting with you towards the middle of March , as soon as the audit has been completed , that is .
I have no illusions : three weeks from now , my ideas will not be perfectly clear - quite the opposite .
That is why I wish to seek your views on the health monitoring policy that we must put in place .
Then I intend to come back to Parliament in April - before presenting the official communication which Mr Santer referred to - so that we can define together a model that will enable us to rise to the challenges .
Furthermore , it is not only the BSE affair that is at issue : there are a number of other dossiers - to which you have referred - which are receiving our full attention , not to say giving us cause for concern .
There is a legislative problem , ranging from the green paper proposals to the question of product liability - but I shall not list everything .
You are well aware of the dossier 's complexity .
We must summon up all our energy , capacity for invention and sense of responsibility .
Many of you have experience in this field .
I consider it my duty to drawn on everyone 's experience , whether at the level of consumer associations or ministries - as you will already have observed .
Moreover , in my hearing before Parliament two years ago , I was questioned on my responsibilities , but I did not have these responsibilities at the time .
It would therefore be wise for us to agree on an appropriate model of health monitoring and protection for our fellow citizens .
As I said at the beginning of my speech , there are no miracle or overnight solutions , and we must all be aware of that .
We need resources : if we wish to implement policies , we must provide ourselves with the necessary means .
And I am counting on your support in this , because as Mr Böge rightly said , we have a natural alliance .
We still have to make that alliance bear fruit .
Thank you , and , if I understand things correctly , we shall be seeing each other again before long .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have listened very carefully to the numerous speakers in this important debate .
Commissioners Fischler and Bonino have responded to a number of observations and let you know their feelings at this stage .
I do not wish to reopen this debate , which has been extremely dense , but constructive .
I should like to say firstly that you , the Members of the European Parliament , have done your job by presenting and debating the report of the Committee of Inquiry .
And I am able to say with confidence that the Commission will continue to do its job , in the interest of Europe 's citizens .
Like you , I would have wished the Council - which , as an institution , is equally involved in this affair - to take part in this debate .
Over and above its political differences , Parliament as a whole is concerned to ensure that , from now on , considerations of human health are taken more into account in the framing of Community policies .
I share that concern .
I said so earlier , and I indicated the practical measures to be taken in my speech .
As for the Commission , in the light of the committee 's conclusions , it will do everything it considers necessary , in accordance with its institutional prerogatives and its sense of the general European interest .
And I hope that others - for example the European Parliament - will have the courage to break certain taboos when we come to discuss food policy and the future of the CAP .
Mr President , I said in my speech that I wished to assume the responsibility of the College of Commissioners - and I take that word seriously .
I must say to you , in all honesty , that that is what I have been doing at the head of the Commission for the last two years .
All the measures we have taken since the British Government 's announcement of new scientific data last March have been guided by that principle .
There was the decision to introduce a total embargo immediately , despite the vigorous protests of the British Government . And that embargo is still in force .
There was the decision in principle to lift conditionally the embargo on certain derived products , which was taken on the basis of the scientific data available to the Commission at the time .
I would stress , moreover , that that decision was not implemented in practice , for the reasons that Mr Fischler has just given .
And , lastly , there was the proposal for a framework agreement , which was adopted by consensus at the Florence summit . That agreement lays down extremely strict rules for examining any request for the lifting of the embargo , partial or otherwise .
In conclusion , I wish to reiterate - as Mrs Bonino has just done - the Commission 's commitment to cooperating with Parliament , with due regard for our respective competences .
Similarly , I welcome the offer of cooperation that Parliament has made .
That is how I interpret the report presented and debated this afternoon .
As Mrs Bonino just said , the Commission is prepared to keep Parliament regularly informed of the progress of its work .
May some good come from this disaster , and may Europe become a better place to live for its citizens : that , ladies and gentlemen , is my most fervent wish .
Thank you , Mr Santer .
Ladies and gentlemen , with Mr Santer 's speech , the joint debate on the BSE crisis is closed .
The vote on the Medina Ortega report and the eight motions for resolutions will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The vote on the motion of censure will take place on Thursday at 3 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 7.40 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time to the Commission ( B4-0001 / 97 ) .
Question No 44 by Gary Titley ( H-0014 / 97 )
Subject : Failure of Member States to recognize each others ' academic and professional qualifications
A constituent of mine , a highly qualified Modern Languages teacher married to a Frenchman , has found that her qualifications are not recognized by the French authorities .
She has consequently not been able to find appropriate work teaching languages in French schools .
What action is the Commission taking to ensure mutual recognition of language teaching qualifications ?
What comments does the Commissioner have on the French authorities ' approach ?
The Commission is aware of the matter raised by the honourable member .
The Commission 's services have received numerous complaints about the problems encountered in France by teachers coming from other Member States .
As far as teachers are concerned , in fact , the applicable directive is 89 / 48 / EEC , which relates to a general system for the recognition of higher education diplomas gained as a result of professional training courses lasting a minimum of three years .
The basic principle of that directive is that the host Member State must permit a Community citizen to carry on a profession within its territory even if he is not in possession of the national diploma required for that purpose , provided that he is in possession of the diploma required in a different Member State in order to embark upon or carry on the same profession .
This recognition confers upon the migrant worker the right to embark upon or carry on the profession in question on the same conditions as a holder of the national diploma .
When the appointment of teachers takes place by means of a competitive examination - as is the case in France where public education is concerned - recognition authorizes migrants to participate in the competition , though without offering any guarantee that they will be successful .
The French authorities can , furthermore , require migrant teachers to undergo a probationary period on the same conditions as French citizens .
They may not , however , require Community citizens who are already teaching in another Member State to take the French training course in order to earn the diploma required in France .
That is the background , and the conclusion drawn from that background , given the circumstances , is that the Commission has instituted proceedings for infringement against France , pursuant to Article 169 of the Treaty , with regard to its failure to apply to teachers the Community rules on the reciprocal recognition of diplomas .
I am delighted to hear that the Commission is taking action on this matter because the constituent of mine who I referred to has a first-class degree at an English university in French and German , is a fully qualified teacher in the United Kingdom and has a Master of Arts in German .
Her mistake was to marry a Frenchman and go and live in France where she has been refused employment as a teacher despite having considerable experience of teaching .
In fact , the only employment she can get is with French private schools as an animatrice , which is a very low grade of occupation .
So dire has the situation become that this lady is now proposing to return with her baby to the United Kingdom to find work , leaving her husband in France , and intends only joining him during the school holidays .
Forty years of integration have ended up with a divided family despite all the fine words about mutual recognition of qualifications .
I can therefore only urge the Commission to take the most effective and rapid action .
Forty years after the Treaty of Rome it is not good enough that we are dividing families in this way .
I should just like to stress again , after the remarks by the Member of Parliament , that the Commission is making use of the measures provided for by the Treaty .
There are currently two infringement procedures under Article 169 of the Treaty and , if necessary , the Commission would not hesitate to bring the matter before the Court of Justice .
Mr President , I too was very pleased with the Commissioner 's answer .
On a slightly broader point , I wonder if he could say what progress , if any , has been made in bringing professional bodies in other areas together to persuade them to recognize qualifications in each of the Member States .
In particular , there seems to be a problem with university degrees .
Professional bodies , say in the United Kingdom , recognize that a degree in law from a British university goes some way to meeting the professional qualifications for a lawyer but not necessarily a degree in law from a French university .
Perhaps law is not the best example because of the different legal systems .
But it might be the same in architecture or any other profession .
Clearly if the same rights of accreditation are not universal throughout the European Union , this does amount to a restriction on the mobility of labour and harms the single market .
Yes , this is a very general and important question .
I will provide a general answer by saying that this is indeed a key aspect of free movement of people and of effective citizenship in the Union .
We are addressing this sort of problem by combining three facets of action : information , enforcement and finding out whether further legislative action is needed .
Regarding information , you all know the Citizens First programme through which we convey to our citizens effective information on how to work in another Member State of the European Union .
This is useful because it provides citizens with this information , and provides useful feedback about the obstacles they actually encounter .
Regarding infringements , I just mentioned one case vis-à-vis one Member State .
Finally , the third aspect of our action is finding out whether any further legislative action is needed .
May I remind Members of Parliament that the free movement of people falls within the remit of the high-level group shared by Mrs Simone Veil .
Through her help and the help of her colleagues we are finding out whether any further legislative action may be required in this field .
Question No 45 by Per Stenmarck ( H-0044 / 97 )
Subject : Tax-free sales in the EU
In Written Question E-3061 / 96 , I argued that an impact assessment should be carried out before tax-free sales are abolished on ferries operating between EU Member States .
I asked the Commission whether it was prepared to carry out an analysis of various aspects .
The answer given by Commissioner Monti ( 20 January 1997 ) indicates that tax-free sales will be abolished on 30 June 1999 .
No study of the impact this will have on employment , export industries , the price of goods and tourism would be carried out .
Those responsible for taking decisions must spend as much time as possible seeking answers to questions concerning the possible impact of their decisions before actually taking those decisions .
What impact will the abolition of tax-free sales with effect from 30 June 1999 have in the areas referred to above ?
This is a recurring theme , and an important one . The Commission can only confirm its answer to the honourable Member 's written question E-3061 / 96 .
The Commission has to comply with the Council decision abolishing - from 30 June 1999 - duty-free sales within the Union .
The Commission does not consider it appropriate to undertake a study of this matter .
In any case , the Commission regrets that , hitherto , the sector of activity concerned has not taken advantage of the lengthy period available to it to prepare a strategy for adjusting to the abolition of the tax advantage deriving from these sales , even though five years have passed since this decision was adopted .
I may add that the Commission is convinced that , since a study is not necessary , the mere fact of announcing it would send a distorted and inappropriate signal to the industry concerned , which could further delay the adjustments required for that industry to adapt to the decision adopted so many years ago and due to take effect on 30 June 1999 .
Commissioner , I have asked this question and a number of other questions on the same subject in order to ascertain whether we are living up to what we say , and whether we are prepared to accept the logical conclusions of those things we continuously maintain are so important .
When tax free shopping is abolished , there will be consequences , there is no point in closing our eyes to this .
Despite this , we have not undertaken any form of analysis worthy of such a name before taking a decision on the matter .
This is why I am asking that we do this now before the decision comes into force and I think that we should postpone bringing the legislation into force pending this analysis .
We must surely be aware of what we are doing before we do it .
A number of EU Member States have carried out their own analysis of what is likely to happen .
If we weigh it all up together , we are talking about a reduction in income of perhaps 4 million ECUs and approximately 100 000 jobs throughout the EU will disappear .
Even if this figure is an exaggeration , half that figure would still be disastrous , particularly as we are striving to reduce unemployment not increase it .
The question is : Are we prepared to accept these consequences while continuing to maintain elsewhere that we are doing all we can to reduce unemployment ?
I must make it clear to the honourable Member that the decision under discussion is a binding decision , that all the facts relevant for the purposes of taking an informed decision were taken into account at the time , that the existence of intra-community duty-free goods was considered incompatible in principle with a single market , and that , as often happens in economic affairs , while the existence of the duty-free system offers advantages for some there are very serious disadvantages for others : for example , the general retail trade is certainly damaged by the existence of duty-free sales in certain locations .
The duty-free system , for example , distorts competition between modes of transport , and so on .
All these are considerations which were duly taken into account at the time the decisions were taken .
What must be borne in mind is that an unusually long period of adjustment was in fact allowed , which can best be put to use not by conducting and repeating studies of a familiar situation but by the operators concerned working out the necessary adaptations and adjustments which will be required by the new situation , a situation that was announced some while ago .
Mr President , I have a further question concerning the same subject so I am attaching it to Mr Stenmark 's question .
I agree with the Commissioner that this is a matter of principle for the free internal market .
If we follow principles , then tax free shopping must be abolished and not continue to be part of the internal market .
But sometimes reality is in conflict with principles .
Then the question is whether we should stick to our principles or adapt to reality as it stands .
As it happens the Swedish Maritime Authorities have carried out a study which I have here in my hand .
It shows that a large number of jobs will disappear in Sweden in those areas dependent on shipping .
What am I to say , as someone who comes from a port area and who is continuously fighting for employment in Europe and telling my people that the European Union is also active in this area , what am I to say to those who work in the ports if we abolish tax free shopping ?
They will not believe a word I say about tackling unemployment .
In this case I think that we should put aside our principles in favour of reality , in other words , we must accept that employment is the key issue at present for the European Union .
As you know , the great undertaking of constructing the single market has one primary aim : making the European economy more competitive and so benefiting employment .
The reality to which my attention is drawn is a reality in which , today , certain jobs in specific sectors are certainly assisted by the existence of duty-free .
But we have to remember that those jobs have to be set off against the non-existent jobs in other sectors , in other modes of transport , in commerce at large , by which I mean the retail sector , outside the duty-free industry .
So it is precisely the need to have a workable single European market that obliges us to eliminate these distortions that make it less efficient , among which I must certainly include the distortion represented by duty-free sales .
I would also like to point out that , in the case of airports for example , duty-free sales would certainly not be abolished on extra-community flights , and I must emphasize that one of the advantages of the shops and stores that exist at airports , quite apart from the tax advantage , is that they are able to appeal to a public which has time to spare while waiting for a flight and would undoubtedly make purchases even irrespective of the abolition of the tax advantage .
Firstly , I would like to say that I am not a particularly strong supporter of tax free shopping per se , but I am quite concerned about the consequences of abolishing it .
To cite a concrete example : many ferry lines cross the Baltic Sea .
All the shipping companies have problems with profitability and tax free shopping represents a relatively large proportion of the income for these companies .
North of Stockholm , there is only line operating all year round between Sweden and Finland , the line between Umeå and Vasa .
It is very doubtful if this line will even survive if tax free shopping is abolished .
This would break up the close cooperation between these regions which are in otherwise receiving support from the EU via Interreg , support which is particularly allocated to cooperation on lines of communication .
It also means that trucks will have to travel hundreds or perhaps thousands of kilometres further .
Will the Commission be introducing special measures to ensure that important lines of communication , which are already supported by the EU , will survive the abolition of tax free shopping if there are particular reasons to do so ?
This argument is often put forward , namely that tax-free sales constitute a source of funding for transport infrastructures , or for certain forms of transport , in particular through the fees - often quite high - which the operators of sales outlets have to pay in order to pursue their activities within these infrastructures - airports especially , but also others .
As regards tax-free sales on board ferries , for example , there is no doubt that these represent a not inconsiderable part of shipping companies ' revenue , enabling them to offset their running costs and even to maintain unprofitable routes .
Tax-free sales could therefore be regarded as operating subsidies in the transport sector .
The Commission takes the view that if a subsidy is to be provided by the Community in this area , then specific solutions should be sought which are separate from indirect taxation mechanisms .
We are all , I think , in favour of transparency .
If state aid is deemed necessary , it should be requested , evaluated and , if appropriate , authorized as state aid - and not take place in a disguised way , through taxation , in contravention of the principles of the single market .
I will allow Mr Watt to speak , despite the stipulation in the Rules of Procedure that only two persons may put supplementary questions .
Mr Watt , you should know that the Rules of Procedure state that only one or two other Members are entitled to put supplementaries in addition to the author of the question .
The Commissioner referred to the disadvantages of duty-free and he cited a number of areas where be believed there was a negative impact on , for example , the retail sector and the transport sector .
Would the Commissioner make available to this Parliament the studies that back up these assertions ?
I made a number of assertions which are based on a number of elements from several sources accumulated over time .
I confirm that the Commission has no intention of making any further study .
This was , on the other hand , also the position which emerged from recent consideration of this matter at the ECOFIN Council .

Question No 47 , by Mrs Kirsten Jensen , is not called , as the subject is on the agenda for the partsession and will be debated on Friday .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 46 , 47 and 48 lapse .
Mr President , I should like to consult you on a point of order .
Is it possible to take over another Member 's question .
No ?
Very well .
Question No 49 by Mark Watts ( H-1041 / 96 )
Subject : Channel Tunnel safety
The Commission will be aware of the serious fire in the Channel Tunnel on 19 November 1996 .
What action , under Article 75 ( 1 ) ( c ) of the Treaty , ' measures to improve transport safety ' , has the Commission taken with regard to the Channel Tunnel ?
What representations has the Commission made to the UK and French governments concerning safety in the Channel Tunnel , and has any reference been made to the design of the freight wagons ?
Is the Commission concerned that the UK Government refuses to release safety reports on the Channel Tunnel , and will the Council make representations to release this evidence ?
Will the Commission make a statement on the fire in the Channel Tunnel ?
As the honourable Member may recall , I said during the Committee on Transport and Tourism meeting on 18 December that the Commission attaches the greatest importance to maintaining the very highest level of safety that is usual in rail transport .
Clearly safety is a major objective of the common transport policy and it is essential that all forms of rail transport , including the channel tunnel , are at least as safe as conventional rail .
At present the Commission is not aware that there is any evidence to show that relevant Community legislation has been called into question by the accident in the tunnel .
When the results of various investigations become available the issue of Community action might then need to be considered .
Inquiries into accidents which occur during railway operation are , as I think the honourable Member may know , strictly within the legal competence of Member States .
I can , however , inform the House that the recently approved directive on the carriage of dangerous goods by rail specifically allows for higher than normal safety standards in the channel tunnel .
The design of freight wagons is however not a matter for the Commission .
Finally , the Commission is not aware that the United Kingdom has refused to supply information as suggested by the honourable Member .
I am familiar with the honourable Member 's very close and very active interest in all matters relating to the channel tunnel and I will certainly keep him informed of any developments which will be relevant to him .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his comprehensive reply .
I understand that he has done his utmost within his competence as Commissioner to thoroughly oversee this matter where it falls under his responsibility .
But I am sure he would understand my concern when he says he will comment when reports become available .
We are seriously concerned that , for example , the French inquiry report will not be published or made available to the public and indeed , the deliberations of the channel tunnel safety authority will , not necessarily be made fully available , in particular all the background papers that related to the approval of the semiopen wagons which played a key role in causing and spreading the fire .
Could the Commissioner not join with me in pleading with the British Government to open the books in this case and allow the public to judge for themselves whether or not the channel tunnel is safe ?
That means publishing all the documents relating to the channel tunnel safety authority .
Without those , I would submit that we are not able to judge whether or not the tunnel is safe .
Mr President , I am grateful to the honourable gentleman .
I think that the history of inquiry reports into major incidents of the kind that took place in the channel tunnel demonstrates that all authorities , as well as the general public and operators , have the greatest possible vested interest in the maximum openness .
It is the one means that guarantees not only that lessons are learned but that lessons are seen to be learned .
As the author is not present , Question No 50 lapses .
Question No 51 by Nuala Ahern ( H-0023 / 97 )
Subject : Safety of coastal communities from radioactive shipments
At the time of the first shipment of highly radioactive vitrified nuclear waste from France to Japan in 1995 , shipment took place without disclosure of information concerning the route .
On arrival it was discovered that one of the canisters had corroded and was leaking radiation .
With regard to the present shipment of highly radioactive vitrified nuclear waste that left France in January 97 , what responsibility does a Member State ( e.g. France ) have to inform the Commission of the route that is being taken and has France so informed the Commission , and what measures has the Commission taken to inform and safeguard the coastal communities en route in the event of an emergency on board the ship , the Pacific Teal ?
Within the European Union information to Member States and the Commission on the shipment of radioactive waste is ensured through the following two provisions : first , Council Directive 92 / 3 relates to the supervision and control of shipments of radioactive between Member States and into and out of the Community .
It lays down a procedure for ensuring that shipments of radioactive waste take place only after all the states involved have given prior informed consent .
Standard forms and documents for the application of this directive were established by a Commission decision in October 1993 .
Information to the Commission is ensured through reports on the implementation of the directive , which have to be submitted every two years by the Member States .
Second , the information on transport by sea of radioactive materials , including radioactive waste , is also covered by Directive 93 / 75 .
This directive obliges the operators and masters of vessels carrying dangerous or polluting goods to provide the competent authorities of the Member State of destination or of departure with detailed information about the ship 's intended route and cargo .
The Commission does not receive direct information about individual shipments of radioactive material , nor does the Commission have the task of informing coastal states in case of an emergency on board .
The provision of such information is , however , an obligation for the Member State concerned under the directive .
Thank you for your reply , Commissioner , which was quite explicit .
I understand that the Australian Government has been informed of this particular shipment .
Could you confirm or deny that specifically ?
If that is so - and your reply appears to indicate that Member States of the European Union would have prior information and give consent to shipments along their coastal highways and byways - then can you confirm that in the case of shipments along the Channel , the Bay of Biscay , the Irish Sea , the North Sea and the Atlantic coast of the European Union , all the Member States would have been informed of such shipments and would have consented to them ?
Could you confirm that specifically ?
I am grateful to the honourable Member .
If she has particular information relating to Australia , I would be very happy if she were to write to me explicitly about it .
Whilst clearly we do not have competence in this area , we certainly maintain interest .
That would be supplemented by any information she can provide .
On the whole question of transit shipping , a proposal for a Council directive setting up a European ship reporting system - so-called Eurorep - was adopted by the Commission in December 1993 .
It aims at extending the notification requirements of Directive 93 / 75 to all vessels carrying dangerous and polluting goods which are in transit off the European coast and bound for a country outside the European Union .
However , in the absence of a political agreement in Council on the Commission 's text , Eurorep is still on the table before the Council .
The imminent ratification by the Community of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea gives a stronger legal basis to our proposal with regard to international law and hopefully that will allow a re-opening of the discussions within the Community on the proposal .
I look forward to hearing further from the honourable Member .
I should just like to say to Commissioner Kinnock that I will certainly write to him specifically about the Australian information .
But can he tell me whether the Member States along the route have actually given permission for this transit ?
It sounds from his answer that they should have .
Have they actually done so ?
Can he tell us that ?
I will investigate that precise question and provide the honourable Member with the precise answer .
Question No 52 by Florus Wijsenbeek ( H-0030 / 97 )
Subject : Aid to a Walloon transport undertaking
Does the Commission consider it consistent with the objectives pursued as regards both combined transport and equal conditions of competition for the Walloon government to grant aid amounting to Bfrs 200 million to the TTS ( Bierset ) road transport undertaking for the purchase of oversized rolling stock for the transport of motor-vehicle parts from Germany ?
The Commission services first request the Member States concerned to supply full details of the aid within fifteen working days .
If there is no answer or if the answer is incomplete , the Member State is again asked to give detailed information within another fifteen working days and is warned at that point by the Commission that the Commission has the power to issue an injunction .
On the basis of the full information provided in the answer the Commission may decide to raise no objection to the aid or it may decide to raise no objection to the aid or it may decide to open proceedings under Article 93 ( 2 ) because of doubts or because of lack of information .
If the Member State has ignored the request for information , the Commission may issue an injunction to obtain the information .
The injunction may also order the Member State to suspend payment of the aid pending the outcome of the investigation or the injunction can require the Member State to supply the information needed by the Commission to take a decision on the case .
That was the best non-answer I have ever received from the Commission .
The procedures are well known to me .
I brought this matter to the Commission 's attention especially and gave the information needed on what has happened because I would like the Commission to take a position and to tell us , as Members of Parliament , if it agrees with this kind of state subsidy or not .
If it does not it should take immediate measures .
So I would like to have the Commissioner 's view on whether or not he deems this kind of support to be valid .
The Commission was not aware of the existence of such financing but it sent a request for information to the Belgian authorities in order to establish whether there could be an unnotified state aid .
It is difficult to accept that in providing a full and factual answer on the whole procedure of state aids , the Commission should be accused of providing non-answers .
Accurate , truthful information is accurate truthful information .
Question No 53 by Sören Wibe ( H-0043 / 97 )
Subject : Construction of the Bothnia line in northern Sweden
The Swedish government recently decided to build a new railway , the first stage of which is to run from Sundsvall to Umeå .
The railway will improve access to northern Sweden and in future provide a link between northern Sweden and northern Finland .
In the long term , a link is also planned into the Murmansk region .
Might Sweden be eligible for EU support for the construction of this railway and , if so , from which part of the EU budget could such support be sought ?
The Bothnia line is not presently included in the trans-European transport network and its inclusion was not requested by Parliament or by the Council during the procedure for the adoption of the trans-European network guidelines .
As it is not considered as a project of common interest within the terms of the legislation it cannot benefit from financial support under the trans-European networks budget .
Furthermore , as regional funds covering this area do not include transport infrastructure and the funds available bear no relation to the likely cost of the project , they cannot be used to co-finance the project either .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his answer even if it was rather negative .
This concerns a railway line which lies a long way from here , perhaps 2 000 kilometres or more .
It is however an extremely important line for the region involved , particularly for the transport of goods .
I do not understand the Commissioner when he says that this has nothing to do with our common interest .
This is a line which will quite obviously be used to link Northern Sweden and Northern Finland , and also North Western Russia at a later date , with the other European railway networks .
The fact that it is not included in current plans is simply because the decision to build it was only taken quite recently .
My next obvious question to Mr. Kinnock is whether it is totally out of the question to include this extremely important line ex post facto in the Transeuropean Railway Network .
I am grateful to the honourable Member .
Firstly , the idea of including the Bothnia line in the transEuropean networks is not - to use Mr Wibe 's phrase - ruled out , simply because there has to be a revision of the guidelines in 1999 .
I would also point out to him that in order for any project to be considered for inclusion in the trans-European network , and therefore liable to be supported from the budget , it has to have the support or nomination of a Member State government .
If the Bothnia line is not in the trans-European network proposal , it is firstly because it has not been nominated by a Member State , secondly because it was not included at the point of its parliamentary consideration and thirdly because on further consideration the Council did not include it .
If there is a proposition from the Swedish Government and if the proper procedures are followed it is possible that the line could be included .
But that is entirely up to the initiative of the Member State .
Question No 54 by Hans Lindqvist ( H-0047 / 97 )
Subject : Scandinavian Express Loop
The prospects for improving links between a number of Swedish and Norwegian towns and cities by rail are currently being discussed in Sweden and Norway .
The project , provisionally named the Scandinavian Express Loop , will establish a Stockholm-Östersund-Trondheim-Oslo-Stockholm rail loop .
It also incorporates the Atlantbanan line , which was the subject of earlier discussions .
The lines already exist but require upgrading to take express trains .
What prospects does the Commission see for EU financial support being made available for this project ?
The Atlantbanan line is included in Annex I of the Decision on Community guidelines for the development of the trans-European transport network as a project of common interest .
The southern section of the line is also included , as the honourable Member will know , in the Nordic Triangle , which is one of the fourteen priority projects endorsed at the Essen European Council and in the legal decision that has been presented to and accepted by this Parliament .
The line is one of the components of the ambitious project called the Scandinavian Express Loop .
As a project of common interest , the Swedish part of the line could benefit from Community financial support under the TEN budget line but as yet the national authorities concerned have not requested any Community contribution .
On the basis of the information available , it does not appear that other Community funds could be used for funding this project .
It seems indeed that the Swedish part of the line is going to be totally financed by the national railway infrastructure authority , the Banverket .
Thank you for your response , it was not as bad as I thought .
It means that the planning process which is already underway between Sweden and Norway can continue , which perhaps would not otherwise have been the case .
Irrespective of this , it is important that the line is included in that part of the planning process which allocates funds .
It is a line which will go in a circle from Stockholm , to Östersund , then towards Norway across Trondheim and then to Oslo and back to Stockholm .
My next question to the Commissioner is : What else does the Swedish government have to do to further its request for sufficient funds for this line ?
Is it possible to approach Norway for funds , over and above the Interreg cooperation which exists between the countries and which already includes this line , to push this project forward ?
I regret to say that as a result of the decision of the Norwegian people , that country is not in the European Union .
Consequently there is no call we can make upon Norway so far as complementary development of infrastructure is concerned , even though I know that the good relationships between Norway and other countries does mean that there are joint attitudes in policy insofar as infrastructure is concerned .
But unfortunately , as a result of the outcome of the referendum , giving positive messages to that country is not part of the Commission 's function .
So far as support from the TENs funds is concerned , the step that would have to be taken , as I pointed out in an earlier answer , is for the Swedish Government to make an application .
This would have to receive due consideration .
But because this particular project is recognized as being one of common interest , depending upon its maturity , the chances of its getting financial support from the Community would be at least as favourable as for comparable projects .
Is there any possibility of including projects of transnational importance of this kind in the trans-European networks ?
If so , how should the two governments concerned act upon that ?
Presumably , as I am certain Mr Wijsenbeek knows , they should act positively and collectively , because of the terms of the provisions that exist under the current legislation , because of the need for a revision in 1999 , because of the fact that these projects by definition have long planning and development periods .
I hope that we can embrace projects of real trans-European value more widely in a future period than we can at the present time .
Consequently I hope that Member State governments will bear in mind their responsibility for making initial proposals and do so in the context of the existing legislation and the nature of the trans-European network priority projects and , indeed , the whole philosophy of the network scheme .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 55 , 56 57 lapse .


Question No 58 by Birgitta Ahlqvist ( H-0032 / 97 )
Subject : ' Learning in the information society : action plan for a European education initiative '
This action plan ( COM ( 96 ) 0471 ) is a welcome initiative on the Commission 's part , but it should nonetheless be stressed that certain important considerations are simply ignored .
There is no provision for handicapped people , although the latter surely count as major beneficiaries of the information society , given that new data processing technology allows the limitations imposed by certain handicaps to be reduced or even eliminated completely .
With the end of the HELIOS programme , the Commission undertook to integrate the programme 's objectives into all its policies .
Would it not therefore be possible find a place ( with appropriate budgetary funding ) for the handicapped within the action plan in question ?
The action plan for a European education initiative relates to primary and secondary education .
Therefore , it includes as a target group all pupils attending schools at these levels , including handicapped children .
It is clear that the new information and communications technologies , adapted for educational purposes , can make an effective contribution to the learning process for handicapped pupils , in particular those who have physical difficulties in attending school , but also those with cognitive difficulties .
The implementation of the action plan is based on the use of existing programmes , such as Esprit , Telematics , Leonardo da Vinci and , above all , Socrates , within the framework of the corresponding decisions , procedures and budgets .
As regards Socrates , the European Parliament and Council decision adopting this programme provides for the special needs of the handicapped to be taken into account within its various sections .
In keeping with the new Community strategy on handicaps , adopted by the Commission in its communication of 30 July 1996 , and in particular its concept of mainstreaming , and in view of the Council resolution of 20 December 1996 on equality of opportunity for handicapped persons , the implementation of the action plan for a European education initiative will certainly incorporate the needs of the handicapped .
This aspect will also be taken into account in the follow-up to the Green Paper on the social aspects of the information society .
I am very grateful that I am here and able to receive this answer .
Mrs Ahlqvist is lying in bed with a temperature some 2 000 kilometres from here .
She is very sorry that she cannot be present .
What she wanted to say on this matter is that she cannot find any measures for the handicapped in what is otherwise a good action plan for a European initiative on education .
I am grateful for the response to this question .
I think that Commissioner Cresson has really demonstrated a willingness to embrace the opportunities for the handicapped created by new technology .
The physically handicapped will be able to improve their prospects for increased mobility on the labour market and the mentally handicapped can have a totally different form of contact with the world around them .
I hope now that , during the tendering process for this plan , we will make good use of the fact that by including these aspects early on in the purchase negotiations we can adapt this technology at reasonable cost for use by the handicapped .
Yes indeed , and what is more we encourage any progress that can be made in this field .
There are computer systems for blind people , for example , which enable them to write in braille .
Likewise , there are various systems for people who are unable to move ; these aids to communication are becoming more and more powerful .
I am therefore absolutely convinced , as you say , that in the context of the Commission 's procedures and the overall objectives of the texts to which I referred a moment ago , we shall be able to make significant and satisfactory progress towards increasing the involvement of the handicapped in information networks and knowledge systems .
Of course , there is always room for more progress , and research projects must be mounted as well .
In the field of educational software , for instance , where we have a small unit which has begun work , very specific solutions can indeed be found for these different categories of people , because there is not just one form of handicap .
Question No 59 by Joan Vallvé ( H-0034 / 97 )
Subject : Implementation of the Socrates Programme
In February 1996 I asked the Commission whether Recital 11 of the Decision on the Socrates programme - on the possibility of including certain languages which , without being official EU languages , are recognized at national level and are used to a significant extent as teaching languages in universities , as is the case of Catalan - could be mentioned in the 1996 handbook for applicants to the programme . The Commission replied that the recital could be expressly mentioned in the 1997 handbook for applicants .
Has the Commission taken the necessary steps to this end , bearing in mind that this would enable the provisions of the Decision on the Socrates programme and the Reding report adopted by the EP in December 1990 on languages in the Community and the situation of Catalan to be better applied ?
As regards the implementation of the Socrates programme , the Commission wishes handbooks for applicants to Community programmes to be explicit and straightforward .
The present text of the 1997 Socrates handbook refers to teaching languages in the participating countries , without specifying these languages .
The Commission 's services are currently taking the necessary steps to ensure that - in addition to the 11 official languages of the European Union - the 1998 handbook will expressly mention other languages such as Catalan , Galician and Basque , with a view to promoting cooperation between universities .
In any event , the absence of this explicit reference up to now has not prevented the Catalonian universities from taking a very active part in the various schemes under the Socrates programme . For example , they have sent 3000 students on placements abroad , and have received the same number of students from universities in other Member States .
I am very satisfied with that reply .
I am speaking French in order to make myself understood more directly .
I certainly hope that your promise , namely that the 1998 handbook will make reference to what was established in recital 11 of the Socrates programme , will have a better chance of being kept than the reply which you gave me approximately a year ago , in February 1996 , when you made a similar promise to me that the 1997 handbook would include that reference , whereas it does not .
I hope that the matter will be taken seriously this time , and that in 1998 the handbook for applicants will expressly mention the Catalan language . This will be in keeping with Mrs Reding 's resolution , which we adopted in 1990 .
Yes , Mr Vallvé , I can definitely promise that the next handbook will indeed refer to the various languages I have just mentioned - Catalan in particular , but others too .
Mr President , I have two brief supplementaries to put to the Commissioner .
Firstly , would it be possible for there to be a survey across all the programmes within your remit which take account of Parliament 's concerns about minority languages ?
After all , this issue affects a very large number of people in the European Union .
Catalan can hardly be called a minority language ; it is one of the more widely used languages .
Secondly , we have approved the supplementary protocols to the association agreements which allow Socrates and other similar programmes to be extended to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
I was the rapporteur on this , and I should like to ask the Commissioner to what extent the protocols have now been implemented , and with what degree of success .
What I can say is that it is difficult for me , here and now , to give you a list of the places or circumstances in which minority languages are taken into consideration .
However , if you wish , I could send you such a list in writing .
As regards the extension of Socrates to the CCEE , this initiative is still in its infancy ; it is being developed and satisfactory progress is being made , naturally at an appropriate pace .
Many students from the CCEE are coming to our universities .
Conversely , a number of students from the European Union are going to universities in the CCEE .
However , we are still in the very early stages of these initiatives , which will be able to benefit to some extent from various programmes , most notably Phare .
Question No 60 by Hubert Pirker ( H-0036 / 97 )
Subject : Leonardo Programme
What measures will the Commission take to dismantle the barriers that hinder EU-wide exchanges of trainees and instructors ( teachers and instructors in undertakings ) within the framework of the Leonardo training and mobility programme ?
As far as the Leonardo programme is concerned , there are a number of barriers - since this is your question - affecting the transnational mobility of young people and their instructors .
That is why the Commission published in 1996 a Green Paper on obstacles to transnational mobility in education , training and research , with a view to provoking a wide-ranging public debate and devising courses of action to remove these barriers .
Broadly speaking , we can identify two types of barrier which are hindering placements and exchanges under the Leonardo programme .
Firstly , there is the legal status of trainees and the question of the transparency and recognition of vocational diplomas .
The fact that the right of residence for EU citizens in another country , without a residence permit , is currently limited to three months represents a barrier to mobility , in the sense that priority should be given to longer placements , which are of course more worthwhile and of greater value to the young people concerned .
For this reason , the Commission is to make proposals with a view to improving the conditions relating to the right of residence , social security and taxation .
As for promoting the recognition of vocational diplomas throughout the Community - by implementing the 1985 Council decision on the equivalence of vocational diplomas - the lack of any real progress in this field is , to my mind , extremely worrying , and I entirely share your concerns .
The Leonardo programme is helping to improve the conditions for greater transparency and the recognition of diplomas , in that transnational placements and exchanges organized under this programme must be validated and certified .
Leonardo is thus fully playing its role as an innovative experiment , which will enable us to announce a specific proposal on the form of the European status of trainee .
I must confess that this problem is an extremely complex one , however : it is much more difficult for young people to move around the European Union than for goods and capital , even though Europe came into being for the sake of its citizens .
Many problems are being encountered in connection with Leonardo and trainees , but also with students and , for example , unemployed youngsters who no longer receive their benefits if they go abroad ; there is the barrier of low wages being paid , the problems of young people who go to another country on placement , and those of young researchers - all these are very widespread problems .
I think that Parliament should indeed lend its full support to the fact that the mobility of our citizens , and in particular of young people , is absolutely crucial for developing an awareness of European citizenship .
Many obstacles are also being encountered because these problems are horizontal ones which involve several ministries within a government : employment , social affairs , sometimes home affairs , and in certain cases education .
It is therefore very difficult to persuade the Member States to accept satisfactory measures .
If we wish to make the status of trainee something worthwhile , if we wish split-site training courses to become a kind of Erasmus for trainees , which is our aim , it is clear that we shall all have to pull our weight , and I am relying heavily on Parliament in this matter , which really is a crucial one in terms of an education policy for the people of Europe .
Thank you for your comments , Mrs Cresson .
I see in practice the extent of the problems involved in implementing the excellent Leonardo programme .
However , I think it is extremely important that every possible resource should be harnessed to allow the transfer of innovation , to facilitate mobility , further training and education for trainees , because this measure also has the potential to prevent unemployment - and that is such a serious problem for us .
I am glad , therefore , that there is a commitment to act , and that you too realize where the problems are .
I am also aware of some additional problems , because in practice it is difficult even to set up an exchange of information between companies which are prepared to participate in the mobility programme , to organize exchanges of trainees and instructors between one country and another .
In practice , I also encounter major problems on the question of whether to count the exchange period as holiday time or as part of a period of training .
Can you see any possible means of removing these additional barriers too ?
I think that the problem you are raising - if I have understood correctly - is that of recognition by companies of the period of time spent , and the work done , by a trainee in another Member State of the Union .
It is clear that the problem of accrediting skills is a very topical one , and that it does not relate only to traineeships .
The question is how to assess the equivalence between vocational levels within one occupation in different countries .
We are currently working on this issue .
If you have had an opportunity to read the White Paper on education , on the learning society , you will have seen that we are seeking to establish skill accreditation schemes with different occupational groups .
For example , we are working with the European Banking Union , and a number of other professional associations , to obtain recognition of knowledge acquired not only by trainees during their initial training , but also throughout the lifetime of a worker or employee who wishes to work in another Member State , to enable that person 's level of skills to be assessed correctly , even if he completed his education many years earlier .
So we are starting to explore this whole issue , which affects traineeships but also lifelong learning for workers .
Question No 61 by Marie-Paule Kestelijn-Sierens ( H-0037 / 97 )
Subject : Importance of clinical research at European level with a view to determining a therapeutic strategy for treatment
Independent clinical research at European level with a view to determining a strategy for treatment is an important contribution towards optimizing the treatment of cancer and other diseases which require a multidisciplinary approach .
Does the Commission have any plans to include such research in the Fifth Framework Programme on Research and Development ?
Is the Commission prepared to encourage Member States to simplify national statutory obligations - which often differ quite remarkably - in respect of this clinical research and to bring them more into line in the interests of progress in treatment ?
As far as clinical trials at European level are concerned , since research on cancer - as well as several other diseases - requires a multidisciplinary approach , it stands to benefit in particular from research carried out through multi-centre clinical trials in Europe .
Such trials have , therefore , always played a major role in the Union 's medical research programmes .
Multi-centre clinical trials should continue to represent an important aspect of medical research activity under the fifth framework programme .
They should be included both in the key action on viral and infectious diseases and in the research work on the treatment of degenerative illnesses , provided for in the programme on discovering the resources of living beings and the ecosystem , one of the six major programmes set to constitute the fifth framework programme , as outlined in the communication adopted by the Commission on 12 February .
The problem of harmonizing the rules on clinical research in the Member States is different in the case of drug trials from that of trials involving other treatments , such as surgery , radiation therapy or the various combinations of these methods which are widely used in treating cancer .
The provisions in the field of drug trials are harmonized at Community level as part of the rules on the marketing of drugs , for which the Community is formally competent .
That is not the case for other types of clinical trials , which the Member States are responsible for regulating .
Since the Commission cannot intervene directly here , all it can do in this case is encourage the Member States to align their respective rules in the context of cooperative research work on cancer and other serious diseases ; the Commission provides a good deal of support for such work through the framework programme .
Thank you , Mr President , and thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
I asked this question on behalf of the European organization for cancer research and treatment , a European body based in Brussels which organizes clinical research into cancer .
Clinical research is essential for determining the most efficient and up-to-date treatment for cancer , and not only benefits patients but also offers the prospect of making cancer treatment cost-effective .
It is thus an important and valuable method both from the medical point of view and also in public health terms , which is why I think - and I am grateful to the Commissioner for acknowledging this - that it should have a place in the Framework Programme on Research and Development .
As far as the differences in legislation in the Member States are concerned , I agree that all the Commission can do is to encourage the Member States to bring their legislation into line , and I look to the Commission to put this into practice .
Yes , indeed .
In fact , I am familiar with the organization to which you refer , whose work is extremely intensive and worthwhile .
Ethical assessment of clinical trials is governed by different laws or regulations in each country , and it is true that this area falls within national competence .
What I would point out , in an attempt to move our thinking forward in this area , is that an international conference on clinical trials and ethics is to be held in Brussels on 9 and 10 September 1997 .
It will deal in particular with problems linked to the ethical assessment of research protocols for clinical trials .
Moreover , under the research programme on biomedicine and health , and with specific regard to the ethical , social and legal aspects of medical research , researchers have been invited to submit projects on this topic .
I think that an international conference of this kind , which will undoubtedly attract a large audience , will - if successful - enable organizations like the very active one you have mentioned to persuade the Member States ' governments that harmonization is absolutely vital , if adequate exchanges of information are to take place .


Questions Nos 62 , 63 and 64 will receive written answers .
Question No 65 by Ioannis Theonas ( H-0909 / 96 )
Subject : Steady decline in the iron and steel sector in Greece , and notably Chalivourgiki Ltd
The economic crisis has had a particularly damaging effect on the iron and steel sector in Greece where production and the workforce have been steadily declining .
Following the accession of Greece to the ECSC the only two blast furnaces in Greece which belonged to Chalivourgiki Ltd have closed , followed by the company 's electric furnaces , the iron production section has been put on shiftwork and now the reinforced concrete sector is also closing , resulting in the loss of more than 2500 jobs .
Will the Commission say whether it intends to take special measures to maintain and develop the iron and steel sector in Greece and particularly the steel industry which faces extinction and to maintain employment , and to examine whether the employers who are reported to maintain similar industries in Wales and Switzerland are guilty of illegal practices ?
Mr President , the restructuring of the steel industry is a process that requires the industry to adapt continually to technologies and markets , and the Commission has been monitoring that process for many years already .
Of course , the task is one for the industry itself in the first instance , but obviously a range of accompanying measures is needed , including in particular social measures , measures in relation to external trade policy and also , where necessary , programmes to generate new employment .
We agreed with the industry two years ago that we had an overcapacity of some 19 million tonnes of hot-rolled steel .
Since then , capacity has been reduced by around 11 million tonnes , and a further 5 million tonnes are still to be shed .
This means that although we have not achieved the capacity that we and the industry judged to be appropriate , the removal of the overcapacity has had a positive effect on the remaining operators in the industry .
There have been no more job cuts , and today the industry is operating , by and large , at a satisfactory level in terms of prices and volumes .
This may not be true of each individual company , and in the particular case of the Greek steel industry , it may well be that certain companies face more serious problems than those experienced by companies in other Member States .
We will naturally help in such cases , and we are already looking at conversion to other possible forms of production through the RESIDER II programme .
At the request of the Greek Government , and by the unanimous decision of the Industry Council , we have created the possibility , under the new rules for steel subsidies , of extending regional aid to help the Greek steel industry with ECU 50 million up to the year 2000 , subject of course to the condition that this will not entail any increase in production capacity .
As regards the illegal practices that were referred to in the question , it would be helpful if the accusation could be rather more specific .
The fact is that in many of these cases of illegal practice , we are simply talking about a more competitive industry in another Member State or - from my own experience - in a third country such as Switzerland .
Illegal practices are not always involved : often it is simply a case of a competitor performing better than the local industry in the home country , and it is difficult for the Commission to offer help in such a case .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his reply .
I think that it simply confirms what stands out clearly from the question , namely that the very serious difficulties that the Chalivourgiki undertaking in Greece has been faced with stem from the policy of the European Union - formerly of the EEC , but now of the European Union - to cut production in the Union .
This policy has had a particularly damaging effect in my country , and the problems that it has caused for the country 's only undertaking in the sector are leading to a gradual shutdown of the industry and the loss of thousands of jobs .
Now , however , this undertaking is swiftly being converted from a production company to a trading company , at the very time when huge projects are under way in Greece for which iron , at least , is needed ; iron that is now being imported from Turkey .
I would therefore like the Commission to take note of the consequences of that policy and also of the fact that the undertaking in question , while claiming that it faces problems of competitiveness , is moving to other countries - to Switzerland and Wales , and even to the United States - and starting up operations there .
The supplementary question introduces nothing new .
I have already explained that we began by agreeing with the industry , including the Greek industry , that we had 19 million tonnes of overcapacity .
Overcapacity causes problems .
It puts pressure on prices .
Even extremely competitive companies were recording losses .
Four years ago , virtually no one was still earning enough to cover their costs .
Therefore , our main problem was how to eliminate the excess capacity .
We did not decide where capacity reductions were to take place .
The Commission did not take it upon itself to say that this or that amount of capacity had to be cut in Greece or France or Germany .
The industry itself made those decisions , on the basis of competitiveness .
I am sorry if the Greek steel industry in particular was not sufficiently competitive in this respect to withstand the competition from other countries , but if it is the task of the Commission to see that the same conditions apply throughout the Union , then obviously it cannot make exceptions .
We cannot allow state subsidies in Greece just because the steel industry there wishes to maintain jobs .
If we did so , jobs in the UK , France or Germany would have to be lost .
We have an overall responsibility .
We take that responsibility seriously , and it is up to each company to see that it remains competitive .
I cannot make any special allowances for a Greek company .
Question No 66 by Caroline Jackson ( H-1039 / 96 )
Subject : Food additives and public information
Article 8 of Directive 94 / 36 / EC states that the Commission will undertake a programme of public information so that the significance of the most frequently used E-numbers , indicating the presence of particular additives , will be better known .
Mr Bangemann stated in July 1996 that a study on this subject had been completed .
What has happened to it , and what does the Commission plan to do next on this subject ?
I know that Mrs Jackson is right - indeed she is always right .
And she is quite right to ask why we have not yet begun this programme of consumer information .
According to the terms of the directive that we adopted , we should have started it last year .
The problem is - and I really would ask Mrs Jackson to bear with me here - that implementing this type of consumer information campaign in this particular area is an extraordinarily complex task .
Because we did not want to get it wrong , we commissioned an agency to tell us , on the basis of a study , how to set about the task and where to begin .
The study - which Mrs Jackson may already have , and I should be glad to give her a copy of it if she does not - comes to the very conclusion that we ourselves had feared : it is not clear how to put this information across to consumers .
There are a variety of additives .
Consumers understand why some of them are there , but in the case of others they do not understand at all .
Let us take the question of colourings , for example .
Colourings , which are permitted - not least by decisions of Parliament , I would add - are generally seen by consumers as completely unnecessary .
They want to know why foodstuffs need to be coloured .
Or let us take the question of perishability .
It may be possible to explain perishability to consumers , but their response will be : ' Very well , if a product is perishable , then that must be indicated .
I do not want any additives to make it keep longer . '
In other words , we face the problem that it is impossible in practical terms to explain to consumers the decisions that we have jointly taken and consider to be sensible .
That is the situation , and we cannot change it .
Of course , we do have the option of cutting everything out , allowing no more colourings , no more preservatives or similar substances .
That would push prices up substantially , for example in relation to perishability .
Consumers would have to pay significantly more , and I am sure they would not like that any better .
To put it another way : the study that we commissioned gave us no useful indication of how to proceed , or of what strategy we need for implementing this .
That is the problem in a nutshell , Mrs Jackson .
I hope you can advise me .
I do not know what to do .
It sounds as if I could get two salaries here - one as a Commissioner and one as a Member of the European Parliament .
Technically speaking , would the Commissioner not agree that the Commission is in breach of the law .
Under Article 8 of Directive 94 / 36 , it is stated quite clearly that the Commission will undertake a programme of public information .
The Commissioner 's answer says this is all too difficult .
I would like to ask him if he will bring forward a plan by the end of 1997 on this ?
Will he give us an undertaking that he will bring forward a proposal for a campaign of public information by the end of 1997 and whether in doing so he will undertake to consult with consumer organizations as to the inclusion in such a campaign of better information to consumers regarding the most frequently used food additives ?
The Commissioner seems at a complete loss having received the report of the agency which the Commission itself commissioned .
It is really no good for the Commissioner simply to hand this question back to me and say he does not know what to do , that it is all too difficult .
There is a legal requirement on the Commission to do something .
I do not deny that there is a legal requirement .
By the way , Article 8 says that the Commission has to launch a campaign in conjunction with consumer bodies , the European Parliament , the Member States and the food and retail industries in order to inform consumers about the evaluation and authorization process of food additives .
We are trying to do that .
Because we did not know how to approach the problem we looked for advice from professional people and they cited things that Member States had done and which had been a complete mess .
I do not want to start a programme - even if I am obliged to do so and I do not deny the obligation - in a way which wastes taxpayers ' money .
That is the reason why we looked for advice .
Of course I can launch the thing tomorrow .
That is possible but I am not sure whether it would be a success .
Therefore the Commission has offered all the parties mentioned here - Member States , food and retail industries and especially consumer organizations - to discuss the outcome of that study and to seek a way to solve the problem .
I can promise you that we are ready to start at any time but I want to start with something which is reasonable .
It is easy to be an activist .
It is not so easy to be rational and to try to achieve something .
At the beginning of my political career I was an activist because that paid off but at the end of a political career you feel you should do things in a more reasoned way .
Question No 67 by Alan Donnelly ( H-1043 / 96 )
Subject : Organizations representing Internet service providers
Following the Commission 's progress in releasing draft legislation on various issues concerning the Internet , does the Commission not feel it essential to support the industry itself by assisting in bringing together organizations representing Internet service providers in the Member States of the EU and throughout the rest of Europe ?
Mr President , what Mr Donnelly says is quite right : not only in the case of the Internet but also with regard to other infrastructures , we shall only succeed when providers of content , and particularly service providers , assume their proper role .
The problem of making contact with this industry arises from the fact that it does not yet present a uniform front in the way that the hardware producers or operators do , for example .
These sectors have been organized for some time .
They know what they want , and they have established relationships with the Commission .
This is not yet the case with the service providers .
However , they are in the process of becoming organized .
Only last week , I held a two-day conference with the major service providers to establish just what sort of conditions will have to be created to facilitate the provision of this type of service .
However , this was merely a first informal contact , and we need further formal contacts .
We have set up a working party consisting of representatives of the Member States , net operators and suppliers of equipment and software , as well as Internet service providers and other providers of content .
The report of the working party was mentioned positively in the Council decision of 28 November .
This will enable us to establish an initial framework , and we shall then reconvene the working party .
I cannot tell you anything more at present .
However , Mr Donnelly was quite right in saying that we need additional formal contacts in this area , and in particular contacts with the European Parliament .
I hope that when we are in a position to submit the report that we are preparing on illegal and harmful content , the House will have an opportunity of saying more on these issues , in particular self-monitoring , liability , filter technology , evaluation systems , etc .
The German Government has also offered to hold a conference on these questions in the summer .
The Commission is cooperating with the German Government , so that we can use this conference to evaluate ideas on how to solve this problem .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for his answer and the fact that progress has been made in recent weeks in informally contacting service providers .
But I would draw three things to his attention .
First of all , we have always identified the area for creating jobs in the information society as being through the service providers .
Secondly , we accept that when we try to deal with small- and medium-sized enterprises in the traditional sector we always say it is very difficult to contact them .
That leads me to the third point .
Since this is an emerging market , surely we should try now to find national networks of service providers so that we can actually have a dialogue with them .
The United Kingdom has a very efficient network of service providers .
It has offered to act as a focal point .
I would like to ask the Commissioner whether , with the help of the European Parliament , we could try , perhaps before the summer recess , to organize a further meeting with these people , using the UK as a focal point for it ?
I have no hesitation about organizing such a working conference together with the European Parliament in order to look at the experience in Great Britain .
I know also from my own experience , thanks to invitations from active Members of Parliament - I did not say Labour Members of Parliament , I said active Members of Parliament - that in Great Britain there is very positive activity in this field .
So I am more than ready to do that , even before the British elections .
Aid to rail , road and inland waterway transport
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0011 / 97 ) from the Committee on Transport and Tourism , concerning the common position of the Council ( C4-0584 / 96-95 / 0204 ( SYN ) ) with a view to adopting a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 1107 / 70 on the granting of aid to rail , road and inland waterway transport ( rapporteur : Mr Tamino ) .
Mr President , I should like to remind the House , briefly , that this is a document which the Commission drew up back in July 1995 and whose purpose was to extend Regulation 1107 of 1970 , on the granting of aids for combined transport by rail , road and inland waterway , to the years 1996 and 1997 .
That document highlighted the urgent need to grant this extension at short notice and explained the reason for which the aid in question was still needed .
I would also recall that it was stated in that document that transport prices reflect social costs , which in fact was detrimental to combined transport by comparison with road transport , thus resulting in the urgent need to extend the mechanism for providing support to the intermodal services .
The document , then , highlighted the necessity for these aids .
Parliament , first in the Committee on Transport and Tourism and then in plenary session , in fact agreed that it was a matter of urgency to try to reach approval on this proposal for a regulation : in fact , at the end of 1995 the Transport Committee approved a proposal , with various amendments , which were accepted in February 1996 by a plenary sitting of the European Parliament .
The amendments that were made on that occasion related especially to certain aspects : the need to encourage more environmentally compatible transport systems and to highlight the fact that a financial equilibrium between the various modes of transport had not yet been achieved .
These two amendments were incorporated into the joint proposal , but other amendments which I as the rapporteur had tabled and which I believed to be of significant importance , were not incorporated , in particular one which endeavoured to highlight on the unique aspects of transport through mountainous areas , as in the case of the Alps , though these problems are well known .
This amendment was not incorporated into the joint proposal ; nor , more significantly , were those amendments which related to the problem of whether to delete or retain Article 4 of Regulation 1107 of 1970 .
Before coming to the subject of that Article 4 , there is one preliminary comment I should like to make .
In view of the genuine urgency , and in view of the very quick decision taken by the European Parliament , we found ourselves discussing that provision again a year later - at the beginning of 1997 , in other words , when the objective was to extend the period to include 1996 and 1997 .
That , I must admit , is somewhat perplexing , and I wonder today what purpose is served by an extension until 1997 only .
Are we sure that we should not , in fact , extend it beyond 1997 ?
Now , it is in this context that the problem of whether or not to retain Article 4 arises .
Although it is true , as has been stated , that Directive 91 / 440 caused Article 4 to lapse de facto , it is also true that Article 4 relates to aspects which do make these aids to the combined transport system possible .
Eliminating Article 4 of Regulation 1107 of 1970 - without having replaced it with a different provision - in fact makes it difficult if not impossible to continue with those aids in the near future .
On the other hand , it was the Commission itself which pointed out that financial equilibrium had not yet been achieved , though without it it would not be possible to encourage more environmentally compatible systems .
The question I ask myself , therefore , is whether it may not be necessary for the Commission to identify a line of action which would enable us to achieve that objective .
In this situation , the Committee on Transport did not find it appropriate to accept the amendments which I had tabled : as a result , we come to this House with a provision like that proposed by the Commission .
I favour this provision , but I felt it appropriate , specifically in order to prompt an answer from the Commission , to reintroduce certain amendments , in particular in order to understand what procedure is envisaged in the near future regarding aids to the combined system .
Mr President , my group is happy to comply with the Commission 's urgent request to approve the common position .
The scheme in question must be extended as soon as possible , otherwise the 1996-97 period which it is intended to cover will have elapsed altogether .
We shall not on this occasion be supporting the amendments which the rapporteur is insisting on putting forward , for reasons he has just explained , though we agree with them in principle and voted for them at first reading .
Combined transport must move forward , quite literally , for reasons which everyone knows and which have been repeated on various occasions .
We and the rapporteur can be happy in the knowledge that the Commission and the Council seem to be agreed on this .
Anyone who has read the Commission communication on an action programme for combined goods transport - Pact 2 - and anyone who recalls what the White Paper on railways had to say , cannot but give their wholehearted support to an active policy in this field .
Then there is also the fact that we always tend to think of road-rail when we talk about combined transport , and overlook inland waterway transport .
We cannot emphasize too strongly that a high-quality and efficient fleet of inland waterway vessels could provide much more environmentally-friendly transport than at present , without excessive cost or investment .
In conclusion , following on from some of the comments made by the rapporteur , I should like to ask the Commissioner when we are likely to see a complete revision of Regulation No 1107 / 70 .
Extending existing arrangements with retroactive effect is a sloppy way to go about things , and should be avoided as much as possible in future .
And in view of the Commission communication on Pact 2 , we might also ask if it would not be more convenient to bring all forms of aid for combined transport under one system , and whether the revision of Regulation 1107 / 70 could not mark the start of this .
It might actually be a good deal easier than we think to make the situation more transparent .
On behalf of the European People 's Party I would like to welcome the Commission proposal and , indeed , the Commissioner here this evening , and congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Tamino , on his treatment of this proposal .
The Regulation 1107 / 70 , as amended in 1992 , sets out the mechanism for aid for combined transport for last year and this year so it is indeed timely that , in the month of February , we are nonetheless looking at this extension of the regulation .
It is important to recognize that non-road modes of transport experience disadvantages , not least through the inequality of distribution by mode and by type of use of infrastructure charges .
Combined transport suffers particularly in this way and we , in the European People 's Party , accept that .
It is important to review the existing mechanism of support for inter-modal services .
Account must be taken of the diverse national situations .
The Commission proposal will continue to permit Member States , under the principle of subsidiarity , to select the form of aid most suitable and conforming to their national priorities .
The proposals therefore allow the possibility of national aid for combined transport infrastructure for transfer facilities between modes and for specialized equipment for inter-modal transport .
While the granting of aids for combined transport would be exempt from the strict authorization procedure under Article 93 ( 3 ) of the Treaty , Member States would be required to inform the Commission of aids granted in the form of an annual estimate at the beginning of each year and subsequently report at the end of the financial year .
The attraction of the new regulation is that the bureaucracy required by both the Member States and the Commission will be reduced .
This is a welcome change .
Under the proposal it will be for each Member State to decide what , if any , form the support will take .
While the European Union emphasizes combined transport , I hope that both combined transport and conventional freight operations will be supported by this measure .
My group endorses the Commission proposal setting out the categories of aid which are legitimate with the aim of overcoming the particular handicaps experienced in the development of inter-modal or combined transport .
It is understood that the aids will apply in the short term and will have a positive and beneficial effect on the development of combined transport .
The proposal to extend Regulation 117 / 70 deserves Parliament 's support since it is just this type of aid to combined transport which we believe is in line with the European Union 's future transport policy .
It is also a means of strengthening the position of railways and inland waterways in the European transport market .
At the very least , until such time as the level of competition between the different modes of transport is reflected in the reality of grants and proposed harmonization conditions , these aids are a modest means of providing compensation in the interests of a sustainable transport policy .
In conclusion , we congratulate the rapporteur on his report .
I am delighted that the Council , in adopting a common position , has incorporated two key amendments from the European Parliament and on that basis we should now approve the common position and I have therefore great pleasure in commending it to the House .
Like everyone else , my group too supports the proposals before us and congratulates the rapporteur on them .
We do not oppose his amendments in principle , but as Mr Castricum said a moment ago , this is not the right time to be pursuing them , particularly when the Commissioner - and perhaps he would like to give us details of this - has just been instructed by the Council to have further talks with Switzerland on transalpine transport .
My group is also rather pleased to see from the common position that the idea of stopping further aid altogether after 1997 is under consideration .
Why is this ?
First of all , because we have seen that simply carrying on providing aid for combined transport is tantamount to flogging a dead horse .
Combined transport seems to be taking a smaller and smaller share of the transport market , rather than increasing , and it would therefore seem that freedom of choice for shippers is gaining the upper hand .
Our group welcomes this as a very positive development that should be extended further , which is not to say , of course , that we should not be glad to see environmentally-friendly forms of transport taking a greater share of the market .
Decisive factors here seem to be the lack of further liberalization of the railways , the high costs of transferring goods from one form of transport to another , and finally , Commissioner - and I should like to hear what you have to say on this - the fact that it is impossible for transporters to take responsibility themselves for transferring and unloading from rail transport at the place of destination .
This is an area where we would join Mr Castricum in calling for more detailed legislation in future .
Mr President , combined modes of transport , or to be more accurate a system in which each mode of transport is considered individually , is not only a European transport project with respect to capacity and prices offered to those buying transport .
It is also an environmental project .
It is a project which takes account of bottlenecks and which can be made economically justifiable .
Like my colleague , Mr Castricum , I also support the Commission 's initiatives and hope that the Council will follow these up , but I would also advocate the expansion of these initiatives .
Member States must involve themselves more fully in these activities , and must be made to see that this is a joint European project , not local projects .
The strategy until now has been that Member States themselves be involved in the selection of areas of investment , not at a European level , but at a local level .
This must change in the future .
There seems to be a continued failure to realize that points at which sea , rail and road systems meet are often good junctions .
What we are missing is the category referred to by the term short sea shipping .
This is an important aspect of the development of combined transport modes in Europe , and I hope we can agree to an extension of the programme so that it can continue after this year and next year .
Because what tends to happen is that we wait until traffic develops , then attempt to regulate it .
It would be good if , at a joint European level , we could attempt to regulate traffic before it has developed , and make new provision for it .
Market forces will not take care of this problem by themselves .
We can propose as many toasts as we like at the prospect of a combined transport project .
But nothing will happen until we can agree at a European level .
It is therefore not just a question of deregulation , privatization , or any other scheme we can dream up .
It is a question of how determined we are to regulate in order to create the modes of transport we wish to see .
I wish the Commissioners good luck on the Council as they seek to convince the various ministers that these projects are worth investing in .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this issue is certainly important enough in itself to merit serious discussion .
I agree with most of what my colleagues have said .
We on the Christian Democrat side of the House support the common position and hope that the Commissioner will table a proposal for a followup regulation without delay , so that we do not find ourselves in 1999 discussing the follow-up regulation for 1998 .
I should like to highlight two points in particular .
I believe it is extremely important to extend the aid regulation to include support for combined transport , because we all share the objective of moving long-distance freight transport increasingly onto railways and inland waterways and also - as the previous speaker mentioned - short sea shipping , in order to make our roads in the Community safer and to conserve the environment .
We also agree with the second concept in the common position and the Commission proposal , that of simplifying the way that aid is monitored in this sector .
However , we still have certain reservations .
These concern the need to ensure two things - and I would ask the Commissioner if he could give a guarantee in this respect when he addresses the two new concepts in his reply .
My first question is this : if individual authorizations are not to be compulsory in these aid procedures , how do you intend to ensure that the Commission will continue to monitor the aid with the same degree of care ?
Exemption from individual authorization cannot mean exemption from aid monitoring , and I should like to have your assurance that you will make your staff fully aware of this .
Secondly , if individual authorizations are no longer required , how shall we ensure that when aid is granted to one company , another company , city or region does not find itself disadvantaged without having any say in the matter ?
This is what happens in practice : competitor companies say that they had no idea what subsidies had been applied for , because the details were not published anywhere , and they ask how they are expected to register their misgivings when they only receive the news a year after the event .
That is why I believe , Commissioner , that even with the simplified procedure , some thought must be given to ways of informing competitors and allowing them to raise objections - in the interests of promoting competition , as opposed to distorting it .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Tamino for his well written report .
It is my fundamental political conviction that providing conditions for free trade and free competition is also the best way of resolving Europe 's various transport problems .
This is why I am essentially sceptical about economic support and subsidies .
Now that we have reached the second round of discussions on this matter and have a common position from the Council of Ministers , I believe that we can say that this has all the makings of a good decision .
The Tamino report is about improving combined transport .
Undisputably , this is of great importance ; there is every reason therefore to encourage it .
How this is done , is also of importance .
Investment in combined transport cannot be made by continuously raising taxes and an even higher and more unfair distribution of freight costs .
These are already widely divergent in the various EU Member States and all too often this is a great disadvantage to countries which already have long transport distances and high freight costs .
This large and continuously increasing disparity must not be allowed to grow larger .
This means that the most important way of encouraging combined transport does not lie in direct economic support .
Instead , we should be working more towards the proposals in the White Paper which has been presented to Parliament and which covers the revitalisation of Europe 's railways .
The fact that Europe 's railways are continuously losing their market share of goods transport is a big problem .
But the way to counteract this lies more in stimulating the railways in other ways rather than by the direct provision of economic support .
The most important boost would be to simplify goods transport across EU national boundaries and to introduce more open competition than we currently have .
For this reason , the most important decisions that we can take for this sector , to encourage both the railways and combined transport , are not the decisions which we are taking today but those which are still to come .
Mr President , could I first thank the House and the rapporteur Mr Tamino for his very useful work on the amendment to Regulation 1107 / 70 on state aids to inland transport .
The result of these efforts is to underline again Parliament 's strong commitment to promoting combined transport and that , as ever , is welcome .
By approving this common position , the House ensures that the rules in Regulation 1107 / 70 concerning aid to combined transport will remain in force this year .
Since those rules will , however , expire by 31 December we must obviously prepare the structure of a new regime that meets the needs of the future .
With that specific purpose in mind , my services are currently working on a report on the current state aid practices of Member States based on the answers they have given to a Commission questionnaire .
The result of this work will obviously provide an informed basis for the revision of Regulation 1107 / 70 in exactly the way Mr Castricum was seeking .
Naturally in due course I would be pleased to have a detailed exchange of views with the House on ways of establishing a legal framework which will allow the continued and appropriate promotion of combined transport .
It would be relevant to discuss Mr Castricum 's idea relating to the project action for combined transport at that juncture .
The PACT programme is going to be extended to relate to short sea shipping and I hope that Mr Sindal will see that as evidence of our sustained commitment in the Commission to the development of that very important aspect of combined transport .
Meanwhile , I should say to Mr Jarzembowski that I agree with his emphasis on effective monitoring and on fair conditions and he can be absolutely sure that the Commission not only will sustain its current efforts but constantly look for even more effective and incisive ways of producing exactly the results that he seeks .
On the specific matter of the report before the House , I note that Mr Tamino , as he said , has re-submitted two amendments which both the Commission and the Council rejected at the first reading stage .
I must inform the honourable Member that in the view of the Commission , both amendments continue to be inappropriate .
I hope therefore that he will not persist with them and will concur with the recommendation of the Committee on Transport and Tourism to approve the common position without amendment in the fashion argued for by Mr Wijsenbeek .
I express my gratitude for the continuing constructive attitude of honourable Members in supporting development in combined transport and I look forward greatly to the next stage of provision for the future .
Mr President , I put two specific questions to the Commissioner concerning the stage of unloading and the matter of Switzerland .
I hope I will receive a more detailed answer later on .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Investor compensation schemes
The next item is the report ( A4-0047 / 97 ) by Mr Janssen van Raay , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee on the joint text ( C4-0058 / 97-00 / 0471 ( COD ) ) , approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council Directive on investor compensation schemes .
Mr President , I am pleased to see that Commissioner Monti has now arrived alongside Commissioner Kinnock .
The Chamber may seem empty , but I can assure you , Mr Monti , that I have just walked through the building and there are 300 Members currently sitting glued to their television screens watching this debate in their offices .
So we have the House 's undivided attention .
Secondly , the most important point I should like to make is to stress how successful the conciliation procedure introduced under the Maastricht Treaty has been .
I very much appreciate the fact that under the Irish presidency , when the last such procedure occurred , we were able to reach a successful compromise through the intervention of Commissioner Monti and the Irish Minister .
With swine fever currently sweeping through the Netherlands , I was particularly interested to hear this afternoon 's debate on mad cow disease , and I thought to myself that if Amsterdam I or Maastricht II extended the conciliation procedure to all areas of cooperation , it would be a major step forward .
What Minister van Aartsen said was not logical , of course : he cannot first welcome measures against the United Kingdom and then grumble about the measures which the Commission has , in my opinion as a Dutchman , quite rightly taken against the Netherlands to protect public health and consumer interests .
The only thing which the Minister should have done was to ensure that no pig-farmers suffered loss .
This Commission deserves a pat on the back from President Santer , which is more than could be said for the last one .
The point I wish to make is this : if we had had the conciliation procedure then , so that we could have worked directly with the Commission and the Council , it might have been much easier to find a solution .
I have to say that we are extremely pleased .
We negotiated up until the last minute , as you know , to try to get Parliament 's ideas adopted .
Thanks to you , the Council adopted many of Parliament 's amendments at second reading .
I always think of ourselves as a kind of House of Representatives and the Council as the Senate , with the Commission playing the absolutely vital role of intermediary .
It is up to us to ensure that European legislation is introduced which is acceptable to everyone .
The various sections of the Delors package do not seem so important individually , and even the investor compensation scheme does not seem all that important at first sight .
However , it forms the cornerstone of a major package of legislation , and as such it is extremely important for consumers and investors .
We naturally find it unfortunate , I have to say , that the export ban has not been lifted .
We would have preferred to allow the countries offering the highest levels of protection for investors to compete with countries which do not offer any .
As you know , Mr Monti , we urged you to include this amendment right up to the last minute .
But when the AdvocateGeneral in the proceedings between Germany and the Commission and the Council told us that it was out of the question , we gave in .
We are now relying on the Commission , and this is my main point , to ensure that the highest possible level of protection for investors is introduced in all countries of the European Union , and particularly Greece .
This was one of the amendments agreed in the compromise with the Irish presidency , and we really are counting on your cooperation .
I should in any event like to thank Commissioner Monti for the role which he personally played in achieving the compromise with the Irish presidency .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for ably piloting this legislation through the three readings in this House and through the conciliation procedure .
Despite the small number of MEPs who are present tonight , this is a very important piece of legislation .
It protects small savers and small savers ' savings .
Small savers are the backbone of the banking industry .
Small savers scrimp and save .
There is a great deal of fear in the European economy at present , fear of job losses , fear of what will happen in old age , fear of what will happen if people have periods of sickness , fear of what will happen to children .
Savings are used to save for old age , periods of sickness , helping children through studies and helping grandchildren .
Loss of savings can be a personal tragedy for the families concerned .
This piece of legislation protects those small savers .
Without saving we have no investment .
So this piece of legislation is absolutely essential both for the prosperity of Europe as a whole and for the prosperity of the individual families concerned .
I thank the rapporteur and the Commission for putting this protective directive before the saving consumers of Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we all know the problems that are currently confronting social security systems throughout Europe .
The simple question of whether our pensions are secure now exercises not only the Germans , but an ever increasing number of the Union 's citizens .
The call from the Member States for more private pension provision cannot be ignored .
It is not surprising that many people are attracted to invest in securities - a sector of the financial market that is as sensitive as it is risky .
Against this backdrop , the directive on investor compensation schemes takes on further topical significance .
The most important concern is to protect small savers .
We should therefore welcome the fact that , after a tough battle between the Council and Parliament , a compromise has been reached , opening the way for the directive to come into force .
Once again the codecision procedure involving the Conciliation Committee has proved its worth .
Small investors must be able to deal with branch offices of companies selling securities in the Community , or receive securities services in the context of the international trade in services , with as much confidence as when dealing with domestic companies .
That is why investor compensation schemes must be in place in all the Member States , to ensure that small savers at least have a uniform minimum level of protection in the event of a securities firm being unable to meet its obligations to its investors .
We introduced legislation some time ago to provide for this type of protection - albeit through very different systems - in the case of credit institutions .
Here , the uniform minimum compensation of ECU 20 000 per investor has been set at a level that is designed to protect the interests of small investors .
It is also designed to allow the Member States to stipulate that investors must bear a proportion of any losses .
However , competition is part and parcel of the internal market , and this brings me to my main criticism of the directive .
The rapporteur has already discussed this point in detail .
The Council takes the view that the level and extent of cover offered by the various compensation systems should not become an instrument of competition .
The Council fears that the market will be disrupted if the branch offices of securities firms can offer better cover than a securities firm licensed in the country where the securities are bought .
To put it plainly , the European Parliament sees the arrangement which the Council is proposing as a ban on the export of services by securities firms based in countries where the system offers a higher level of cover than that of the country in which the branch office is located .
Only the fact that this arrangement , or export ban , will not apply after December 1999 has prompted the House to give way here in the interests of reaching a compromise .
It should be noted that in the course of the Conciliation Committee procedure , Parliament succeeded in ensuring that compensation will be calculated on the basis of the current market value of the securities , and will be paid out without delay .
The compromise that was reached thus takes account both of investor protection and of the need to maintain confidence in the financial system .
It represents a significant contribution to the completion of the single market , and that is why my group recommends that the compromise should be adopted .
In the few seconds available to me , I naturally cannot examine the excellent compromise worked out by the rapporteur in any detail , but I should like to congratulate him on it .
J.K. Galbraith once announced at a hearing of the American Senate that the stock market boom which was happening at the time would not last , and from that moment the markets started to plummet .
I hope I shall not have the same effect , but I think we can assume that the market boom we are experiencing will not last , and that one of these days it will start to dip .
Now that investors have found out about the stock markets , the way in is often through investment firms .
It is therefore a very good idea , and I am grateful here to the rapporteur and the Commissioner , to spread the asset formation and the risk in this way , also among those not previously involved .
As a Liberal , I wholeheartedly welcome the fact that small investors are now to be given a certain guarantee .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to begin by thanking the parliamentary delegation , and in particular the rapporteur .
The proposals which have been presented to us as the outcome of the conciliation procedure represent a sensible compromise .
This was obviously necessary .
The adoption of a directive was urgently required to facilitate the free movement of capital under Article 7a ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty , and it was necessary to make the legislation compatible with the directive on bank deposit guarantees .
The main problems were the objections to the need for a directive , given the principle of subsidiarity , and the question of the export ban .
The very fact that the latter has been a bone of contention is , in my opinion , the best argument in favour of the directive .
Potential distortions of the market needed to be countered .
The proposal that the export ban should apply only until 1999 allowed an acceptable compromise to be reached on this point too .
The only appropriate response to this balanced proposal is for the House to adopt it .

Mr President , it may be the case , as Mr Janssen van Raay said , that this Chamber is not particularly crowded this evening , but it seems to me that the speeches we have heard have really cast light on every aspect of this very important problem , which has been so well solved .
In this context , I should like to express , on behalf of the Commission , both institutional and personal congratulations : institutional congratulations because we have seen a fine example of the workings of a conciliation procedure ; and personal congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr Janssen van Raay , and to all the members of his delegation for their efforts to achieve an agreement with the Council last December on legislation of such major importance .
The importance of this directive lies in the fact that , together with the directive on investment services and the directive on the financial soundness of banks and investment enterprises - directives which are already in effect - it will constitute one of the fundamental pillars of the single market as far as the securities sector is concerned .
It seems to me that the speeches made by Mr Oddy , Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn , Mr Wijsenbeek and Mr Ullmann have really highlighted the various aspects of this single market that we are constructing for the citizen - a market which can therefore , thanks to a directive like this one , widen the spectrum of citizens , whether small or large savers , who can invest in securities .
At the same time this provides a boost to the savings / investment cycle and so stimulates the growth of the European economy for the benefit of future generations and creates a mechanism of confidence .
So although it may seem to be a technical provision , perhaps a rather dull provision , I see it as one of great economic and social importance .
I therefore congratulate Parliament again on the key part it has played in achieving this result .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting closed at 11.20 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I refer to page 1 of yesterday 's Minutes .
Both Mr Smith and I raised the question of the list for Question Time and the fact that the questions we had tabled to Commissioner Kinnock on transport were not included in the transport section .
We wondered whether there had been a simple administrative blunder or whether there had been some political manoeuvre to prevent embarrassment for the United Kingdom Government .
The President in the chair , Mr Imbeni , said he would report the matter to the Commission .
Has the presidency had any news from the Commission about what happened to these questions ?
Mr McMahon , the matter is being dealt with , and the Commission will decide which Commissioner is to answer your question .
That will certainly be discussed , and the Commission is free to decide which of the Commissioners will answer it .
Madam President , I was well aware who the Commissioner would be : I tabled the question on transport to Commissioner Kinnock , who is the Transport Commissioner .
Now someone in this institution - or in one of the two institutions - decided not to refer it to Commissioner Kinnock .
I want to know whether the failure is in Parliament 's or the Commission 's services , and I want to know whether it is a simple administrative blunder or a political manoeuvre !
Only the President can find that out !
No , Mr McMahon , it is neither of those things .
I can only repeat what I have just said .
The questions are submitted to the Commission as a collegial body , and the Commission itself then decides who will answer a particular question .
In other words , neither we nor you can decide in this case that Mr Kinnock will answer your question .
We shall pass the matter on , and then the question will be answered .
Madam President , if I may , I would like to make two small comments on the Minutes .
I refer to page 22 of the Spanish version , and I have been able to check that the same applies to the Italian and French versions .
During the debate on BSE I had the honour to take Mrs Pery 's place in the chair , and when Mrs van Dijk was speaking I gave Lord Plumb the floor .
The substitution does not appear in the Minutes .
I am flattered to be mistaken for Mrs Pery , but I do think the accuracy of the minutes demands a correction .
The other point , Madam President , refers to page 23 and as far as I know only affects the Spanish version .
I have checked the Italian and the French and they are correct , but in the Spanish version , at the start of questions to the Council and the Commission , Mr Avgerinos ' name does not appear , and as I understand it , he was chairing the sitting .
These are small points , Madam President , but to be meticulous in our work , I think they need to be pointed out .
Thank you very much . That will be corrected .
As far as the confusion is concerned , there ought to be no problem in changing that too .
I have just heard that in the other versions which you did not mention these omissions or errors were not made .
But they will be corrected in the versions to which you referred .
Madam President , a number of foreign lorries have been marooned for two weeks now in northern Spain .
Despite efforts by the Spanish Government to find a solution the situation in some places is particularly grim .
Tyres are being slashed , windows broken and two lorries have been set on fire .
I urge our President , Mr Gil-Robles , to use his good offices with the Spanish authorities in order to convey Parliament 's alarm and our deprecation of this situation and to point out to the Spanish authorities that they have a duty to safeguard the free movement of individuals and goods .
Mr Cornelissen , that was not a point of order .
We are now dealing with comments on the Minutes .
We shall certainly pass that on , but for the moment I would ask you to confine yourselves to comments on the Minutes .
Madam President , I thought Mr McMahon was doing very well and did not need my assistance but I am really astonished at the reply you gave him .
If it is the case that the Commission will decide for itself which questions to answer , then why are we asked to address questions to specific Commissioners ?
Why is part of Question Time designated to specific Commissioners ?
We addressed our questions to Mr Kinnock .
Someone took a decision to take them away from Mr Kinnock and place them so far down the agenda that they would not be reached .
Who took that decision ?
We believe there were political forces behind that , and could you tell us what happened ?
Dirty work at the crossroads , you know : the nuclear industry is very much aware of these things .
I believe there has been a misunderstanding on your part .
I said before that the Commission decides which Commissioner will answer the question .
I did not say that the Commission decides which question will be answered .
That must have been misunderstood .
Incidentally , the Commission is , of course , listening to what is being said here , and I have no doubt that there is a possibility that Mr McMahon 's question will indeed be answered by Mr Kinnock , but that is not something we can dictate .


I can only pass it on with an explicit request that Mr Kinnock reply to the question , which I shall do .
( Parliament approved the Minutes . )
Topical and urgent debate ( objections )
The next item is the vote on objections relating to the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance ( Rule 47 ) .
Item I - Human Rights :
Madam President , on the subject of human rights . I have two points to raise .
Firstly , a request has been received to replace our human rights resolution on Vannunu with one on the war criminal Brunner .
We would ask the honourable members who made that request to agree to Brunner being an addition rather than a replacement .
That is my first point and my second one is an urgent plea to the Greens to withdraw the new item they want to add under the human rights heading , namely the matter of the detainee Roisín McAliskey .
Why ? Because negotiations are currently ongoing which might be frustrated if this question is put on the urgency list at this time .
It is the result which counts and I thus ask the Greens not to press for this to be added to the agenda today but to withdraw their request .
Mrs D 'Ancona , the objection I have received was tabled by the PPE Group , and the deadline for motions has actually passed .
This means that I cannot simply grant your request - and I do understand what you want to achieve - unless the PPE Group expresses its agreement .
Madam President , the proposal made that we should withdraw this resolution is completely out of order because the Parliament has to debate human rights abuses within the Union and it is quite clear that this Parliament has an opportunity to do so today .
It will be too late to do it later .
Negotiations have been going on ; letters have been going backwards and forwards but nothing has actually happened .
The Parliament has to address human rights abuses within the Union .
We are debating human rights issues right across the world and we cannot ignore what happens in our own Member States .
Thank you very much , Mrs McKenna .
Beef labelling - veterinary controls - cattle registration
The next item on the agenda is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0037 / 97 by Mr Papayannakis , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 96 ) 0460 - C4-0546 / 96-96 / 0229 ( CNS ) ) regarding the labelling of beef and beef products ; -A4-0033 / 97 by Mr Olsson , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposals for : I.a Council Directive ( COM ( 96 ) 0170 - C4-0334 / 96-96 / 0109 ( CNS ) ) laying down the principles governing the organization of veterinary checks on products entering the Community from third countriesII.a Council Directive ( COM ( 96 ) 0170 - C4-0335 / 96-96 / 0110 ( CNS ) ) amending Directives 71 / 118 / EEC , 72 / 462 / EEC , 85 / 73 / EEC , 91 / 67 / EEC , 91 / 492 / EEC , 91 / 493 / EEC , 92 / 45 / EEC and 92 / 118 / EEC as regards the organization of veterinary checks on products entering the Community from third countries ; -A4-0022 / 97 by Mr Mayer , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 96 ) 0460 - C4-0545 / 96-96 / 0228 ( CNS ) ) establishing a system for the identification and registration of bovine animals .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , yesterday we debated at some length the arguments of our Investigative Committee concerning BSE and the responsibilities of the United Kingdom , the Council of Ministers and the Commission .
Nobody underestimates the magnitude of the crisis , especially the crisis of citizens ' confidence in the workings of the European Union , and of consumers in the beef industry and its products .
That crisis is enormous .
We see it in the market , in falling consumption and prices , and in the threats against employment and the viability of companies .
Today we are debating one of the European Union 's first attempts to respond to that crisis of confidence , a draft regulation on the labelling of beef and beefbased products .
The size of the intervention and the organization of the infrastructures presupposed by this regulation and the one related to it concerning the recognition and registration of the animals , indicate the severity of the crisis brought about by BSE .
Yet , other interventions and measures will be needed to restore the confidence of consumers .
It will be very difficult to do this , because that confidence is constantly being shaken by technological development and by the pursuit of profit .
The one makes it possible , and the other makes it necessary to produce new products or modify traditional ones , while consumers are less and less able to know what it is that they are eating or drinking .
The real restoration of confidence will come when there is a convincing policy to eradicate BSE at the level of production .
The regulation we are debating here merely intervenes at the level of trade and attempts to give consumers more and useful information about the origin and production conditions of meat and meat products , hoping in that way to help the market settle down .
However , the regulation was drawn up under conditions of urgent need , and for that reason it has gaps and omissions which we are trying to correct with the amendments we have tabled .
The regulation provides that in future beef and beef-based products can be placed on the market if accompanied by a label recording information about their origin .
For that to be possible , there must first be a regulation on the recognition and registration of animals , involving an information system , and then labelling can follow .
The regulation 's problems are as follows : firstly , the labelling system proposed is in principle optional .
If we were to accept that provision , we would be led towards the creation of two markets : one with labelled products , which would inspire greater confidence and would have higher prices , and one with unlabelled and somewhat suspect products , demand for which would be less and whose prices would therefore be lower .
That solution appears easy and could be implemented straight away , but it would achieve nothing .
It reassures consumers artificially , but without guaranteeing that there will not in due course be people who , being less well informed and poorer , have been desensitized by publicity and will choose products which are considered riskier but are cheaper .
I think a better though still temporary solution is the compulsory labelling of all beef products , including industrially processed ones .
Of course , that solution has negative aspects , it requires huge administrative intervention , measures and controls , and it would be very costly .
However , it responds better to the scale of the crisis of confidence we are facing .
A second problem is that labelling is envisaged for meat and meat-based products .
Your rapporteur , however , insists that all beef industry products should be labelled , including industrially processed ones .
A third problem : the information that the draft regulation envisages should be given on the labels is inadequate .
Specific amendments propose to include information on the fattening and reproduction conditions of the cattle from which the products in question come , and other useful information as well .
Finally , your rapporteur proposes to strengthen the orders relating to monitoring the implementation of the system and to sanctions against those who infringe them .
It is an issue to which the European Union generally tends to pay too little attention . The recent BSE crisis should have persuaded it to change its attitude .
At any rate , the value of all this is relative and , I repeat , concerns the last stage of the cycle that begins with production and ends with final consumption .
Let us all hope that the forthcoming Commission and Council proposals will include intervention at the root of the problem , the production system itself and the need to modify it with new criteria governed by sustainable development and the need to protect consumers and public health .
Madam President , let me just say that yesterday , Mr Santer stated that he is in favour of compulsory labelling .
I assume this means that the Commission accepts all the related amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment .
Depending on the Commission 's answer to us , we will see how best to take further our support for the Environment Committee 's proposals .
Thank you very much .
Madam President , first let me congratulate Mr Papayannakis for his excellent work .
It is important in today 's market that we try to rebuild consumer confidence in food .
In the past , food was produced and consumed locally .
People knew where food had been produced , how it had been prepared and what the consequences of eating it were .
It was often the case that if infection or other problems were present that people in the local area were more resistant to these problems .
Today we no longer have a local market for food .
Nor do we have a national market for food .
Today we have a European and also a partially global market for food .
It is good that there is a free flow of goods and services in the European Union and I also positively support the aim to increase world trade .
But it is not good if this free flow leads to the further spread of infection and diseases , diseases which can affect livestock and people .
This is why it is so important to keep track of what we are eating and to inform consumers where food has come from and how it has been produced .
As for the report by Mr Papayannakis , there are two main issues which we must consider : the first is whether the labelling system should be voluntary or obligatory , and the second is whether it should only apply to whole pieces of beef or to beef products as well .
I am well aware that obligatory labelling has its difficulties .
But I think Parliament would be sending out the wrong message if it accepts a voluntary system .
My party group is in favour of an obligatory system .
I am also well aware that it can be difficult to label manufactured products ; often we end up with a long list of products in ever smaller quantities .
In such cases , there can be obstacles to labelling manufactured products .
But , I still think that we must find practical ways , and the Commission must help in this , to set limits so that obligatory labelling can , in principle , also be applied to manufactured meat products .
With that , Madam President , I would like to turn to my own report which is essentially about the same thing , food safety , but which concentrates on food imported from third countries .
In this respect I would first like to thank Mr Kindermann and the Agriculture Committee for their very valuable views concerning a number of details which we on the Environment Committee did not have access to .
I would also like to thank the Committee on Budgets which sent a letter with their comments on the report .
The proposal concerns harmonisation of veterinary control regulations on all products of animal origin imported into The European Union and the introduction of veterinary checks for each shipment at an approved veterinary control station .
A database called ANIMO is to be used in connection with this for communication between the different stations .
I view this proposal positively and support its main points .
It will simplify a number of areas which will be helpful .
But introducing a common system also means that we must increase our efforts to restrict import fraud .
There is also one point of view which I have a particular interest in laying before you ; it is perhaps particularly of Swedish or Scandinavian interest , but that does not make it any less important .
Article 2 of the Directive also affects certain plant products .
In this instance , this means hay and straw , which will be examined because they can also be infected with foot and mouth disease .
Today , we have other problems as well .
This includes the import of soya meal , for example , which can contain salmonella .
This is a matter of great concern , particularly to those of us who have made great progress in eliminating salmonella , Sweden and Finland for example .
There is also a passage which says that respect must be paid to the special requirements of individual countries .
This has a role here as well and it would be useful to include something of this nature .
I have one amendment proposal concerning penalties .
This is really only a detail .
In accordance with Swedish Law , we would like to see the final decision on penalties made via the courts and not administratively .
In addition , we are also proposing , and this may seem a little strange , that we postpone introduction of this until 1st January 1998 , because the computer system required is not yet in place .
For this reason , it cannot be introduced in accordance with the Commission 's proposal on 1st January 1997 , which is a date which has already passed .
Madam President , I think that covers the points that I wanted to add to the discussion .
The Environment Committee has recommended both the amendment from the Agriculture Committee and their rapporteur Mr Kindermann , and that from the Committee on Budgets and I believe that we will be able to reach broad agreement on this report .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , action needs to be taken in response to the developments on BSE ; that surely emerged especially clearly yesterday .
Tangible and foresighted improvements must be made in the identification of cattle and in beef labelling .
Consumer confidence in beef has been severely shaken .
The causes are manifold .
One significant factor is that meat is mainly sold as an anonymous mass-produced commodity , and the consumer really learns very little , or indeed next to nothing , about its origin .
This situation must be remedied .
Before any improvements can be made in this domain , of course , we not only need a transparent production process but also a transparent marketing system .
The Commission - and I must stress this - has responded , and in the autumn it tabled a proposal for a regulation on the identification and registration of cattle .
However , the required level of consumer safety cannot be ensured unless such identification and labelling is carried out on the same scale and with the same priority for beef too .
Only these two components of quality assurance can ultimately restore consumer confidence .
There is little point in lamenting the inadequate implementation of the existing Directive - yes , there is one !
We must speed up the pursuit of our goal through the Regulation with the ultimate goal of transposing it to provide a legal basis in all Member States .
The system for the identification and registration of cattle is based on four elements - ear tags , which would be on both ears , databases ( a key element ) , animal passports and registers of animals on each holding .
These elements will be compulsory , and it is absolutely essential that they should be compulsory .
The Council will now decide on the basis of the report - and I should like to emphasize this too - whether an electronic identification system can be introduced after a test phase , known as the IDEA programme , involving around a million animals .

There is no doubt at all that the present mechanisms for proving an animal 's origin are inadequate .
Two principles have to be respected . On the one hand , the proposals must be practicable .
We must not thoughtlessly jeopardize the measures taken in the three areas .
The system has to work .
This applies above all to the link between the producer and the database .
On the other hand , while consumer confidence needs to be regained , it is essential not to lose sight of the aim of keeping the bureaucratic burden on producers as light as possible , as the European Parliament has expressly demanded time and again .
This restoration of consumer confidence requires the setting of standards .
And the farming community is prepared to meet these standards .
Nevertheless , I do believe that we have to incorporate an even greater share of responsibility for Member States into the system governing the transposition of the Regulation and that we should therefore allow them a certain amount of latitude , particularly with regard to the introduction of the database and the animal passports .
Conditions for the introduction of the database vary widely .
In some countries a system is already up and running ; however , there are also some countries where it will probably take a long time to introduce the database .
The underlying aim of our deliberations , ladies and gentlemen , should now be the creation of an absolutely reliable system of data collection .
But where this is already guaranteed , we should not demand any more than is necessary , in other words we must also avoid any duplicated collection requirements .
One quite vital point in relation to the credibility of the measures - and this is surely the crux of the matter , Commissioner - concerns imports from third countries .
Mr Olsson , as you know , stressed this point .
If imported cattle , animals that have entered the Community from third countries , are to be properly identifiable , these imported animals will have to be subject to official identification procedures as soon as they reach the border .
The data must then be entered in the database without delay , and the animal passport must also be issued immediately .
I do not believe that the Commission 's ideas on this point go far enough .
This is where the credibility of the system is challenged .
We cannot afford to be any less stringent with imports from third countries than with animals born here in the Community .
To my mind , ladies and gentlemen , that is quite fundamental .
Likewise , the current 30-day limit for identification is reasonable and we should maintain it .
Now , ladies and gentlemen , it will also be said that Article 100a should be envisaged as the legal basis for labelling .
And if 100a is to be the legal basis for labelling , it should surely cover animal identification too .
According to the Commission 's statements in yesterday 's BSE debate , codecision is to be extended in these areas too , and if goodwill on all sides can prevent almost any delay or reduce it to an insignificant level , then 100a should also serve as the legal basis for the identification of cattle .
I move that we vote on this and remind you that , even if delays are kept to a minimum , it still boils down to a formal referral back to committee .
But I believe that , if we show goodwill , action can be taken quickly with little loss of time .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a proposal from the Commission is on the table today , aimed at establishing common rules for the control of animal products from third countries .
The completion of the internal market and the associated abolition of border controls make it essential to harmonize import conditions as a prerequisite for the termination of the bilateral agreements .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on whose behalf I drafted the opinion , welcomes the Commission 's proposal , which simplifies the existing provisions and adapts them to the new situation .
It seeks to introduce strict rules in particular areas in order to ensure the protection of public health .
The cessation of the existing independently conducted identity checks is acceptable , because such checks are to be part of the future inspection system .
Quite apart from the poor and occasionally misleading translation into German , the proposal contains some unclear formulations , which we are trying to eliminate through our amendments .
We hope that the Commission will accept these amendments we have proposed .
We continue to appeal to the Commission to rethink its position on the selected legal basis .
It states in its own proposal that the common system of veterinary checks is governed by the aims of completing the internal market and harmonizing health protection .
Especially in the light of the present discussion in this House and among citizens outside on the subject of BSE and of the Commission 's correct decision to relieve the Directorate-General for Agriculture of its responsibility for veterinary checks , the Commission should really have come to realize that the monitoring of animal products has far less to do with the organization of the agricultural market than with public health and consumer protection .
As far as Parliament is concerned , the knowledge and experience we have amassed in the last few weeks and months show that the only appropriate legal basis is Article 100a in conjunction with Article 129a .
I am also thinking particularly of Mr Mayer 's comments here , which I fully endorse , when he said that we should extend the scope of this legal basis to take in the other two reports being presented to us today .
Madam President , yesterday we were expressing the concerns of European consumers and consumers outside the Union on the whole question of beef .
Today we are taking appropriate measures to meet some of those concerns .
I welcome the new urgency and activity of the European Commission in this area .
I reject the criticism that this proposal imposes unnecessary administrative costs on farmers .
It is absolutely necessary to do this to consolidate the markets which European farmers have for their meat products .
It is necessary also to reassure people in third countries who buy our products .
We produce a million tonnes of beef in the European Union that have to be sold in third countries .
It is common knowledge that consumers outside of the European Union are increasingly aware of health and safety aspects of the products which they buy from us .
So , this measure is important for all these reasons .
I have to express the concerns of the Committee on Budgetary Control in the area of cost .
We have maybe 70 million bovines in the European Union .
We spend ECU 60b annually .
Something like 70 % of that is paid in individual premia .
So it is extremely important from a bookkeeping point of view that we know exactly where these animals are and how to calculate correctly the amount of money that should be and has been spent .
The Budget Control Committee also has a concern that this regulation did not include sheep and goats .
We spend nearly another ECU 2b in this particular area .
We thought that since sheep and goats were included in the original Directive 102 , that they should have been included in this one as well .
On behalf of the Budget Control Committee I would urge the Commission to bring forward legislation to give us further assurances in relation to the spending of this money .
Madam President , in principle I agree in general with what Mr Mayer told us .
Besides , everything provided for by the regulation and the amendments that improve it needs to be done , if meat is to be labelled .
Unless we have a system for the recognition and registration of cattle , it will not be possible to label beef and other beef industry products .
However , Madam President , I want to stress the magnitude of the effort that will be needed to register the 95 million head of cattle in the European Union in data-bases and monitor their movement .
That is something which would have been unthinkable only a few years ago , but which is necessary today and will cost a huge amount , the cost of the Community bodies ' folly to say the least .
It is the price we will be paying for the profit enjoyed by others thanks to their stance throughout the BSE crisis .
There is , however , a problem Madam President .
Some countries are nearly ready to go ahead with that system , while other Member States are very poorly prepared or even entirely unprepared .
If we want to avoid creating loopholes for illegal economic methods , smuggling and other suchlike , which would ultimately go against the interests of public health , I think it will be necessary to adopt the amendment we voted for on the Environmental Committee and which essentially calls on the Commission to prepare and finance a special programme to harmonize the laws in all Member States and to supply the necessary electronic and other infrastructure , so that the recognition and registration system can be implemented as soon as possible throughout the European Union .
Madam President , the proposals we are today discussing are , in my view , very important .
I see a strong connection between the subject of today 's debate - Mr Mayer 's report - and what we were yesterday discussing in relation to the BSE crisis .
I believe that it is very important that we introduce a system for the identification and registration of cattle that is effective , sound and secure .
At the same time , I very much appreciate the argument concerning the labelling of beef and beef products which , as has been stated in the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , has to be made compulsory and not just voluntary .
In my view , these are important signals that we need to give to consumers who have currently lost all confidence in beef and beef products and all other products of animal origin . That loss of confidence has been triggered by the methods of husbandry , the problems - from time to time condemned - involved in the transport of animals and the difficulty in identifying the origin of the product that turns up in processed form on our tables .
On top of all those difficulties , in themselves chronic , structural and indicative of the problematic state of the beef and beef products ' market in Europe , we then had the BSE crisis which made the situation considerably more complicated .
I therefore believe that the system of passports for the animals , the data bases , the ear-tagging and the registers kept at each holding which my group believes should be absolutely compulsory - with no exemptions even for transitional periods which would in fact make them optional - are all extremely important factors both in terms of health and veterinary controls and to prevent fraud in the administration of the premiums provided for by the common agricultural policy in the beef and beef products sector .
I believe , Commissioner , that we need soon to identify guidelines for reform of the common organization of the market in beef and beef products ; this is an issue on which announcements have been made on several occasions , and I believe that all of our countries and , more particularly , the producers of the European Union , are right to demand that we should move on rapidly from words to deeds .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the wake of the BSE issue and the crisis of confidence it has engendered among consumers , the three proposals on the registration of cattle and the labelling of beef , as well as the Olsson report , are of great importance .
It is quite simply vital that we succeed in restoring consumer confidence .
The possibility of proving the origin of cattle and beef will be a decisive step in that direction .
The Commission 's strategy of providing for the registration of cattle and for the compulsory introduction of both a database and animal passports is the correct approach .
We should not let ourselves be put off by supposed technical difficulties .
The experience of some Member States with databases has shown that they have considerable potential .
It is undeniable that the 1992 Directive has not been satisfactorily transposed . Perhaps it was never properly transposable .
Speculation about the origins of individual animals remains rife .
We should be in no doubt that the real work to implement the new Regulation still lies ahead of us .
For example , steps must be taken to ensure that exchanges between the databases of Member States actually work in practice .
What use is it to a French farmer if he is offered an animal from Spain but has no knowledge of its precise origin because its data are only available in the Spanish database , to which he has no access , or vice versa ?
I simply cannot understand why the Commission wants to allow fourteen days after importation for compulsory identification of animals from third countries .
This provides scope for fraud to take place during that very period .
I emphatically support the amendment tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development whereby imported animals would be identified immediately , as the Mayer report states .
The entire system , however , will only serve its purpose if the evidence of origin can also be communicated to the consumer .
For that reason we need beef to be labelled all the way through to the shop counter .
We in the House are agreed that a voluntary labelling system as proposed by the Commission is the wrong way to restore consumer confidence .
In my opinion it is futile to rely on market forces to create a system of labelling .
As long as there is no blanket provision for the labelling of such products throughout Europe , distrust will continue to prevail among consumers .
Only a compulsory labelling system can remedy the situation .
The message given by the Commission to the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection was this : if labelling is voluntary , meat products and other by-products , such as those containing gelatine , can be included in this Directive .
But the result of that will be a lot of labelling , a lengthy process and a great deal of concealment .
What you are presenting to us here is a conjuring trick .
According to these proposals , eight details about the animal from which the gelatine is derived must appear on packaging such as a cream carton : the date of slaughter , the sex of the animal , the method used to cut up the carcass , to name but a few .
That is unrealistic , and we should steer well clear of it .
I naturally understand the motives of those who advocate a far-reaching compulsory system here too .
It is a fact that we need to give a clear signal after the BSE crisis , to prove our determination to make a fresh start .
The question , however , is whether this is possible with a set of requirements that can scarcely work in practice .
I can only warn against pursuing that approach .
While we may understand the motives , we must ask ourselves whether public confidence would be far more seriously dented if such labelling were to prove impossible and if , in trying to meet our obligation to deal with this matter , we were seen to be doing something that was perhaps incomprehensible and perhaps even mistaken - for that situation is on the cards .
What will happen when that sort of thing occurs ?
How do we then hope to restore consumer confidence ?
I believe we should only put verifiable information on labels .
Of course , no Member State should be prevented from adopting rules of its own , but at a European level we should not go through with this .
What should not , however , be rejected , Commissioner - and this is my earnest plea - are our demands that the reports be dealt with under Article 108 .
After yesterday 's speech from Mr Santer , I believe you will find it easy to agree to these demands .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has unanimously endorsed them .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has agreed that negotiation on the matter is legitimate .
So we are well on our way .
Madam President , I in turn wish to point out how sensible it was to schedule this debate for the day after the BSE debate and also to link these three reports , which in fact complement one another , like three links in the same chain , producing an important outcome : new guarantees for consumers and also new obligations for producers .
However , there is still perhaps too little involvement of third parties who are also important here : by this I mean the wholesalers and retailers who are in fact , at the point of marketing , important links and have also to be made to take responsibility , particularly as regards labelling .
I wish to dwell for a moment on the agricultural world and the problems that this new development could cause .
Hitherto , with the ear-tagging and inventory , more or less all farmers - even the smallest of them - were able to manage fairly easily .
But it cannot be denied that this new legislation brings on to the farm elements previously quite unfamiliar in this context : computers , in the first place , which require a different kind of professional training and maybe even a new kind of worker .
It is plain that all of this may involve - and I am certain of this - new costs and a different professional commitment , even though improved qualifications will result .
Therefore , I am in favour of this new development , but before we give someone a car , I think it worth checking whether they have a driving licence , otherwise it would end up off the road .
This then is what I propose : a staged reform , particularly as regards the introduction of the data bases which , if they are to be reliable , have continually to have data fed into them by a substantial percentage of producers .
The proposal that we create a ' buffer year ' after the 31 December 1997 deadline seems to me to be reasonable .
And here I am thinking above all of the small producers , the hill farms in which - given the small number of people working them - all of these innovations could cause consternation and confusion .
Once the data base is complete , we can think in terms of a passport , an undoubtedly fascinating and ambitious proposal , that would accompany cattle movements , the rearing and the whole of the life of the animals , to the point of the final certificate which we shall be able to identify in the label , the final stage in a system of documentation that has always to be based on clear and comprehensive data to guarantee the quality and thus the characteristics of the product - a clear indication of origin , methods of processing and any veterinary controls .
That applies particularly to the by-products of meat processing .
I am thinking here with some concern of the famous hamburgers , so much loved by the young people listening to us here and in relation to which these labels are more important than in other areas of meat processing . The hamburger whose origin , content and , above all , quality are frequently still a matter of hoping for the best .
Mr President , I represent Somerset in North Devon , which is the cattle heartland of the UK , and what we do not know about beef and beef products is hardly worth knowing .
We have been gravely hit by the recent crisis in confidence in this sector .
That is why I welcome these Commission regulations and indeed Mr Papayannakis ' suggested amendments , because I feel they are essential to restore public confidence in the whole of the beef industry .
My group favours an obligatory system of labelling .
We believe that while geographical origin is important , it is certainly not the conclusive or definitive factor .
What we want to see is the kind of things asked for in Mr Papayannakis ' Amendment No 4 on minimum standards .
We want to see labelling that would cover also genetic engineering techniques and the use of stimulants in beef production , although here we prefer Mr Tamino 's Amendment No 29 to those put down by the rapporteur .

I believe that it even is more important to label processed goods containing beef and beef products than to label the meat itself , even if this is difficult .
This is the area where public confidence is really at its lowest .
It is important that the public be aware - and this is something Liberals have striven for in the European Parliament - of exactly what goes into the foodstuffs that they are buying .
I believe , too , that stricter labelling requirements would help farmers .
Farmers have lost control of their industry .
They have lost control of the industry upstream , where the feedstuffs manufacturers are concerned , and they have lost control of the industry downstream to the large food chains .
Requirements that would help boost public confidence would also help farmers to regain control over this important industry .
Therefore , Liberals in this House support the idea of an animal passport .
I would like to conclude by suggesting to the Commission that we will need , very shortly , a much wider review of food labelling requirements in the European Union .
We have a whole mass of regulations ; these need to be brought together in one document .
Madam President , I believe that , as the debate has made clear , the whole House understands that the time has come to introduce these three provisions and hold a joint debate on them , as they are interlinked . They are interlinked first and foremost because there would be no point in having labelling - which we want to be compulsory - if we are unable positively to identify cattle , hence the need for the ear-tagging , the data bases , the passports for animals , the farm registers and , in future , the possibility of electronic tagging also .
All of these are vital measures that have to be brought into effect as rapidly as possible , so as to be able to offer a guarantee of results .
The aim is to be able to guarantee citizens and consumers positive controls and , therefore , labelling which we believe has to be compulsory for beef and beef products and , in future , for other kinds of meat also .
In addition to being compulsory , the label has also to be absolutely clear , also according to the guidelines already accepted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the basis of the amendments tabled also by the Greens .
Of course , we believe that this could have been done earlier and it was not necessary to wait for the BSE crisis before getting this far .
But now that we have reached this stage , we must demand that what was said yesterday in the Chamber by President Santer should be done very quickly .
We are therefore expecting the Commission to state clearly to us today that the label will be compulsory and that it will not therefore be opposing the amendments tabled to that effect .
We are also expecting a label that is very clear - one reason why I am hoping there will not , for example , be objections to the reference to genetically modified organisms .
That is also why there has compulsorily to be included on food product labels information on products derived from genetically modified organisms .


The legal base , as pointed out in the Papayannakis and Olsson reports , should be Article 100a , and we expect Commissioner Fischler to say as much directly ; nothing else is needed , it is sufficient that the Commission accepts it .
DG XXIV needs to be reorganized in such a way as genuinely to protect consumer health but it has also to be given adequate staffing and resources .
Finally , we are expecting a real reform of the CAP in which the problems of the environment and consumer health take precedence over questions of quantitative production .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , cattle breeding is having a hard time of it , not only because of mad cow disease but a lot of other factors too .
On 20 February it will be exactly two years since a veterinary inspector was cold-bloodedly murdered in Flanders and this killing is thought to be he work of the widely established hormone mafia .
The illegal use of growth promoters in the beef industry remains a very serious problem .
So the identification and labelling of beef are significant initiatives .
And they complement each other .
The first move is identification and registration , and labelling is the logical next step .
I have a few reservations , however .
The Mayer report includes the Agriculture Committee 's Amendment 19 , which wants producers to be given extra ear tags and passports so that they can themselves replace any lost ear tags and complete them legibly .
To my mind that is extremely dangerous because it may lead to all manner of dubious goings-on .
In my country , for example , we have a very good identification system .
But there are dishonest cattle producers who often use forged ear tags and this practice is commonplace amongst the hormone mafia .
The availability of extra blank or uncompleted ear tags or passports would really be an open invitation to fraud .
My second worry : the plan is for a voluntary labelling scheme .
I share Mr Papayannakis 's concern that a scheme of this kind will create a dual market which is socially unfair .
One will end up with an expensive market of labelled products and a cheap market with unlabelled products , and that is not on .
Thus labelling must be universally compulsory , that alone will do .
And my last point is this : some farms have introduced an electronic system of identifying their cattle .
This works by the electronic recognition of chips implanted into the animals .
It automatically registers any movements of the animals and is useful not only to the farmer but also to abattoir recording systems and even to the central databases .
My question to the Commission is this : has Mr Schleicher already studied this system ?
Is it practicable , what does it cost ? I should be glad to know .
Madam President , Commissioner , the report by Mr Papayannakis on the labelling of beef and beef products is to be welcomed , particularly where it confirms that labelling should be compulsory to provide accurate information to consumers of beef or beef products .
Had this happened in the past , we should certainly have been better protected from the risk of a BSE epidemic .
Currently labelling is voluntary and that is why , by approving the report , the House would be rejecting the Commission proposal seeking to make labelling optional .
Good sense and courage are needed here : either we try to win back the consumer confidence or we try to work in the interests of some breeders who are seeking to make matters worse by refusing to make public what should appear on the labels : provenance , processing , shelf-life and additives used in the product marketed .
I agree with the view that operators who import meat or meat products from third countries ought also to label them .
Alleanza Nazionale is in favour of the labelling of beef and beef products , although it is aware that some animal control measures may involve substantial operational difficulties and require a considerable organizational and financial input .
In an earlier speech on BSE , I said dura lex sed lex .
Today , I have to say that we cannot have our cake and eat it , therefore we need to talk not only in terms of preventive measures - for instance , the identification and registration of cattle and computerized data bases - but also in terms of maximum clarity where the product is being released on to the market .
Yes then to the labelling of beef and beef products : we need at least to agree that information on the origin and processing of meat has to be compulsory .
We shall be voting for the amendments designed to secure this .
Madam President , I should like first to pay tribute to the excellent work done by all the rapporteurs and in particular Mr Papayannakis , both in his own report on the labelling of beef and also in writing the opinion for the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection on Mr Mayer 's report on the identification of cattle .

We all know the background to these two reports , and also that by Mr Olsson , which were linked by the Commission .
One of the key issues that emerged yesterday in our very long debate on the report of the special committee on BSE was the need to be able to identify and monitor cattle if BSE is to be eliminated .
One of the great problems in identifying the right cattle to be slaughtered in the UK was the lack of accurate records .
Sometimes both farmers and the public at large see that BSE-free herds have been slaughtered first whilst herds that had had cases of BSE were left in limbo , their owners knowing that the cattle would be culled at some time but not knowing whether to buy in extra winter feed or not .
The proposals for the proper registering of herds by means of ear tags , individual cattle passports and computer bases are to be warmly welcomed .
It is important that information about parentage , herd , date of birth and farms where held should be easily checkable .
Given the particular situation in Europe at present , the Environment Committee is proposing amendments to add information on feeding , hormones and medicines .
There is increasing consumer anxiety about the effects on human health of excessive exposure to antibiotics .
Indeed , if animals are reared more extensively , as was discussed yesterday , there will not be the same fear of infection which has led to antibiotics being routinely added to animal feed .
Consumers want to know that they are not ingesting excessive residues of antibiotics when they eat meat .
This is why the labelling scheme fits in with the registration scheme which has to be put in place to provide the information required for the accurate labelling of beef .
Mr Papayannakis rightly proposes that the labelling should be compulsory and that beef products , not just beef , should be included in its provisions .
This is very important since it is more often prepared beef products , rather than beef itself , which present a risk of infection .
This is because they are often made from mechanically recovered meat and meat from parts of the carcass not normally on sale in supermarkets and butchers .
This is not just about BSE .
More people have died recently from E coli in the UK than from the new strain of CJD as a result of eating contaminated beef products .
The very elderly and the young are particularly vulnerable to such infections .
Of course hygienic preparation and thorough cooking can reduce the risk , but knowing that these products will have to be labelled as to the exact origin of the meat , including what the animal was fed on , will be a great incentive to manufacturers to ensure that these meat products are made only from wholesome raw materials .
With the emergence of BSE and the new CJD in humans , we in Europe and especially in the UK have had a dreadful warning that we must not take risks with either human or animal health in pursuit of maximum profit .
We must examine agricultural practice , monitor what goes into our food more exactly and give our consumers the information they require to give them confidence in the wholesomeness of what they are buying and eating .
The Environment Committee - certainly its Socialist members - are making tough demands upon the Commission in terms of the information required , the need for the labelling scheme to be compulsory and cover beef products as well as beef and the need for rapid progress to be made in implementing the measures .
The Socialist Group feels that we have a duty to promote public health and consumer protection in Europe .
Our farmers and the beef industry can only benefit in the long term by the re-establishment of well-grounded consumer confidence .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the BSE issue , it is true , has permeated the recent work of the European Parliament .
The report by the Committee of Inquiry tried to reconstruct and interpret the past , and I am sure that it will have repercussions .
But now , I believe , we must set about charting our course for the future .
We must see the present crisis as an opportunity to make improvements .
Foremost among these improvements will be the restoration of consumer confidence , which has plummeted so alarmingly in the last few years .
I need not reiterate to this House that the BSE crisis has brought countless farms to the brink of ruin .
It is imperative that we succeed in taking swift measures to help these farmers throughout Europe whose plight is no fault of their own and to regenerate meat consumption .
The identification of cattle and the labelling of meat and its derivatives have surely become imperative .
The aim must be to remove the anonymity of meat .
The consumer in the supermarket should not only have a quality guarantee but should also be able to identify exactly where the meat has come from .
Accordingly , I consider it essential that both the identification of cattle and the labelling of beef be introduced as quickly as possible on a compulsory basis .
I am well aware that this involves a great deal of organizational and financial input , but too much damage has already been done in the cattle industry for anyone to be content with half measures now .
I believe that the proposed system of identifying individual animals with ear tags and maintaining computerized databases , animal passports and farm cattle registers can work well if people want it to .
Besides the Member States , the Commission will also bear special responsibility for providing the necessary technical infrastructure ; this must not entail disproportionately high costs , particularly for small producers .
I believe we can also learn from the BSE crisis that in future we must look beyond the market and profits and give due consideration to the protection of the health and interests of consumers too .
It seems vital to me that imports from third countries should also be subject to equally strict criteria and to compulsory identification and labelling .
By a foreseeable date it must be possible to identify reliably the exact origin of every single cut of meat on sale in the European Union .
There are ethical and moral boundaries .
Politicians are required to recognize these and to act accordingly .
They must take the interests and needs of the citizens of Europe very seriously .
Madam President , on the 20th March last , the declaration on the possible transmission of BSE to man by the consumption of beef has caused a widespread crisis in consumer confidence , and consequently an unprecedented economic loss for beef farmers .
Our institutions have tried to act .
Eleven months have already passed and we are talking seriously about regulations , cattle registration , labelling and monitoring .
It is never too late to do good .
Consumers still have every reason to be distrustful , if they know the conditions under which some farms rearing livestock for meat are run , the food products and drugs used and the possible consequences on health .
The time has come to reassure them , on behalf of the majority of farmers who do their job well and yet are also penalized .
A significant deficiency of the European texts and their implementation has now become striking : inadequacy of the Directive 92 establishing the framework of the cattle identification system , but also lamentable implementation .
In fact , it was not until 1996 that some countries began to apply it .
The Mayer report confirms the draft regulations for identifying and registering animals , but also encouraging effective health monitoring of herds and also the management of farming subsidies .
The immediate creation of data banks is imperative .
The directive on the monitoring of products originating from non-member countries also needs to be simplified .
The immediate and compulsory labelling for beef and its derivatives is essential .
This is of course the most important measure that will be able to restore credibility .
And we support it , as we support the institution of sanctions .
Confidence is not decreed ; it is earned .
In this case , it is re-earned .
This is why we will support the content of these three reports and congratulate the rapporteurs .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteurs for these important reports .
Consumers demand animal products which are safe and unproblematic from the point of view of health , and they also insist on an assurance that the conditions in which animals are reared and transported ensure a satisfactory standard of animal welfare .
The Community particularly needs to make progress with regard to animal transport in the EU , so much negative publicity has there been on this subject .
In the ELDR Group we regard a compulsory marking and registration system for cattle and marking of beef and beef products as essential measures and as means of restoring consumer confidence in beef and beef products .
A compulsory marking system will be more effective than a voluntary one .
Parliament 's opinion calls for an animal passport system covering the whole of Community territory and computerized databases to enable animals ' origins , movements , whereabouts , slaughter etc. to be monitored openly .
The report 's explanatory statement quite rightly observes that the system must not become too complicated , bureaucratic , expensive or partially overlapping , as will happen if , for example , four different systems are set up .
I would therefore ask whether it would not be sensible to introduce animal passports only for animals which move from one country to another .
In implementing the system , it ought to be possible to use common sense in the Member States to ensure that the measures taken and their cost are in the right proportion to the benefits they yield .
If a centralized animal register which exists in a Member State is operating effectively , so that all the necessary information can be obtained from it , that should be enough .
After all , the production structure differs from country to country , and it ought to be possible to take this into account .
It is very important to restore consumer confidence , and I would therefore urge the Member States and the Commission to act quickly with the aim of introducing the system at the end of this year .
The Olsson report on the principles governing the organization of veterinary checks on products entering the Community from third countries is also very important from the point of view of safeguarding consumer health .
The basic principle absolutely must always be that agreements entered into must not endanger the health of consumers or animals .
A third country 's legislation should be considered equivalent only if the level of safety for which it provides is at least as high as that conferred by the EU 's own legislation .
As a representative of Finland , I would warn the EU authorities against any departure from this principle , since I know that , particularly with regard to the agreement with the United States , the EU would be willing to compromise even the present level of safety if the EU could thereby correspondingly increase its exports .
I hope that the BSE crisis has at least taught the Commission that , even in the business world , a high standard of ethics and morality , which is above bribery , should be adhered to .
Animal welfare provisions must be incorporated in these agreements .
Madam President , there are at least two lessons we must learn from the BSE crisis : the first is that with regard to livestock production , two checks are better than no checks at all , and secondly we can no longer rely on only the actions and decisions of the Member States to give a Community guarantee to any food product .
For the safety of European consumers , a general Community check is more than ever necessary .
The Commission bases itself on the illusion that stating the geographical origin is sufficient to protect the consumer , and it is therefore proposing optional labelling .
With just reason , Mr Papayannakis would like to improve this system which is more than just incomplete with the introduction of additional information : place of birth of the animal , breed , sex , and also the breeding and fattening regions and method of reproduction .
These amendments of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development link up with those of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection - it may never happen again - and aim to render it compulsory to label meat and derived products .
We naturally strongly support this step .
After the BSE affair , which the Commission was hardly able to keep abreast of , the remaining uncertainties require more than ever that we observe the principle of caution .
Moreover , compulsory labelling must be linked to the system upstream , of birth registration and continued identification proposed by Mr Mayer .
The current situation now imposes the tracing of domestic animals as a basic guarantee for both farmers and consumers .
Nevertheless , there must be a system which is effective without being too restrictive for the farmer .
The new regulations must recommend a single identification at European level , without which the lessons of the BSE crisis will not have served much .
So that the regulations can be applied by farmers in their daily practice , they must be simple and combine in a single procedure the current administrative obligations , registration and information to the appropriate authority ( passport criteria and information ) .
This requirement could be reduced to one registration , of which one copy is reserved for the appropriate authority and another for the passport .
Finally , as one must draw information from the current situation , it appears wrong and dangerous not to require that an inspector go into the farms to check ear tags and staff .
In this respect , we naturally support Mr Olsson 's report .
Colleagues , I submit for your reflection the fact that we have under our eyes three reports on a delicate subject , three pieces of evidence that the Commission is continuing only to half deal with the matter in order not to displease certain systems which would like to be as liberal as possible , and which are therefore the most propitious to fraud .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we have come to deal with an important aspect of the BSE issue , namely the identification of animals , but also the labelling of beef .
We in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development agreed that compulsory identification should also apply to beef products .
I hope that the Commission will endorse our view , because we believe that farmers are not the only ones on whom responsibilities can be imposed - and it is right that they should be imposed , and we do support that - but the processing industry should also be brought into line .
The tendency of the processing industry to buy as cheaply and anonymously as possible must be stopped , partly for the sake of consumers but also partly for the sake of producers , since processing companies would then have less freedom to keep changing suppliers .
Compulsory labelling would enable producers to set realistic prices but would also help consumers by enabling them to trace the origin of meat .
To put it rather tritely , if I bought beef produced by Meier and Company , and if , as a consumer , I was very satisfied with it , I should assume that Meier produced good beef ; if , however , on my next visit to the same retailer the label showed that the meat was not from Meier 's , I should want to know why that supplier was no longer being used .
If the answer was that the meat could be bought more cheaply from another company - which , of course , is normally the motive for changing suppliers - that rationale would have nothing to do with quality but would be based purely on business considerations , which might not be understood by consumers .
They would prefer to stay with the supplier they knew and trusted , and that reinforces our position .
Allow me to end with one more thought .
When we speak of all this registration , Mr Fischler , we must not , of course , confuse registration with the fight against BSE .
When we feed registered cows with infected meat-andbone meal , they will still become mad cows - or registered insane cows ; let us be clear about that .
Registration is an aid and an indicator for consumers , but it is not a remedy for BSE , if I may reiterate that quite plainly .
Madam President , at the end of the ' 80s , the European Parliament adopted the Borgho report on the labelling of food products of controlled quality of origin .
To date , provisions have not really been made for this report to be followed by effects .
I believe , Commissioner , that what we are asking through these three reports is titanic work , but necessary for ensuring the confidence of the European citizen and consumer in its institutions .
Labelling , quality , fraud , traceability : all these points go together and one still wonders how it was possible to take so lightly this contract between the authorities and consumers .
In a manner of speaking , one cannot now say , when consuming products imported from Great Britain , whether or not they contain gelatin .
These products are in circulation .
I have been informed that problems also arise with registration , when animals change State and the receiving State wishes to re-register them under their own registration .
All this causes delays which naturally lead to fraud .
No one is safe , no one can guarantee that he will play the game right up to the end .
It is our role , it is your role , to demand that a system be introduced which will ensure traceability .
Commissioner , transparency and cooperation between institutions urge me to ask you to apply Article 101 of the joint decision to identification and traceability , as one cannot guarantee the cohesion of a system without demanding that all points be governed by the same procedure , that of transparency and cooperation .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if what the press says is true , the Ministers of Agriculture held exploratory talks on this subject in Brussels on Monday .
Exploratory talks !
This battle over an electronic button in the ears of cattle is , in my view , a surefire means of breeding Euro-exasperation .
Why , I wonder , do we need so much time for the whole introduction process ?
Besides the labelling of meat , it is planned to introduce computer-based identification of cattle in the EU .
The points at issue are when the measures should be introduced and whether they should be compulsory .
In my opinion , identification and labelling ought to be binding obligations for all Member States by the end of the millennium at the latest .
In Germany this is scheduled to take effect on 1 January 1998 .
In many regions there are already successful programmes under which labels of origin are prescribed for meat products .
The use of a memory chip will make it possible to store all the necessary information on origin , breed and ownership .
The data may be retrieved at any time by means of a scanner .
Needless to say , Commissioner , I should not wish the electronic component to be found by the customer when he carves his Sunday joint at the lunch table , so the question of a sensible niche for the microchip , based on practical experience , will certainly have to be discussed somewhat sooner .
Sadly , however , I have to note that the secondary industries related to agriculture are not always equally interested in the transparency of markets .
The supply of beef of guaranteed origin still leaves much to be desired .
For that reason I have to ask what the cost of this proposed Regulation will be .
Its implementation will surely entail a considerable amount of expenditure in the Member States .
I believe that care must be taken to ensure that the hard-pressed agricultural sector in Europe is not burdened with excessively high costs .
The entire measure will be considerably cheaper than the bill we have run up over this whole BSE issue to date .
The funding of the new system from EU or national resources must , in my view , be legally guaranteed .
The planned official identification of animals imported from third countries should also take place immediately upon entry into the Community .
Madam President , we spent a full day yesterday discussing the impact of BSE on public health and the serious consequences for our farmers , the food industry and employment , and we are , of course , also conscious of the consequences for our competitive position in world trade .
It is right and proper that we put in place the most stringent controls in the entire area of food production , right through from producer to consumer .
In my contribution to yesterday 's debate I highlighted the urgency of implementing a full traceability programme from producer to consumer .
With modern technology and proper animal coding , this procedure , as we now know , is possible and is already considerably advanced in my own country , Ireland , where we have pioneered a traceability programme in the lamb trade - the first within the European Community .
We are also considerably advanced in relation to the most modern technology in identifying all our other animals .
I also come from a country where meat production , and in particular beef production , is an important economic sector , because we export 85 % of our entire production .
So it goes without saying that BSE has been a disaster for Ireland .
The quality of Irish beef is renowned .
It must also be put on the record that from the moment of the first suspected case of BSE in my country we implemented a full-herd slaughter programme .
Our farmers are now the innocent victims of circumstances beyond their control , and the Commission must give practical recognition to their economic plight .
I must say that I am somewhat concerned that a statement from President Santer yesterday would seem to imply that the BSE crisis will lead to a more radical reform of the common agricultural policy than was originally anticipated .
This to me indicates a panic reaction , and we must not allow our understandable concern with public health - and it is proper that we should be concerned - to unnecessarily undermine the importance of the common agricultural policy as an essential management support measure for sustainable European agriculture and , in particular , its importance in keeping the maximum number of farm families on the land of Europe and , as well , in the broader context of rural development , to which I know our present Commissioner Fischler is totally committed .
In conclusion , I wish to put on the record again my appreciation of the Commissioner 's commitment to agriculture and to rural development .
I will defend his position anywhere , on any platform or forum in Europe .
Madam President , BSE is a serious European problem .
Everything possible must accordingly be done to overcome it and repair the damage it has caused .
From the measures in hand and those of which we know it appears that the Commission 's resources are being reinforced and the scope for supervision improved .
An animal and plant disease unit is being set up in Dublin , individual marking of cattle is being improved , and databases are being established .
Marking of the origin of beef is being rendered more precise , and meat imports are to be monitored more effectively .
The question is , does the European Union repose too much confidence in monitoring and administration ?
For example , the cattle marking system amounts to an enormous population book-keeping exercise ; it relates to millions of individuals , which , moreover , are replaced rapidly .
It is intended to enter in centralized files , inter alia , particulars of a cow 's mother , sex , all pastures where it has spent any time , and date of slaughter .
Is it realistic to assume that Europe 's cattle can be individually monitored by means of centralized databases , or are we just creating an enormous bureaucracy ?
On the other hand , is the focus of the monitoring right ?
BSE was able to spread because farmers trusted their own countries ' veterinary authorities and their morals , and because they trusted feed producers , while using legal and approved feed .
Is it not here that more resources are needed ?
Making it possible to trace beef is purely a retrospective monitoring measure , and will not remedy serious damage after the event .
Madam President , there is a silver lining to every cloud .
It took the epizotic disease of BSE and its dramatic consequences on human health and farmers ' incomes for the European Union to decide to reinforce and harmonize cattle identification and registration measures .
In this respect , we feel that the Mayer report , which goes further than the European Commission proposals , is in the right direction , although one should avoid increasing the obligations imposed on the States .
For example , to impose on each farm ear marking , a computerized data base , a register and passport for the animals , risks not only increasing bureaucratic provisions , but could also lead to fraud , because of lack of sufficient financial means or the complexity of the legislation .
One has the impression that with these proposals , the Commission and the Council are trying to clear themselves of ten years of laxism concerning animal imports and identification , and that they are now going over the top to try to regain a somewhat waning credibility .
Ladies and gentlemen , we quite rightly wish to restore consumer confidence in beef .
And at the same time , the European Commission is authorizing the import of genetically-modified corn ; perhaps tomorrow hormoneproduced beef , under pressure from the Americans .
Is it not a great hypocrisy to take measures , certainly necessary , even if some have a dual purpose , and at the same time eliminate frontier controls and write off the liability of the British government , which is primarily responsible for the mad cow crisis ?
Let us remember that the BSE crisis has already cost European tax-payers over 23 thousand million francs for 1996 alone .
The beef interprofession wonders whether , if the animal is born and has been raised and slaughtered in the same country , stating the country of origin is indicated .
Similarly , if it comes from different countries , the statement must indicate one of the origins , and in all cases the place of birth and the place of rearing .
To the traceability of the animal , it would be appropriate , Madam President , to add the guarantee that the animal has always been fed on grass or cereals .
It is under only this condition that the link of confidence between producer and consumer will be re-established , and that the beef market will regain its pre-crisis level .
Technical measures have never replaced a political desire which has cruelly failed our politicians in this major BSE crisis , as in many other fields .
Madam President , yesterday this house debated the report of the temporary Committee of Enquiry into BSE .
The report clearly illustrated the importance of an effective system of animal identification in the European Union .
European rules on the identification of animals have been in place since 1992 , although not implemented satisfactorily in all Member States .
I am in no doubt that the BSE crisis would have been far more severe had it not been possible to trace those animals which potentially carried the infection .
Inability to trace the 1989 and 1990 British cohort in the UK was one of the major factors which delayed the agreement of the UK 's BSE eradication plan .
Whilst this week marks the end of the temporary Committee 's enquiry it does not mark the end of the crisis .
Normality will only be restored when European citizens are confident that such a crisis will never be repeated .
This can only be achieved when effective legislation and controls are put in place to allow swift action to be taken should a risk to public health ever appear .
Part of that control system requires a rapid identification of animals which potentially pose a risk .
This is not only to protect consumers , but also to protect farmers and tax-payers against the unnecessary slaughter of healthy animals .
Such a system must be European-wide as such crises are seldom confined to one Member State as the BSE crisis and the current problem of swine fever have shown .
For these reasons I welcome the Commission 's proposals and I am disappointed by the attempts of the rapporteur Mr Mayer to weaken the system proposed by the Commission .
In a week when some members of the European Parliament are calling for the resignation of the European Commission for not taking sufficient action to prevent the BSE crisis it would be rather contradictory to vote against the kind of preventive measures which could have changed the course of agricultural history over the last ten years if they had been in place .
Madam President , an old proverb tells us that every cloud has a silver lining , and today 's silver lining comes in the shape of these three reports .
I should like to congratulate everyone who has worked on them .
We must ensure that we identify young animals which come from third countries .
This point has been addressed .
It is absolutely essential that we insist on this compulsory identification .
Everything required of the enterprises based in our single market must also apply to imports , otherwise we are talking about half measures .
The electronic identification system should be introduced , and I recently read , on a very prominent page of a prestigious daily newspaper in Germany , an essay on three identification procedures .
I must say that each of the three procedures undoubtedly represents a prudent solution , but the challenge at the moment lies in finding out which of them is best .
But without such identification we shall make no headway at all .
I might also add , of course , that such electronic processes can usually work out cheaper in practice .
Identification naturally costs money , but what about the enormous amount of money that non-traceability has cost ?
So this is hardly the direction in which the argument should be pursued .
The matter is urgent .
We are , of course , in an awkward situation if we are saying this while Mr Mayer , on the other hand , is moving an oral amendment to have everything dealt with under Article 100a .
Commissioner , I am fully aware that , in purely theoretical terms , this will result in a delay .
It can last for up to a year , but here is my appeal to you : perhaps in this Parliament we might demonstrate how quickly codecision procedure under Article 100a can be implemented .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , I have no doubt you would agree with me on that .
We should set a good example here by applying Article 100a in record time , thereby also sending a message , perhaps , in the spirit of the Intergovernmental Conference .
The gentlemen who head our national governments get themselves terribly bogged down ; everything takes such a very long time .
We agree on the substance ; there are no disputed points as far as that is concerned .
I therefore call upon you to deal with these reports as tabled here together with us in a summary procedure under Article 100a .
Madam President , I agree very much with Mr Goepel when he says that the Commission should grin and bear it in relation to Article 100a .
I support that . It is certainly grinning , but is it bearing it ?
What we want here , in considering these three reports , is an acknowledgement that the world has changed utterly in the wake of the BSE crisis .
Things are not as they were .
The old comfortable attitude to the regulation of agriculture has gone - gone for good and quite rightly .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , as some of my colleagues have said , accepts , welcomes and supports the Olsson and Papayannakis reports , but it has problems of the kind that have been referred to earlier with the Mayer report .
The reason for that , simply , is that we do not believe that the proposal should be watered down in the way that the rapporteur has proposed .
We are certainly not in favour of amendments which constantly refer to keeping costs down .
What is cost here ?
It is not just the cost to the farmer of taking the necessary precautions .
It is the cost to the Community if those precautions are not followed through .
We have a saying in my country that if you think education is expensive , try ignorance .
The same is true of information .
We need to have the information in place and we need the legal base which will allow us in future to have a proper concern for consumer matters .
That is what shifting the legal base of these reports from Article 43 to Article 100a would do .
It would give Parliament codecision ; it would be appropriate to proposals which are essential for the smooth functioning of a single market in which consumer priorities have their proper place .
Only if we get that shall we be doing our job as a Parliament and acting in the spirit of what President Santer said yesterday in his speech of repentance and contrition .

Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the reports by Mr Olsson and Mr Mayer are very much interlinked as both of them are aimed at ensuring consumer safety , in terms of consumer products from European Union countries and other countries .
As far as the Olsson report is concerned , I would like to know why the Commission is presenting directives and not regulations ?
If every Member State should implement the same controls , why not make it compulsory through a Council regulation ?
As far as the Mayer report is concerned , I would like to make a few remarks .
The first is that I agree totally with the rapporteur when he says that it is not logical to make the register for identifying animals compulsory and the beef labelling system voluntary .
Both of them should be compulsory , otherwise the whole effort to identify animals will make no sense .
The second remark is that labelling should compulsorily specify the origin of the meat and also the fattening method used .
We should also specify which controls the animals have been subjected to .
The third remark is to emphasise the fact that the European Union cannot think up a whole set of measures of this type without accepting that it has to co-fund the expenditure inherent in these operations to be carried out by the Member States .
Many of the problems which currently affect the field of animal and public health are related to the fact that these activities have never really been recognised as genuine Community policy .
My fourth and final remark is that although I fully agree with the aims of these measures I think that their progressive extension to all types of animals - and even vegetable products - will , in the end , entail very difficult red tape to manage .
Therefore , I think that it is time to think very seriously about setting up an institution of the ' Food and Drugs Administration ' type - this was already referred to by the President of the Commission yesterday - which would mean that no products could be sold without its authorisation .
After all , what we have gone through with BSE and other animal diseases , without prejudicing critical analysis of the action taken by the Council , the Commission and the Member States , could be put down , at the end of the day , to the non-existence of a genuine common policy in this area .
From this point of view , we are suffering the effects of the ' non-existence of Europe ' .
Now that the revision of the Treaty is being debated , I hope that our political leaders will not lose this opportunity to analyse the profound causes of these problems .
Madam President , I think back to this time last year and I wonder , if we had had this debate in February 1996 , whether there would have been quite such a consensus in favour of the Commission proposals and in favour of the Mayer report .
The BSE crisis changed everything .
It changed the way many people thought .
When I spoke to farmers in my constituency they wished that they had a unique selling proposition which could prove that their herds were BSE free , that they were free of antibiotics or whatever .
Had this had been the case , they could have then gone out and sold their products much more forcibly .
They tried as hard as they could but the fact is that there was no agreed recognition by the national authorities , by local authorities or by consumers that would prove that their meat was alright , that it was good to eat - a good quality product .
We need to ensure , in the global market , with global media , that we can protect those parts of our industry which come under attack so often and frivolously on occasion .
We cannot afford to have these massive collapses in confidence in our food .
I believe in this meat labelling scheme .
I must concur with the last speaker , I am concerned about the voluntary nature proposed by the Commission for the end-product , but I believe that these meat registration and labelling schemes will ensure that if we have another disaster in our industry , we can ensure those parts which are not affected , will not be affected .
This has my full support and I hope that we can implement this scheme as quickly as possible .
One final point , the farmers will need finance to make sure they can implement the schemes and I hope that some thought is being given to that .
Madam President , Commissioner , we all know that , even in a federal state , not all states obey the rules of public morality .
Therefore , I am not completely in agreement with my friend , Arlindo Cunha , when he says that only a Union policy could put an end to the immorality that we see around us .
We know that Arkansas is not as honest as New York .
At least , that is what the newspapers tell us !
Now I think that meat and meat products should compulsorily be controlled , and they should compulsorily be labelled .
I also lend huge importance to the Olssen report , because I think that at this moment - and my country is one where this happens - meat imported from the East is not being controlled .
Only a while ago Portuguese veterinary surgeons were protesting against the lack of controls on meat entering the country .
I think that , in this case , the Commission , instead of ducking this accusation , has sufficient moral authority because it is appointed by the Government and the States , to say openly and transparently that they are not proceeding properly .
It makes no sense to continue covering up frauds for a small amount of money and it is not logical that we should put public morals on the line .
From this point of view , the Commission is guilty because , as it is the guardian of the Treaties , it should not hide behind public morality , it should not hide behind controls and it should discuss the possibility of funding activities in the various countries where it should be carried out .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the provisions governing the identification and registration of animals , as very recent examples show , are partly inadequate , partly incomplete and are especially prone to cause problems in the domain of cross-border transactions .
On the other hand , the quality-conscious consumer nowadays expects an up-to-date system of meat labelling which indicates at least the conditions under which the meat was produced and which makes it possible to trace the origin of the meat back to the farm of origin .
At the present time there are two draft Regulations on the table . The first is for an identification and registration system for cattle , and the second is for the labelling of beef and beef products .
The purpose of these Regulations is to provide guarantees of origin for live cattle and meat from the farm to the consumer , thereby creating a sound basis for the presentation of beef and beef products in a manner that merits the confidence of consumers .
It is now a matter of proceeding quickly and rigorously ; that , indeed , has been stressed by several speakers here .
Secondly , the Commission also takes the view that a compulsory system of identification and labelling has to be established .
However , I have to say that , for reasons of feasibility , an appropriate transition phase will certainly have to be allowed .
During that phase , however , those countries that already fulfil all the conditions can go ahead with this type of labelling system .
As far as the legal basis is concerned , the Commission is prepared to accept Article 100a as the basis for both of these drafts as well as for the report on veterinary checks , which would mean that today 's debate would amount to a first reading .
Nevertheless , I ask you to consider the fact that it will lose us time and that we shall be unable to act with the requisite degree of urgency .
That applies especially to the identification and registration of animals , one of the main functions of which is to pave the way for compulsory labelling .
Now , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , for the report on identification and registration .

First of all I should like to thank the rapporteurs , Mr Mayer for the Committee on Agriculture and Mr Papayannakis for the Committee on the Environment , as well as Mr McCartin of the Committee on Budgetary Control , for examining our proposals .
On the amendments let me say the following : I can accept Amendments 2 , 5 and 6 .
I regret , however , that the Commission feels unable to accept the other amendments today , and I should like to explain its reasoning to the House .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment 3 because animal breeding is not a Community objective , nor can it accept Amendment 4 , because for reasons of subsidiarity it is not necessary for technical infrastructures to be identical in all Member States .
Amendments 7 , 9 , 12 and 24 are unacceptable because it is crucial that our system should cover the whole Community and be coherent , so that the origin of cattle and beef can be effectively identified .
Such a system would otherwise be counterproductive and would undermine the joint efforts of the European Parliament and the Commission to restore consumer confidence in the cattle and beef markets .
Amendments 8 and 13 cannot be accepted either , because our proposal already states that , in particular , nationally recognized consumer organizations to which such information is of special importance are to have access to the database .
So our proposal goes further than the amendments in this respect .
The Commission cannot endorse Amendments 10 and 18 , because we are already proposing the use of an alphanumerical code , comprising two letters for the Member State of birth with the remainder made up of numbers .
We believe that the adoption of Amendment 11 would create a grey area , since extending the definition of the word ' keeper ' to cover trading in animals would mean , for example , the inclusion of telephone transactions .
Our objection to Amendments 14 and 18 is that details of the type proposed there are surely better covered by the Commission Regulation .
Amendment 15 is not necessary because farmers can attach the ear tags themselves .
In our opinion it is more practical to identify the animals with a new ear tag at their destination rather than at the point of entry .
If the animals are imported for slaughter , the attachment of an ear tag is surely unnecessary , provided that the animals are slaughtered within a short time .
This therefore means that Amendments 16 , 17 and 26 cannot be accepted in their present form .
Amendment 19 is unacceptable , because the stipulation that holdings may receive a particular number of ear tags would be regarded as a rejection of the subsidiarity principle .
Likewise , the Commission cannot consent to Amendments 20 , 23 , 30 and 34 , dealing with the dates of entry into force of various provisions .
As you know , I take the view that we should reach a decision as soon as possible .
That was the basis of the dates we laid down in the proposal .
Nor can the Commission accept Amendments 21 and 22 , because it is not necessary for the identification number of a holding in the database to comprise 14 characters .
Twelve characters are more than ample .
Moreover , the Commission proposal already provides for the registration of all holdings .
Amendments 25 and 29 are a problem for us , because 30 days is too long a period for notifying data to a database .
We take the view that such data should be made available quickly .
The Commission is also unable to endorse Amendment 27 , because I believe that the animal passport should not be issued until the keeper has notified the data .
Amendment 31 is superfluous , because current legislation already contains provisions to this effect .
The same applies to Amendment 32 .
As for the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , I should like to point out that these are already contained to some extent in the Mayer report .
Besides , the position adopted by the Commission on these amendments will be clear from the opinion I have just delivered .
Turning to the report by Mr Papayannakis , which deals with our proposal on the labelling of beef and beef products , may I also express my thanks to everyone involved in the reporting and in the work of the committees .
I believe we all agree that this framework Regulation for a labelling system covering all of Europe should be adopted as quickly as possible .
Our aim , as I have already said , is a compulsory system .
For that reason the Commission cannot accept the wording of Amendments 3 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 10 , 11 , 22 , 24 and 25 , which basically relate to the introduction of a compulsory labelling system , for if we accept the compulsory system these amendments will have to be revised .
But we must be realistic .
I believe , and I have indicated , that it is not possible at the present time to introduce a compulsory system in all 15 Member States .
We believe that it will probably take up to three years before we have established the necessary rules governing identification and the facilities required under this Regulation , such as databases and so on , in all Member States .
A compulsory system , however , can only function in its entirety if its prerequisite , namely a fully operable labelling structure , exists in all Member States .
But as I have said , so as not to hold back the others we should bridge this time lag with an optional system .
The Commission cannot consent to Amendment 34 either .
Details concerning the link between a piece of meat and the individual animal are set out clearly in Article 3 ( 2 ) of the draft Regulation .
Amendments 12 , 16 , 31 and 32 relate to the details that must be included on the label within a compulsory system .
The logic outlined above must therefore be applied here too .
On the other hand , the Commission is able to accept Amendments 23 , 27 , 30 and 33 , which relate to processed goods , but not Amendments 2 , 8 or 26 .

Let me assure you , however , that after a transition phase we shall also be able to include processed goods in the system .
With regard to Amendment 21 , the Commission shares the basic concern of the European Parliament that this Regulation , in view of its importance , should enter into force as soon as possible .
For that reason , I shall plead this case in the Council too .
The Commission is able to accept Amendment 18 in principle , but the provisions governing sanctions will be laid down in the implementing regulations .
As for Amendment 19 , the Commission takes the view that , rather than having annual reports submitted on the implementation of the Regulation , it would be more appropriate if such a report were submitted at the end of the transition phase .
Amendment 4 states that Member States must be free to prescribe requirements that exceed the provisions of the Regulation .
The Commission regards this as a step towards renationalization of the Common Market .
Amendment 20 cannot be approved , because it is still too early to set a deadline for adoption by the Commission of the rules governing the application of the Regulation .
The Commission can , however , accept Amendment 9 , which relates to the independent controlling bodies .
These bodies must fulfil the criteria listed in Euro norm 45011 and would be licensed by the relevant public authority , as is proposed in the Amendment .
I have already spoken about the legal basis , so I can now turn to the last of the reports , for which I wish to express my gratitude to Mr Olsson and Mr Kindermann .


When the single market took effect in 1993 , an efficient system of veterinary checks on products imported from third countries became indispensable .
Parliament and the Commission are in agreement on that point .
It is time to improve the current provisions on veterinary checks on the basis of the experience which has now been amassed .
On the amendments that have been tabled , let me say the following : the Commission is prepared to accept Amendments 2 , 3 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 17 and 18 .
They make the wording more transparent and offer better guarantees in certain areas such as the transmission of information and access to free zones .
However , the Commission regards Amendments 4 , 8 , 9 and 10 as technically unwarranted .
The rules proposed by Parliament for ship suppliers offer fewer guarantees than the original proposal .
I therefore prefer the Commission text in this case .
On the other hand , the Commission can accept Amendment 11 , which allows the Member States a greater degree of flexibility .
Amendment 16 does not meet with the approval of the Commission , which is not convinced in this case of the need for a transition period .
A great deal of progress has been made in the harmonization of veterinary provisions for imports from third countries , and this ought to open the door to uniform checking procedure throughout the Community .
As far as Amendments 12 , 13 , 14 and 15 are concerned , Parliament is no doubt aware of the Commission 's general position .
I regret that these amendments , which relate to institutional matters , cannot be accepted .
Madam President , I assume that the Commissioner is well aware of the political importance of his intervention today , which is separate from that of the President of the Commission of a few hours ago .
He has just told us , and this is very positive , that he wanted to change legal basis and adopt Article 100 , but in the same breath , after giving us the carrot , he comes with the stick saying that he will not be able to accept the amendments demanding compulsory labelling .
I find that that is an extraordinary contradiction , and would like to have confirmation of my interpretation .
Perhaps I have misunderstood , but on the one hand we have the 100 A , and on the other hand the Commission does not support Parliament 's amendments .
So what is the advantage ?
In the end , nothing .
We already knew that the Commissioner would naturally want to make very liberal use of his red pen in his response to our amendments .
However , Commissioner , I believe that the supreme principle is the restoration of consumer confidence .
And for that reason we must push through practicable rules .
Compulsory specifications for cattle identification and beef labelling can be rapidly implemented .
I believe that , even with Article 100a as the legal basis , a message could be sent , as Mr Goepel said , that it need not take eleven months but that it is possible to adopt the relevant regulations more quickly , even on this legal basis .
That is all .
Madam President , I once asked Commissioner Fischler in a debate if he was willing to study the introduction of an electronic system , chips , whereby the animal could be monitored throughout its life .
My question is whether he is prepared to look into the practicability and cost of that ?
Madam President , first , I would like to say how valuable it is that the Commissioner has changed the legal basis to Article 100a .
This is in line with Mr. Santer 's words yesterday which pleases me .
Otherwise there are no further problems , or at least not many , as far as my report is concerned .
The Commissioner has accepted the bulk of the amendments , although not the proposal concerning the committee system , i.e. that more power is transferred to the Commission and that preparation work is carried out more openly .
It would certainly have been helpful if this could have been accepted .
One comment I must make about Mr Papayannakis report is that it would have been useful if it had taken a more robust attitude , i.e. the Parliamentary view of obligatory labelling of meat .
I am practical so I realise that this is difficult .
But I still believe that we must send out a tough message otherwise nothing will change .
If the Commission now introduces a long transition period , there is a risk that a long time will elapse before there is any action .
This is why I think it is so important for Parliament to give a clear signal during the day 's session .
Madam President , Commissioner , the simultaneous interpreting was a bit too fast and I did not quite catch all that , so I will ask you to answer three very simple questions , after first thanking you for accepting the change of the legal basis .
The first question concerns the list of information that must feature on the label .
You said we ought not to debate that , since for the time being it will not be compulsory , it will be optional for a while .
I believe - and I would like your opinion about this - that even if labelling remains optional for a time , the labels should show certain specific data .
The fact that the labelling is optional does not mean that everyone can declare whatever he likes . That would be unacceptable , and would render the measure pointless .
The second question , Commissioner , concerns products .
There is talk of labelling meat .
The Environment Committee and the rapporteur , myself , insist that labelling should be applicable to beef-based products and processed products - i.e. by-products .
I did not grasp your own position : do you accept that , or not ?
The third question concerns the single system , the harmonization of the system for recognition and registration of cattle .
Some countries have no such system and must acquire one very soon , so that the single system will work .
I asked you whether you are considering setting up a special programme for that , a funded Community programme .
I did not hear , or did not understand your answer .
Ladies and gentlemen , perhaps this really has been somewhat rushed , but where there is a need to respond to so many points without taking up an undue amount of time , that is simply bound to happen .
So first of all , let me spell out quite clearly once again that the Commission accepts Article 100a ; I merely pointed out that it will have certain consequences .
Secondly , the Commission accepts compulsory systems .
There was no question of our making the animal identification system voluntary - it absolutely must be compulsory . The only question was whether labelling should be voluntary or not .
Here , too , we accept compulsory labelling .
However , I do ask you to appreciate the situation we face . If we say ' Compulsory - full stop ' , this means that we must allow the Member States the necessary period of grace .
We should then effectively have a legal vacuum in that interim period .
That is why we saw fit to propose the introduction of a voluntary system for the transition phase , but that does not mean - and let me reemphasize this clearly too - that during the transition phase anyone can do as he wishes ; on the contrary , regulations must still be observed , for instance in relation to the information the label must contain .
Once more there are two separate questions here . Whether or not I produce labels is a matter of choice .
The content of the label itself , however , has to be subject to clear rules .
Only thus can it work properly .
In connection with various amendments which I rejected , I stated very clearly that , in our view , they would not exactly improve the system .
In fact , certain of them could create grey areas ; moreover , in some respects our proposals go further than those of Parliament .
I do believe that the Commission is entitled to highlight that sort of problem and in the first reading here - assuming now that Article 100a is our legal basis - to reject such proposals .
I thank the Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
Voting will take place at noon .
Welcome
I am pleased to welcome to the House a delegation from the Republic of Yemen , led by His Excellency , Mr Mohammed Abdo Said , the chairman of the Finance Committee in the Chamber of Deputies .
Your delegation is honouring us with your visit at the second inter-Parliamentary meeting with the appropriate delegation of the European Parliament .
I note with pleasure that relations between the European Union and Yemen are excellent and that our contacts at Parliamentary level have shown our mutual desire for cooperation .
May I wish the Yemeni delegation profitable meetings and an excellent stay in Strasbourg .
Veterinary medicine residues in food
The next item is the report ( A4-0035 / 97 ) by Mr Kenneth Collins , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) amending Council Regulation EEC No. 2377 / 90 laying down a Community procedure for the establishment of maximum residue limits of veterinary medicinal products in foodstuffs of animal origin ( COM ( 96 ) 0584 - C4-0683 / 96-96 / 0279 / ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , I should say at the outset that the view that I express this morning is the unanimous view of Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , and I wish to make it clear that it is unanimous .
Maximum residue limits - so-called MRLs - are the permitted levels of chemicals in animal products used for human food .
They are covered by a Council regulation that was established in 1990 and was due to expire in December 1996 .
The concept is a very important one : what is the safe level of each chemical for humans to eat ?
It is as simple as that , and so it is a matter not just of industrial policy or veterinary policy , it is a matter of public health .
The market was split in two in 1990 .
There were old substances - so-called - more than 180 of them already on the market , which were to be progressively tested in order to have MRLs established , and there were new substances which were yet to come onto the market and which would have to have MRLs set before they were allowed to be sold .
All the old substances were to be assessed and given MRLs by the end of 1996 .
This did not happen , meaning that all the substances currently without MRLs would , in fact , have to be banned from the Community unless legal action was taken .
The Commission was very slow to produce the proposal .
The old regulation expired in December 1996 , the new one was not transmitted to Parliament until 10 January 1997 .
The current situation therefore is that there is a legal vacuum .
The present Commission proposal tries to do two things : it tries to extend the time limit for the evaluation of chemicals , and we can accept that as it is clearly necessary ; but it also tries to classify the substances used in animal clinical trials .
A laudable aim , but I am afraid that two or three weeks is not sufficient time for Parliament to examine this properly and deal with a very important aspect of public health .
We need an assurance that all the remaining MRLs will be carried out within a given timescale , if we agree to an extension .
The committee is in no doubt that an extension is necessary , and we are prepared to go along with that .
But , frankly , the rest is not good enough and , in our view , we must make public health our top priority .
Moreover , the Commission proposal does not reflect concerns about clinical trials .
Companies , we are told , have not always supplied the right information , sometimes even because the Commission has not always made it clear what it wanted and there are far too many substances whose trials have not even begun , never mind been completed .
In this context , we cannot allow the risk to public health that untested chemicals might pose .
So we accept the logic of extending the deadline , but we cannot accept the rest of the proposal .
We have not been given time and we do not think it provides sufficiently for consumer safety : it is not complete and it leaves consumers , as well as drugs companies , in the dark .
The European Parliament has only one reading on this - it is an Article 43 proposal - and we understand that the Committee for Veterinary Medicinal Products may well report to the Commission in two weeks suggesting changes to the testing system .
And yet here we are today being asked to allow this through on the nod .
That is not satisfactory .
The proposal , the timescale and substantive policy measures are all quite different .
There are no rules in the Treaty to allow us to split this .
Moreover , in spite of the fact that the Commission has been asked to demonstrate what the legal argument is , so far , at 11.40 a.m , it has not done so .
I have not heard from the Commission what its legal argument is on the basis of the Treaty , and it is not for want of asking .
I was promised it an hour and a half ago this morning and I still have not received it .
It would have been preferable to fill the legal vacuum , but I am afraid that unless the Commission is able give a clear commitment that it will withdraw that part of the proposal that refers to the substances and agrees to proceed only with a timetable extension , then I am mandated by my committee to say quite clearly that we will take this back to committee for further amendment .
That is the unanimous view of the committee .
Mr Bangemann is indicating that he is surprised .
I do not know why he is - if , indeed , he is - because it was made clear at the committee stage that this was the unanimous view and it was made clear to him in a letter only yesterday .
I hope that the Commission can see its way to withdrawing the proposal which refers to the substances .
I hope the Commission can agree to proceed only with the timetable .
If it will do that , then I am quite happy to recommend to Parliament that we agree to the timetable change , but my committee is quite adamant that it will not agree to the rest .
Mr Bangemann has asked to speak .
I do not know whether it is for a motion of procedure or for a personal reason , but I noticed that he reacted very strongly .
So I will call upon him to speak straight away , with the permission of Mr Collins and the other persons intervening , whom I shall call upon subsequently .
Madam President , let me say first of all why I asked leave to speak just now - not because I am annoyed , but because we must begin by identifying the nature of the problem together .
I gathered from Mr Collins ' comments that there are still some uncertainties .
For that reason I should like to tell you at this point what we think about the matter and how we believe the problems can be solved .
Firstly , we certainly do not require Parliament to voice its opinion on the substance of the proposals within two weeks .
Parliament can have the time it needs to examine these proposals carefully .
The more recent developments can also be taken into consideration , and the Council - as Mr Collins knows - has confirmed in a letter to me that it will not decide on the substance before Parliament has formed and formulated its opinion .
The letter was also sent to Mr Collins , as I have just heard .
This means that nobody , either in the Council or the Commission , expects Parliament to deliver its opinion on the substance in a few days or hours , let alone here and now .
That is not our wish , nor is it the wish of the Council .
The Council has given a commitment .
I believe that , in the interinstitutional dialogue , we should not assume that it will break a commitment which is recorded in writing .
But , in order to relieve Parliament of this concern too , I can tell you now that , should the Council intend to decide without any parliamentary input , a scenario to which I attach no credibility whatsoever , we would withdraw the proposal .
We can do that at any time .
We would prevent the Council from taking a decision without Parliament having spoken .
All we ask - and Mr Collins has even said he would support this - is that Article 14 , in other words the extension of this time limit , be dealt with now , otherwise we shall get ourselves into an impossible tangle with regard to medicines that have been on the market for years and are perfectly harmless .
That is the problem .
It has taken a long time ; that is true .
This , however , is not the fault of the Commission . The Agency in London , for example , does not have enough staff , and the industry , as Mr Collins also said , has not always made the necessary documentation available .
So the technical legitimacy of a two-year extension of the time limit is not , to my knowledge , being questioned .
Madam President , I believe you will appreciate that it was necessary for me to say these things again here .
The substance , the proposal as a whole , is not at issue .
The Council will not decide before Parliament has delivered its opinion .
Parliament has all the time in the world , however much it needs , and the Commission hereby promises that if the Council did not honour the commitments it gave in its letter - and this is a purely abstract hypothesis - we should withdraw the proposal , which would then no longer exist .
The only thing we ask for as a matter of urgency is the application of Article 14 , and that is legally possible .
Madam President , the protection of animal breeding and human health are today priorities among the activities of the European Union , especially after recent events related to BSE .
At the same time , the operation of the single market must be adapted effectively , so that products in circulation or to be circulated will ensure the protection of health and conform with the rules embodied in international agreements .
The Commission proposal we are debating concerns the adaptation of the Regulation establishing maximum residue limits for veterinary medicines in foodstuffs of animal origin .
With this proposal , the Commission is trying to adapt the Regulation by entrusting the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products with the task of examining applications for the establishment , amendment and extension of MRLs , and to streamline the decision-making process by means of this centralized procedure .
At the same time , adaptation is considered essential because the Community must respect the obligations that stem from the agreement to implement sanitary and phytosanitary measures , reached during the multipartite negotiations of the Uruguay Round .
The objective aimed for should not just be to adapt the Regulation , but to make a real contribution to the protection of public health , so that the establishment of uniform MRLs will permit the free movement of foodstuffs and veterinary medicines and effectively safeguard the protection of consumers in the single market .
The first issue relating to the adaptation of the Regulation involves extending the timescale for the evaluation procedure .
The difficulties that have emerged in connection with evaluation at Member State level , and in connection with the newly constituted European Agency , which only began operating in 1995 , compel us to extend the timescale by two years , within which the Agency must complete its evaluation .
Here , it must be stressed that to ensure public health and consumer protection entails placing restrictions on hazardous substances , which must be assessed by December 1997 .
Madam President , the aim of this proposal is to ensure that the taking of medicines by animals destined for consumption does not present any danger to the consumer .
Veterinary medicines leave residues which persist for some time in animals , and are therefore likely to pass into the products destined for human consumption : meat , offal , milk and eggs .
The harmfulness of these residues depends mainly on their degree of concentration in the foodstuffs in question , that which is called ' maximum residue limit of veterinary medicines in foods of animal origin ' .
This is a technical definition , but it clearly states what it means .
This limit was fixed by the regulation of January 1992 .
Since this date , no drug authorization has been issued without this maximum limit being fixed .
Four hundred pharmaceutical products were awaiting this authorization , which should have been issued before the 1st January 1997 .
Unfortunately only 200 have been examined .
The remaining two hundred are threatened by immediate withdrawal from the animal treatment market , which would have catastrophic effects on the agro-food industry , without public health benefiting either .
We therefore ask for the date to be carried forward to the 1st January 1999 .
However , it would be dangerous and contrary to the protection of public health for foods originating from animals subjected to clinical trials to be consumed before a maximum limit - final and not provisional - has been established .
It is therefore essential for animals subjected to clinical trials not to be destined for consumption before this final limit is established .
Madam President , once again what we must bear in mind here is the safety of the consumer , and in this case his safety in relation to veterinary medicine residues in animal products .
First essential point , deadlines .
For the potentially most dangerous substances , it is of fundamental importance for these to be evaluated between now and the 31st December of this year , and if not prohibited from the 1st January 1998 .
Having said that , in view of the delay by the Commission , it is normal to accept an extension of three years for the other products which have yet to be evaluated by the European Agency .
This deadline is necessary , otherwise over 200 old products would be withdrawn from the market immediately without distinction between the good ones and the bad ones , which would not be fair .
Second essential point , clinical trials .
The Commission 's text is vague and imprecise on this point .
It concerns the consumption of food coming from animals which have undergone clinical trials and contain in the organism residues of substances , some of which could present risks to the consumer .
In the light of the crisis we are experiencing in the sector - and on this point I fully agree with Mr Lannoye - the entry of these drugs into the food chain is unacceptable .
Madam President , I think we have to be clear about this .
In intention I do not differ at all from Mr Bangemann .
I want to make that quite clear .
There the similarity between me and Mr Bangemann probably ends .
I do not know that too many people have noticed many similarities in the past anyway .
We accept entirely - everybody in the Chamber ; everybody who has spoken and those who have not - that the time limit has to change .
It can go to the end of the century , roughly speaking .
We need about another three years in order to achieve the testing requirements .
Where we are at variance , however , with Mr Bangemann is what you do legally with the rest .
While I respect Mr Bangemann 's intention to say to the Council : ' You cannot make a decision because you have not received Parliament 's opinion ' , the fact is that there is only one proposal on the table .
There is only one reading on that proposal on the table because it is proposed under Article 43 .
Parliament has no mechanism at all for splitting it and neither , so far as I can see , does the Commission or the Council .
What we have is a declared intention that they will not proceed .
I am afraid these letters that I have received are not of official status .
They do not reflect anything at all in the Treaty .
There is nothing in the Treaty so far as I know - I hope Mr Bangemann can change my mind on this - which says that such a letter of intent constitutes a legal obligation .
If there were such a thing then I might be persuaded to change my mind and the committee might be able to change its mind as well .
But at the moment we do not have the guarantee that Parliament would be allowed to give an opinion on something which it has already given its opinion on because there is only one reading and one regulation .
That is the nub of the problem .
If we can solve that , if Mr Bangemann can show to us what the legal base for all of this is , then we might be able to change our minds .
At the moment I can see no way forward at all , even though I agree with his sentiments and , I guess , he agrees with mine .
We are of one intent but I am afraid that our view in Parliament is that we cannot have sufficient trust in the procedure that is being suggested to make it happen .
I do not think that Mr Bangemann would be in a sufficiently powerful position vis-à-vis the Council to force it either because he would have no legal base for so doing .
Madam President , in order to avoid any difficulties in understanding my unclear German , I want to switch into my excellent English first and then to French , so that everybody who has participated in the debate does not have to rely on our inefficient interpreting service .
( Protests ) For me the service is excellent , I refer to the speeches made during that discussion .
Things have become clearer because , as I said in the beginning , we are dealing today only with Article 14 , we are not dealing with any other article .
Article 14 foresees the extension of two years of these substances which are already available on the market .
Ken Collins and the Parliament are ready to accept that .
Your concern is : ' what shall we do with the substance of the proposal ? ' I have already indicated that there are two letters , one , as you are aware , from the Council and another from my colleague , Marcelino Oreja , responsible for dealing with relations with Parliament , at the advice of our Legal Service .
The two positions are abundantly clear in terms of their legal interpretation : this is not the reading ; the urgency has only been asked for Article 14 - for nothing else .
Today we do not have to debate the substance .
Nobody is asking for that .
It can be done after the Parliament has taken its position .
The only question at stake today is whether the Parliament can accept urgent procedure under Article 14 and this is what we are asking for .
As to the guarantee , our Legal Service says it is alright .
The Council has only asked for the urgency of Article 14 and , formally , urgency was not asked for anything else .
In addition , if there were a difficulty , the Commission would be ready to withdraw the whole proposal in order to make it abundantly clear that Parliament has to state its view on the substance .
I will say a few words in French as comments have been made in French on substances .
If these comments reflect a position of Parliament - which remains to be seen - we are , as always , willing to consider what Parliament decides and you have time to decide .
Clinical trials and all the other things which concern you can be examined and decided subsequently .
The situation is quite clear , and this is why , if you agree with the change in Article 14 , I do not see any reason for not having it .
That is all you are asked for , nothing else .
Madam President , I am grateful to you for giving me the time and I am also grateful to Mr Bangemann for his explanation .
I know that we are supposed to vote on this in the next half hour or so .
I wonder if it might be possible for us to vote tomorrow instead .
Then I will have an opportunity to explore this personally with Mr Bangemann and his services and we might clarify the situation to our mutual satisfaction .
If you would agree to that , I think that would be the best solution .
I think it is an entirely reasonable proposal .
I turn to the House as we would normally have had to vote on this report this morning , at noon .
Are there any objections to us accepting this slight amendment to the agenda , namely postponing the vote on this report to tomorrow noon 's voting time ?
( The House indicated its agreement with the proposal ) The debate is closed .
The vote will be held tomorrow , at noon .
My dear colleagues , Mr Whitehead has put forward a request which I would like to grant .
Mr Whitehead is present , but he categorically cannot be here this afternoon , and he would like to deliver his report .
It is 12.01 p.m.
I will ask him to speak now for this purpose , asking him to observe the speech time so that we can then pass on to the vote .
Consumer policy priorities ( 1996-1998 )
The next item is the report ( A4-0317 / 96 ) by Mr Whitehead , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the communication of the Commission ( COM ( 95 ) 0519 - C4-0501 / 95 ) on priorities for consumer policy ( 1996-1998 )
Thank you , Mr Whitehead .
In view of the circumstances , it was not possible for your intervention to have the desired hearing as everyone was waiting for the vote .
The debate on Mr Whitehead 's report will be continued this afternoon at 15.00 hours .
Welcome
It is a pleasure to welcome a delegation from the International Centre for peace in the Middle East , now in the Distinguished Visitors ' Gallery .
The delegation , made up of representatives of the Knesset and the Palestinian Legislative Council , is here to meet the relevant delegations of the European Parliament .
This initiative is the first of its kind , and a unique opportunity to debate issues relating to the peace process in the Middle East , which affects us all very closely .
I also want to take this opportunity to welcome the European Union 's Special Envoy for the Middle East peace process , His Excellency Ambassador Moratinos .
Our relations with the Knesset and the Palestinian Legislative Council are excellent , and the contacts we already have at parliamentary level have demonstrated the common will to cooperate in a large number of sectors .
I hope this meeting will mark a new stage in the necessary rapprochement between the countries and towns we represent .
I wish the delegation from the International Centre for peace in the Middle East fruitful discussions and an excellent stay in Strasbourg .
Mr President , I am rising simply to seek clarification : there is a clear contradiction between what President Santer said yesterday in his report , on page 8 , which refers to systematic and compulsory labelling as the Commission preference and the statement we have today had from Commissioner Fischler who rejected all the amendments calling for the labelling of beef and beef products to be compulsory .
Before we take a vote on this issue , we want to be sure what the true position of the Commission is .
Is labelling compulsory or not ?
Is it systematic or not ?
The statements we have listened to did not imply that .
To say generally , as did Commissioner Fischler , that the Commission ' generally ' agrees that this should be compulsory but that there is to be no obligation or deadline for the immediate future is tantamount to not accepting that principle stated yesterday by President Santer .
Before we move to the vote , we want to be clear about the Commission position !
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very grateful for this intervention , because it does enable me to put something straight .
The honourable Member was evidently not listening this morning .
( Loud protests ) I explained this morning that the Commission accepts the possibility of basing all three proposals under discussion here on Article 100a .
The Commission also explained this morning that it clearly endorses a compulsory system .
Nevertheless , I did venture to point out that a certain transition phase will be necessary until we can actually have this compulsory system operating throughout all the Member States , since it requires an appropriate form of animal identification and of animal registration , which have to be carried out with the aid of computer technology .
So that those Member States which already fulfil all the conditions are not prevented from introducing a system of labelling during the transition phase , we believe it makes sense to allow voluntary labelling during that first phase , a view which , incidentally , met with the approval - or so it seemed to me at least - of most of those who attended the debate .
Now is not the time to debate this subject .
Questions can be asked when we get to the report .
I should just like to ask Commissioner Fischler one question : how long is the transition phase ?
I have just said that such questions must be put at the appropriate time .

Thank you very much for making that point , Mr Evans , because as you could tell , it was not just Mr Whitehead who was hardly listened to , but the Presidency itself , when calling for silence for this vote we would like to get on with .
I should just like to ask Commissioner Fischler one question : how long is the transition phase ?
I have already told you those questions must be put at the proper time .
Mrs Fontaine was referred to personally and is asking for the floor .
Mr President , I believe I usually ensure that this House is well respected .
But Mr Whitehead knew this perfectly .
He has enjoyed the benefit of a very large favour .
Normally , my dear colleagues , we should not have started his report .
It was past noon and we should have started the votes .
If , in addition to that , I had imposed silence on the House , we would have prolonged Mr Whitehead 's intervention even further , and I think he understood perfectly .
We were in very particular circumstances .
That , Mr President , is all I wanted to say .
Votes
Mr President , my reference to the regulations is based on Articles 127 , 122 and 43 .
Even if the radical Alliance group tried , by its amendments , to improve the compromise , we remain critical of a procedure which we feel is a renouncement of the European Parliament in an exceptionally grave affair .
We therefore have a basic disagreement , but my reference concerns the question of procedure which has led to the vote which will be held .
On Monday , Mrs Barthet-Mayer and Mr Puerta stressed the very strong reasons for postponing this vote to after that on the motion of censure .
Parliament decided otherwise and did not follow this demonstration , which was nevertheless very strong and based on considerable Parliamentary evidence .
I will therefore not return to the matter .
Mr Hory , this issue was settled on Monday in accordance with the established procedure .
I therefore naturally cannot allow it to be raised again in a manner which is rather an explanation of vote , since you invoke the article on explanations of vote .
I am sorry .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I would like to mention three points :

Firstly , may I remind our colleagues that Mr Fischler told us that the Commission accepts the change of the legal basis and the adoption of Article 100A , in other words , what we are doing today is the first reading.-Secondly , Mr President , from the vote list it appears that I proposed to Parliament that it should reject all the amendments which imply that the labelling system should not be compulsory . In my opinion all those amendments ought to be rejected , because the system must be compulsory , and the same applies to all the amendments that restrict labelling to meat alone , whereas your rapporteur 's proposal ...
... and the proposal by the Environment Commission is that the labelling system should apply to all beef products , preparations , processed products and by-products .
Thirdly , Mr President , Mr Fischler said that the Commission was in favour of compulsory labelling but is asking for a transitional period , and he stated that this is the reason why the Commission did not accept the amendments on compulsory labelling .
That caused indignation among many Members .
I would therefore like to ask Mr Fischler this question : Could we reverse our thinking on this , in other words , could the Commission accept all the amendments imposing compulsory labelling , but in parallel and not in conflict with them , add an article stipulating the transitional period required for the Member States to adapt , and asking that the said period should be as short as possible ?
( Applause )
Mr President , as the rapporteur rightly stated , because of the change in the legal basis this is now a first reading .
I therefore believe that we can come back in the context of the second reading to the wish expressed by the rapporteur .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , may I just remind you that I moved an oral amendment this morning for the legal basis to be changed from Article 43 to Article 100a and that the Commission has accepted it .
As you know , oral amendments cannot be put during voting .
But we will take note of it and it will appear in the Minutes so that the Commission can accept it , if it sees fit .
The Committee on Legal Affairs should also be informed .
That way we can respect the Rules of Procedure and go to the vote without this oral amendment .
I must inform Members that there is a corrigendum to the German version of this report and that Amendments Nos 1 and 28 do not relate to all the language versions , but an appropriate linguistic solution will be found with those involved in due course .
I must also inform you that the text of Amendment No 17 of the report by the Committee on Agriculture appears in the text of Amendment No 16 presented for vote in the part-session and Amendment No 35 has been withdrawn .
We are examining the motion for a regulation .
Mr President , before we proceed to the vote , I should like to hear Commissioner Fischler 's acceptance of what Mr Mayer just said .
Mr President , it is very interesting that those Members who speak my language are the very ones who apparently misunderstand what I say .
So let me declare for the third time that the Commission approves .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Ladies and gentlemen , may I welcome Mr Wole Soyinka , winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature , who came to see me this morning to tell me about the situation in Nigeria , on which Parliament is now fully informed .
Mr President , it is hardly surprising that a British Conservative would like to state a case as to why we voted against the Medina report this morning .
If I had been a fly on the wall yesterday I could well have heard some people trying to make us believe that the British Government was trying to promote BSE in our country .
I have to say that I regret very much the attitude that has been adopted by this House , because it missed the main point .
We cannot rewrite history and that is what the report tries to do .
It tries , in fact , to produce its own prejudices which are not backed by facts .
The committee really needed some scientific instruments to help it to come to the right conclusions - perhaps a retrospectoscope , because that is what it has used by trying to look back and not recognize that this was a new disease and a new situation that had arisen .
Let us all be very clear .
I am sure this Parliament and we , as British Conservatives , want to promote health and confidence .
There is no doubt about that .
Therefore we should look and see the situation in the United Kingdom itself : consumption is practically back to normal ; the beef industry is practically back to normal , and the measures that the government has taken in the United Kingdom have worked .
One cannot say that about the rest of Europe , and it is the lack of confidence that has created the problems .
The report does not identify the causes of the disease .
It only serves , as I say , to promote prejudices which are not backed by facts .
It is very easy to knock , it is very easy to be a narker and always to complain , but to do something positive to cure the problems is entirely different .
The production of animal protein seems to be the basis of the problem .
We have followed the practice in the United States and they do not seem to have a BSE problem there .
There are many issues I would like to address , but let me say this : Parliament seems to be ambivalent about what it is trying to do with Mr Hogg , the Minister .
It says , on the one hand , that he had a legal requirement to come and yet the resolution just adopted states that the institutional agreement needs to be strengthened so that we can demand him to come .
I would submit that there is not currently a legal base for that demand to happen .
Mr President , we voted against the joint resolution , as a conditional censure cannot be defended on a legal basis , and moreover the departments of Parliament had observed it .
A conditional censure cannot be defended on a political basis either .
In reality , a conditional censure is a phoney censure .
We have therefore voted against this joint resolution .
However , tomorrow we will vote for the motion of censure , as the mad cow problem is not , as some people try to make us believe , the fault of bad luck .
Nor is it the fault of the system .
To be precise , it is the fault of the people in charge of the system .
And the people in charge of the system , with all due respect to the preceding speaker , are the British government on the one hand and the Commission in Brussels on the other .
Consequently , we will vote for the censure . And this will have a certain effect , at least with regard to the French representation , as with the voices of eleven deputies of the French National Front , there will probably be a majority of French representatives in this Parliament who will vote on the motion of censure tomorrow .
One of the lessons to be drawn from the ' mad cow ' affair concerns the state of chaos of health controls in Europe , which has allowed the spreading of contaminated meal and meat , and thus of the disease itself .
This aspect of the dossier remains misunderstood , but it teaches us a great deal on the manner in which European institutions currently operate .
From the point of view of the single market , which was to eliminate all import controls on internal frontiers - hence also health controls - a directive 89 / 662 / CEE reorganized the system : the principal health supervision was no longer incumbent on the importing country , at its frontiers , but on the country of origin - in this case the United Kingdom for its meat exports .
However , this formula has cumulative inconveniences : it lays the burden of control on the partner who has the least interest in exercising it vigilantly .
To correct this bias , ' federal ' controls would have to be established for the supervision of exporting countries ; but this complicated structure would prove oppressive for national sovereignties , and also costly , as an army of officials would have to be recruited in Brussels .
That summarizes in a few sentences if not the causes of mad cow disease ( which originates from an agricultural policy contrary to nature ) , but at least the causes of its spreading ; the European Union has abolished its national controls , without introducing , or even first devising , other properly operational systems to take the relay .
What is the current situation ?
With fixed customs on internal frontiers having been abolished and documents which accompany goods having been eliminated too , controls are becoming very difficult .
They are exercised here or there , on the spot , with no serious documentary base and when goods are already circulating on the internal market of each country .
Under these conditions , fraud of every kind multiplies .
The chaos is complete .
A frightening indication has just been given by the report of the Committee of Inquiry of the French National Assembly on mad cow disease , with regard to customs control : none of the persons in authority interviewed - minister , central administration directors , presidents of professional syndicates - has been able to provide reliable figures on imports into France , during recent years , of animal meal of British origin .
Thus the European Union is now in a state of health disarmament , not by accident , but because of a policy which I do not hesitate to qualify as conscious disorganization destined , in the minds of the apprentice sorcerers who conceived it , to cause chaos in the European state .
One cannot fail to compare this very similar situation with the disorder which reigns with regard to collecting intra-Community VAT since the abolition of internal frontiers .
How can we get out of this ?
The naive immediately seize on ready-made solutions which the Commission hands out to them : more Community regulations !
More Community agencies !
More Community controllers !
But no one has tried to find out how much the installation of such a system , standardized and centralized on a European scale , could cost , or even whether it really can be achieved within a short time .
There is nothing stopping us from obtaining experience in this respect , but we must not rely on federal control of health regulations for an immediate escape from the crisis and chaos .
Rather , we believe that the single market has been vitiated by the dogma of the Commission , according to which it was absolutely necessary to abolish all frontier controls and all goods accompanying documents .
Free circulation has thus become free contamination .
To emerge from it , we must question this policy .
I welcome the serious challenge to the European Commission by the European Parliament to clean up its act on BSE .
In response to the EP 's inquiry into the BSE crisis , the President of the European Commission , Mr Jacques Santer , in the presence of 11 other Commissioners , implicitly conceded that there was much wrong with the system which should be reformed .
The report by the European Parliament which attacks the UK Government 's role throughout the BSE scandal is also severely critical of the Commission and of former Commissioner Ray MacSharry , who if not involved directly in a process of disinformation and down-playing the scandal , has been accused by the committee of inquiry of at least ' turning a blind eye ' .
Wilful short-sightedness by the Commission has done no favours for Europe 's consumers , nor even in the end for the EU 's and Ireland 's beef producers .
I strongly welcome the fact that responsibility for food policy is now to be removed from the auspices of the Agricultural Commissioner .
I also support the idea of a European equivalent of the FDA ( Food and Drugs Administration ) .
Through the Liberal Group , I agree not to censure the Commission now but to give it a few months to right the wrongs of the past through major food policy reforms .
If the BSE crisis has done nothing else it has thrown into sharp focus the overriding need to concentrate on consumer protection and to address consumers ' legitimate fears .
The institutions of the European Union and Member State governments must now work together to protect consumer interests at all times .
As such , the approach taken by the British authorities throughout this has been deeply regrettable .
Britain has taken an arrogant approach , insensitive to the implications of its behaviour for its partners in Europe .
While I welcome the concern of the Committee of Inquiry to fully investigate the BSE crisis I am puzzled by the approach they have taken in certain regards .
They called EU Commissioners and officials but did not call the man who had ultimate political responsibility at the time : the then President of the EU Commission , Jacques Delors .
The failure to call Mr Delors before the committee is a startling omission and only serves to question the fact as to whether the committee was even-handed in its approach .
Why was Mr Delors not called ?
Has it anything to do with the fact that the committee had an in-built socialist majority ?
Why did Mr Delors not come forward to protect and defend the Commission ?
The best way to address the BSE crisis now is not to look backwards with the perfect wisdom of hindsight but to establish a comprehensive strategy that will protect and reassure the European consumer .
Of necessity this means the British authorities will have to take a more cooperative and responsible approach .
The spread of BSE among the cattle population has now decimated affected herds and ruined the cattle industry throughout Europe , consequences in themselves extremely serious , but nevertheless out of proportion with the threat on human health if contamination of man from the meat of sick animals is confirmed .
Faced with this crisis , it was essential to isolate the faults , errors or malfunctions which contributed to the spread of the epizootic disease and an undermining of consumer protection , not only to determine everyone 's responsibilities , but mainly to take Draconian measures to prevent the recurrence of such a catastrophe .
The Medina report attributes the most serious fault to the British government which , in deregulating meat and bone meal production , has permitted the contamination of meal by the pathogenic agent which developed into BSE in cattle and which , downstream in the food chain , could develop into Jakob-Creutzfeld disease in man .
The incompetence of the British government is also blamed for having taken away the efficacy of measures intended to combat epizootic disease and the threat of an epidemic , in a vain attempt to protect its beef industry .
For its part , the Council has resigned from its institutional responsibilities .
The Commission has obviously striven to protect the interests of the market and its relations with the British government , before looking to the health of consumers .
In addition , the Committee of Inquiry has brought to light serious structural deficiencies in a decision-making process which concentrates on particular interests and is impermeable to general interest .
In the light of this situation , the tabling of a motion of censure against the Commission should be envisaged .
However , the bad management of this crisis was mainly due to the deeds of the previous Commission ; the President of the current Commission has undertaken to correct the malfunctions and proposes to amend the system of scientific consultation , the decision-making mechanisms , the means of control and the Community legal bases with a view to increasing the Community 's competence with regard to health .
Rather than precipitate an institutional crisis which risks lasting , it appears wiser to give the necessary reforms a chance to see the light of day as quickly as possible , implemented by a Commission threatened with censure if it does not put them into effect within a reasonable period .
This is why the vote on a motion which obliges the Commission to conform to the recommendations of the European Parliament , on pain of a further motion of censure , is the best solution .
Above all , it is important for the Commission to place consumer protection at the forefront of its preoccupations .
I abstained from the vote which has just been held in conclusion of the works of the Committee of Inquiry on BSE .
It is not because of I disagree with the remarkable report of Mr Medina , quite the contrary .
I consider that the report identifies precisely the overwhelming responsibilities primarily of the British government , but also of the old Commission and the current Commission in the mad cow affair .
This disaster , the extent of which no one can foresee , has been aggravated by mistakes made at all levels of responsibility : negligence , complaisance towards the British government , concealment of facts to Parliament , unacceptable pressure on the latter .
President Santer yesterday persisted in this attitude by denying , against the evidence , the unfortunate decision of the Commission to lift the embargo on gelatine .
This behaviour deserves immediate political sanction : the censure , which I will vote for tomorrow .
While Article 144 of the Treaty exists , public opinion will not understand if the Commission is not censured , bearing in mind the gravity of the established facts .
If Parliament does not adopt the motion I signed with Mr Happart , I think it should be proposed to the Inter-governmental Conference to repeal Article 144 , which 50 years ago established a regime of political irresponsibility to the benefit of the Commission .
It would be better to take note and introduce effective control of the executive power of the kind exercised by the American Congress .
However , I find placing the Commission under supervision , as adopted by the resolution we have just voted on , to be pernicious .
It seriously weakens a Commission whose authority has already been severely shaken by the current crisis .
It undermines its independence from Parliament , but also from the Council and Member States .
It prepares a reduction of its powers and responsibilities during the current revision of the Treaty .
I do not know whether that is the intention of my colleagues who have just voted on this resolution , but I fear that it will be the result .
A candid political sanction would be better , which would make it possible to distribute on a sound basis and preserve the prospects of democratization of our institutions .
I voted for the compromise with misgivings .
Our Parliament should not be threatening to censure the Commission when the real culprits remain in office in the UK Government .
They created the BSE problem and allowed it to spread and become endemic in many Southern areas .
They failed to contain BSE and have behaved atrociously with their ' Policy of Non Cooperation ' and arrogant rejection of Europe 's offers to finance a sensible eradication programme .
No wonder Europeans are now calling for compensation for the damage wreaked by the UK 's incompetence .
Alas , we Scots cannot seek compensation for the destruction of our beef export markets and we are not as well protected against England 's BSE as our fellow Europeans .
My Euro-seat accounts stupidity has unduly penalised my farmers .
In the absence of reason in Westminster , and at their own costs , Scottish beef producers created their own ' BSE free ' quality assurance scheme which the Scottish Secretary denigrated and undermined ' in the interests of UK unity ' !
My Party sought to cite the Scottish Secretary 's name in the Censure Motion against Mr Hogg in Westminster this week .
Michael Forsyth banned the flying of the European Flag in Scotland .
May the Union Jack flying over his Scottish Office remind Scots of the UK 's betrayals , and may the European Parliament condemn the cynicism of the UK 's ' BSE ' policy of ' Blame Someone Else ! '
Concern for public health must be the overriding consideration for all involved in the food industry .
In this regard the role of farmers and producers is crucial .
The role of legislators , at national and European level , is also central to a safe food industry .
Consumer confidence is now at an all-time low .
The primary responsibility of the institutions of the EU and all Member State governments is to protect consumer interests at all times and in doing so to restore the level of confidence in beef as a quality food product .
The European Parliament 's Committee of Inquiry into BSE is but one examination of the entire BSE crisis .
While I support all endeavours to resolve this crisis , I am not satisfied that the committee was entirely even-handed in its approach .
Its criticisms of former EU Commissioner MacSharry are unjustified .
Ray MacSharry has already very effectively refuted criticisms made of him by the committee .
However , I would like to add that it is easy to evaluate past events with the wisdom of hindsight .
It would be more accurate to evaluate these circumstances in the context of the particular time .
Ray MacSharry was one of the great reforming Commissioners of recent times and Irish farmers owe him a great debt of gratitude .
The committee of inquiry will not dim this reputation in any way .
It is important to bear in mind that the real culprits of the entire BSE saga are the British authorities , who have displayed great arrogance and total insensitivity to the implications of their behaviour for their fellow EU Member States , not least Ireland .
Any future strategy to resolve the BSE crisis must include a responsible and cooperative response from the British authorities .
As it concerns the resolution common to several groups , the European Radical Alliance remains critical with regard to the pusillanimity of the European Parliament , which has refused , in an affair of exceptional gravity - gravity emphasized by all the speakers during the discussions on the 18th February - to use the political means made available to it by the Treaty .
We therefore have a basic disagreement on the compromise which is submitted to us and on which we do not intend to vote .
However , our position with regard to this vote is mainly dictated by the choice of procedure made by our House at the session on the 17th February .
During this session , Mrs Barthet-Mayer and Mr Puerta emphasized the imperative reasons why we had to postpone this vote until after that on the motion of censure .
Parliament did not follow this demonstration , even though it was argued and based on several pieces of Parliamentary evidence .
It is therefore not appropriate to return to it , except to say that the vote on the motion submitted to us by the five associated groups has the indirect result of taking away from the motion of censure part of its political meaning , and marginalizing the members of Parliament who support it in the exercise of their prerogatives .
This is why the European Radical Alliance group has decided , by a majority , not to take part in the vote .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left has not signed the motion for a joint resolution and has abstained on the vote .
There are two reasons for this position .
As we will be voting tomorrow on a motion of censure on the Commission , it is an interference to include in the agenda a resolution which affects the motion of censure .
As the United European Left has decided to support the censure motion , it considers it inconsistent to vote on a resolution which interferes with such an important matter .
The joint resolution proposes to postpone the censure motion and make it conditional on the Commission applying certain measures , and that is another reason for our abstention .
A censure motion can only apply to past liability and cannot dictate future actions .
That is our basic reason for not voting on the joint resolution .
The report of the committee of inquiry into BSE notes that the Commission has incurred irreversible liability .
If liability exists and is irreversible , the procedure is to present an immediate motion of censure .
The postponement of the immediate motion of censure is a complete dereliction of Parliament 's duty of control and the joint resolution is an attempt to justify that dereliction .
Parliament 's efforts to uncover the facts concerning the chain of events which provoked the BSE crisis should have yielded valuable lessons for the future administration of agricultural and food safety policy .
Instead the work undertaken by the Committee of Inquiry is being undermined by the motion of censure before this Parliament which , if successful , will result in the sacking of all the present College of Commissioners despite the fact that most of the events which ultimately resulted in the BSE crisis took place before this Commission even took office .
This motion of censure is welcome news for the British Government which has consistently tried to divert the attention of the British public away from their own government 's primary responsibility for this entire crisis by trying to blame the European Commission for the failings of their own Ministers and public servants charged with responsibility for food safety policy .
Those responsible for this motion should reconsider their action and , in my view , concentrate their efforts on working with the Commission to ensure that any lessons learned from the investigations undertaken by the Committee of Inquiry are reflected in the future administration of agricultural and food safety policy at both European and national level .
The final report of the Committee in Inquiry is severely weakened because of the Committee 's failure to call a number of key witnesses .
Why , for instance , did the Committee not call the former President of the Commission and well-known socialist politician , Jacques Delors ?
In my opinion , former President Delors , who bore ultimate political responsibility for the actions of the European Commission would have confirmed the comprehensive rebuttals of his agricultural Commissioners against the allegations concerning the activities of the Commission 's services during the Delors era .
Criticism of the actions of the Commission during the Delors era reflects badly on former President Delors and he should have been given the opportunity to refute these criticisms .
Equally puzzling was the failure to call the Presidents of the Scientific Veterinary Committee during the relevant period .
The Committee would surely have been assisted in their investigations if they had had the benefit of evidence form the specialists who had a central role to play as this problem developed into the major crisis it ultimately became .
A further puzzling aspect of the Committee 's work was the decision to make documents containing damaging allegations available to the public before the individuals in question even had an opportunity to address the Committee .
Former Commissioner MacSharry was the victim of this kind of questionable practice and the Committee should have the common decency to apologise for putting allegations against him into the public domain one month before he even had the opportunity to offer evidence to refute these allegations .
It is worth recalling that when the former Commissioner addressed the Committee he refuted these allegations in a detailed , open , effective and comprehensive manner .
Finally , the report of the Committee of Inquiry was severely damaged by the failure of the British Minister for Agriculture to attend and give evidence before the Committee .
Clearly , one of the lessons to be learned from this whole affair is that Committees of Inquiry must have the power to legally compel witnesses to attend and give evidence .
Otherwise , the final report of such committees will be based on incomplete investigation and , as in this case , the excellent work undertaken by colleagues sitting on these committees will be devalued by factors beyond their control .
President Santer spoke very sympathetically yesterday of the European Parliament 's criticism of the Commission .
He admitted that the work of the Commission in past years has been highly inadequate and that none of the action which should have been taken to shield the citizens of the European Union from danger has actually been taken .
If this is recognized , Mr Santer , it must also have consequences .
It emerged from the meetings of the parliamentary Committee of Inquiry that some officials - even senior officials - of the Commission were obviously not prepared to cooperate with the European Parliament .
Officials such as Mr Legras or Mr Mansito even obstructed the work of the Committee of Inquiry , although they , as the head and deputy head respectively of Directorate-General VI , bear immediate responsibility for the defects that were discovered .
Such conduct must surely have consequences .
Officials who demonstrate incompetence cannot simply be allowed to continue in their posts .
In the case of Mr von Moltke of the Directorate-General for Tourism , as you know , the recent pressure exerted by the European Parliament was successful .
We must also mount the same sort of pressure against DG VI .
But of course we must not target officials as part of a strategy of catching the small fry and letting the big fish go free .
The Commission , and above all its President , must take political responsibility for the shortcomings of their institution .
The existence of BSE did not just come to light yesterday , as we all know .
Nor has the Santer Commission only been in office since yesterday .
To date there have been 16 deaths from BSE in Europe .
How many deaths would have been needed before the Commission took any action on its own initiative ?
Political responsibility for the professional misconduct of civil servants always lies with the competent ministers , or in this case with the commissioners ; that is a fine European , or at least British , tradition .
Commissioner Fischler should simply have mucked out his Augean stable sooner .
And he should not act now as if his predecessors had made all the mistakes .
The Green Group tabled a proposal for a ' suspended vote of no-confidence ' in order to emphasize this political responsibility .
This threat seems to have been necessary to persuade Mr Santer to admit publicly for the first time to the glaring errors made by the present Commission and the previous one .
Other bodies , of course , have failed us .
The conduct of the British Government can only be described as malevolent and ignorant .
An action for damages against the United Kingdom ( and that country 's animal meal and meat industries ) before the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg is the only appropriate response .
Mr Borchert and the other European agriculture ministers have also failed us .
They remained inactive far too long and placed economic interests above the lives of their citizens .
Responsibility for the BSE scandal , of course , also lies in the structures of the EU .
The single market has led to a reduction in the standard of consumer protection .
We Greens have always warned against the creation of an internal market without proper ecological and social safeguards .
But of course for the economic liberals in all parties , from Mrs Thatcher to Mr Bangemann , the deregulation of protective mechanisms has been the paramount aim .
We are now paying the penalty for this misguided form of European integration .
Effective control mechanisms for consumer protection have never been established ; in the domain of agriculture the Commission has been its own judge and jury .
Simply setting up a new directorate-general for consumer protection within the Commission is far from enough .
It is high time we had an independent European food inspectorate .
And it is high time we had greater transparency and more rights for the European Parliament .
The meetings of all specialized committees of the Commission will have to be accessible to the public .
No-confidence motions against specific politically responsible Commissioners must also be permissible in future .
And the European Parliament must have a right of codetermination in future on all questions of agricultural policy .
And of course we need a completely different European agricultural policy .
The feeding of meat-and-bone meal to herbivores must be generally prohibited .
Such meal may only be fed if high safety standards are applied , which is not the case in Britain 's deregulated agricultural industry .
Financial incentives must be created for welfareorientated animal husbandry and levies and conditions imposed for industrial mass production of livestock .
We Greens have always advocated organic farming and welfare-orientated husbandry and have been severely critical of European agricultural policy .
The BSE scandal , in this tragic manner , has now proved us right .
Mr President , I was not a member of the Committee of Inquiry on BSE , nor have I had any speaking time during the plenary debate .
Nevertheless , I feel I should state clearly that , if the report of this temporary Committee of Inquiry had been put to the vote here , I should have been unable , for the following reasons , to support it :
The statements regarding the political responsibility of the Commission - past and present - and of the previous Commissioners for Agriculture , as well as the present one , for errors and omissions are too sweeping and are devoid of any differentiation , often condemning out of hand without considering the reality of the situation over the years , with the result that an objective observer of developments from Delors to Santer and from MacSherry to Fischler simply cannot accept such indiscriminate accusations .

This was compounded by the fact that the Committee of Inquiry did not even have the courage to summon President Delors .
It is quite unfair to tar Mr Steichen with the same brush as Mr MacSherry , and it is quite simply grotesque to want to send the Santer Commission packing but not even to invite Mr Delors to give evidence .
It is a pity that the Committee of Inquiry , which has done a lot of good work , has shot itself in the foot by assigning guilt in this entirely indiscriminate manner .
On the other hand , I wish to state categorically that I welcome the recommendations made by the Committee of Inquiry for future action and , after the courageous statement made by President Santer yesterday , I am sure that the Commission will act on these recommendations with the measures that we and the people of this Community have every right to expect , in order to eradicate the cattle disease and to give due priority to the health of our citizens .
The report of the Temporary Committee of Inquiry into the management of BSE has revealed the internal malfunctions of the Commission .
Naturally , one must not overlook the various responsibilities of the United Kingdom , the Council and the British meal manufacturers .
In the minority position I presented , I showed the advantage of creating an independent organization which would enable decisions to be taken free of suspicion or influence .
This is why I stated that this Agency should be subject to EN 45004 standards .
However , in addition to setting up an independent agency , it is also necessary for the control departments of the member States to be subject to the same international rules for ensuring conformity .
It is with great interest that I have learned of Mr Santer 's proposals on the envisaged reorganization of the Commission .
However , even if the measures submitted are interesting , this cannot call into question the responsibilities for the past management of the dossier by the Commission .
This is why I have signed the tabling of the motion of censure and will of course vote for it tomorrow .
If individual censure of a member of the Commission were possible , many of us in this House would have censured Mr Fischler .
I think the management of the Agriculture Commission has significantly damaged the Commission as a whole and his attitude at the committee of inquiry left much to be desired - and just yesterday in the debate he was not even listening to the speeches by such distinguished Members as Mrs Redondo Jiménez .
To vote for a motion of censure on a Commission for events which occurred before it took over has no basis in logic or politics , so tomorrow I shall vote against this initiative .
But putting conditions on the Commission , as in paragraph 7 of the joint resolution , to my mind means weakening the action of the Commission in the face of the challenges the Union has to face in the coming months , including the Intergovernmental Conference .
I have always thought that the interests of Parliament lie in having a strong Commission and not a Commission loaded down with conditions .
So for once I will depart from the my group 's position and vote against conditional censure .
The members of the European Parliament , elected by universal suffrage , must defend European citizens .
Their health is the most precious possession , and they hold their elected politicians responsible for it .
We have been able to measure it in France , in the ' contaminated blood ' drama .
This is why we have taken the initiative of a Committee of Inquiry to throw light on the so-called ' mad cow ' drama .
The conclusions of this report are crushing .
First of all , I would like to denounce the enormous responsibility of the British government .
By her policy of phytosanitary deregulation in the 1980s , Margaret Thatcher authorized the lowering of the temperature for the manufacture of meal .
By thus lowering the cost of the product , the British government and some industrialists made this meal lethal !
The British government then prohibited it in its country , without checking the implementation of this measure , without closing its frontiers and without authorizing European health committee controls .
The responsibility of the Brussels Commission is equally engaged .
It appears that certain officials voluntarily slowed down the circulation of information and hindered all transparency in this terrible affair .
Both must now acknowledge their responsibility and sanctions should be taken .
This is why I will vote for the compromise resolution , and will ensure that all the recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry are implemented , mainly those relating to the engagement of the responsibility of the British government , who is mainly liable .
But I cannot agree to leave unsanctioned the heavy faults committed by the current Commission in the management of the crisis .
I will also vote for immediate censure , on Thursday .
Of course we can accuse the Commission and the British Government of negligence over the handling of BSE .
But for Parliament to deliver a vote of no confidence against the Commission is really going too far , especially as the mistakes which have been made were primarily made by former Commissioners .
A vote of no confidence under these circumstances would be no more than an empty political gesture .
The results of the temporary committee of inquiry into BSE must be interpreted in the spirit and letter of the treaties and derived legislation as well as the principle of subsidiarity .
From this viewpoint it is very clear that all the primary responsibility lies with the United Kingdom Government , which has a duty to protect the health of persons and animals and has shown utter negligence in this area .
Thus , the report states that the greatest weight of responsibility falls on the United Kingdom Government .
The committee has demonstrated the negligent conduct of the United Kingdom .
There were many negative aspects to the United Kingdom 's conduct and one of them was the failure to guarantee an effective ban on feeding meat and bone meal to ruminants ; not respecting the national bans preventing the import of meal from the United Kingdom ; putting pressure on the European Commission not to carry out inspections .
Similarly , the United Kingdom Government did not adequately apply the commitments it made in the Council of Ministers in 1990 and finally , the European Parliament vigorously censures the United Kingdom for its blockade of the Community institutions .
Also responsible are the companies which exported animals carrying BSE , and beef products and derivatives .
In due course they will be facing compensation claims in the courts for public and criminal liability .
The European Commission 's responsibility lies at another level .
The Commission has powers of higher inspection , that is , the power to inspect national inspection services and require fulfilment of European legislation .
That is why the parliamentary committee of inquiry stresses the responsibility of the European Commission in prioritizing the interests of managing the market and lacking foresight about the risks to human health and the spread of the disease to other countries .
The European Parliament also censures the European Commission led by Mr Delors for failing to carry out inspections during the period 1990-1994 .
As regards the responsibility of the present Agriculture Commissioner , Mr Fischler , he must answer for various acts of negligence , in particular the Commission 's decision to lift the ban on exports of gelatine , tallow and semen .
Here the Commission must accept responsibility as a college for having acted against the opinion of the scientific committees .
The same can be said of the group of Member States in the European Council which supported the measure .
For the future of the European Union it is important to draw the institutional consequences .
The European Union needs real executive powers of direct inspection as well as higher inspection and the capacity to withdraw products from the market automatically and ban their sale , both inside and outside the European Union .
Similarly , it must be given powers to require strict fulfilment of Community legislation by the Member States .
Recommendation for second reading Tamino ( A4-0011 / 97 )
The subject presented here is important as it discusses in depth transport intermodality .
It is clear that today , throughout Europe , the distribution of infrastructure charges according to type of transport and the assumption of social costs in transport prices are marked by serious inequalities .
These inequalities are naturally to the detriment of non-road modes , and consequently combined transport .
In this context , I can only agree with the Commission 's draft regulations , for two reasons .
First of all , the Commission proposes to prolong the existing device of financial support to inter-modal services , while leaving the member States freedom of choice in the allocation of these aids .
Then , the Commission 's proposal goes in the direction of a reduction in procedures , mainly replacing the a priori control it currently exercises by an a posteriori control .
I believe that the aids thus supported constitute a very interesting means of compensation in favour of development of inter-modal transport , placing the emphasis on the important position of navigable waterways .
I also voted in favour of the common position of the Council which the Committee on Transport and Tourism recently adopted .
But these aids are still too little in relation to the real requirements .
In fact in the medium term , beyond these mechanisms of compensation , it will be necessary to apply a transport policy which is really centred on intermodality .
For this , in the first place there must be true harmonization of competition conditions at European level .
There should also be regulations which encourage the integration of all real costs in the pricing of different modes of transport .
In this respect , the Commission has put forward , in a recent Green Paper , the stakes for the internalization of external costs generated by transport .
It is a very important element of Parliament 's reflection on inter-modality , and it is in this direction that European deputies must continue their efforts to promote an increasingly intermodal form of transport .
Weiler report ( A4-0016 / 97 )
The reports just presented by the Commission show that the cost of social protection in the countries of Europe has increased very rapidly over the recent period ( from 24 % of the GNP in 1980 to over 30 % today ) , and that this drift is , for the most part and more or less everywhere , due to unemployment allocations .
If we wish to save our social systems , we must reduce unemployment , and to do that , we must first understand where it is coming from .
The Commission 's reports are far from this , since they see it first as the result of a general recession .
Unfortunately , this is not the case .
The current recession comes within an extended and gradual slowing down of the European growth trend of twenty years .
This results from the interaction of two different but closely overlapping causes : the opening of our frontiers without precautions and the relatively high level of our wages and social charges .
In an open economy , the charges which burden employment in Europe feed unemployment , which increases social protection costs , which in turn are a slightly heavier burden on growth , slowing it down and increasing unemployment further .
This is the vicious circle we are shut in , which , if we do not take action , is leading straight to increased compulsory levies , even an explosion of social systems and the rise to power of a society of everyone for himself , throwing an entire proportion of the population into extreme poverty .
The paradox of the situation is that everyone virtuously condemns this type of society , but very few venture to combat the causes , which are primarily the bureaucratization of certain social systems , the absence of Community priority for employment and the release of a simplistic world free trade policy , which is a perversion of true free trade .
To rectify the national social systems , it is obviously necessary to reform their operating rules : to better target aids , and abandon passive support measures in favour of active measures which encourage the unemployed back to work , as proposed by the Commission .
But we must also favour cheaper and more competitive management rules for social bodies , while remaining within the framework of rules of public solidarity .
Finally , the problem must be raised of Community priority for employment , and the related problem of maintaining without limit the minimum social income for the long-term unemployed from non-member countries .
But these reforms would not suffice to reabsorb unemployment if they did not attack at the same time the difficult problem of fair foreign commercial relations in a world-wide economy .
The determining question in this respect is as follows : how , in a completely open and unprotected economy , can a country or group of countries decide tomorrow on a higher social policy than that of its neighbours , without increasing its charges and thus disqualifying itself in competition ?
Curiously , this essential question , which the Commission identifies perfectly with respect to relations between European countries , as I mentioned during this morning 's debate , is hushed up when it concerns relations with the rest of the world .
However , in the latter case , the problem is infinitely more serious , and it is that which , through a deterioration in employment , places the heaviest handicap on the future of our social systems .
It is understandable that after upholding the conclusions of the Uruguay Round , neither the Commission nor the European Parliament wished to hear these truths .
However , we must take stock of them one day if we wish to rectify the situation .
The ELDR Group welcomes the initiative on the debate on the future of social protection in Europe but has not given its support to the Weiler report .
The main reason is that it contains a number of conservative proposals which are not consistent with the new development needed at European level .
The Group welcomes the more progressive contribution of Dutch Minister for Social Affairs and Employment Melkert to the debate and hopes that the Commission will proceed along new and progressive lines .
The public finance crisis , the constraints associated with mass unemployment and the development of the age pyramid are leading the European Union to enter fully into the debate on the future of social protection in Europe .
On this subject , Mrs Weiler 's report ( PE 220.210 ) is in the right direction .
For all that , we must draw the European Parliament 's attention to section 11 of Mrs Weiler 's report : ' ... takes guard against the privatization of social risks , especially with regard to health ' .
We think that this section would have merited further development , as it constitutes one of the major challenges of this debate .
In fact we consider that there is a large risk for the entire fabric of society not to be attentive to a drift which , under cover of economies , alleged better management and laying responsibility on the user , leads States increasingly to reduce ' health ' cover and transfer risks of compulsory joint systems to supplementary systems .
These supplementary systems , which are increasing , are subject only to market rules .
The danger is now that we will see our health system drift towards the American model ( risk selection , exclusion , individualization ) .
Health cannot be considered a lucrative market .
We request that , right from now , the Commission takes over this point and opens the debate on ' compulsory and supplementary health systems and general interest ' .
Mr President , my dear colleagues , the Commission regularly presents an up-todate report on social protection in all Member States , in order to give political decision-makers a good perception of the situation , which should enable them to implement the best social policy possible .
It is necessary , but not enough !
Our colleague Mrs Weiler tries to clarify the very concept of social protection , and invites the European Union to play a more important and more active role .
It was needed !
The history of the construction of Europe is partly based on the aim of guaranteeing and seeking a higher standard of living , which passes for a high level of social protection .
Many of us are convinced that our societies do not suffer from too much solidarity , quite the opposite .
And now it is the associated questioning of this aim which so much abuses the European idea itself .
The Union thus has every interest in investing in its social protection and not considering it as a burden on the economy , but well and truly as the expression of a society model , or even a motive power of productivity and so growth .
The Union is in the process of completing its economic union , inviting all the Member States to respect the convergence criteria defined in Maastricht .
This is a necessary stage .
Is it Utopic to hope that in Amsterdam , in June , the Council will establish social convergence criteria aiming to ensure , for all citizens of the Union , the highest possible level of social protection , while safeguarding and renewing our social security systems ?
One can also fear it and so , above all , we must henceforth militate for that , as it is vital for the European ideal !
Our colleague 's report is orientated towards a social integration of Europe , combining our acquired knowledge , developing citizenship based on the social aspect and solidarity .
There will be no Europe without a social Europe !
All the inquiries show it , European citizens are anxious about the consequences of the single currency on social protection .
Quite rightly !
The constraints linked to the application of Maastricht criteria serve as a pretext to governments to put pressure on wages costs and make cuts in social expenditure .
As explained by the Commission in its communication on social protection : ' The globalization of the world economy and the imperatives of competition will probably necessitate a continued moderation of the growth of wages costs .
It will be more difficult , under these conditions , to increase company contributions and charges ' .
In the name of strict short-term financial profitability of companies , on the one hand it is a question of reducing their contribution to the redistribution of the wealth produced , and on the other hand of transforming the health and security requirement into a vast market open to the appetites of large financial groups .
Health and social protection would thus be considered simply as goods , making it more difficult for the population to gain access to care .
In all Member States , there flourish old recipes for individualization and privatization of risks , with capitalization being presented as a remedy in the face of distribution .
In its communication , the Commission relays this offensive , wishing to place social protection in the context of European competition .
It wishes to introduce market elements in the social protection sector , and even instigate competition between the health systems of the Fifteen .
The report by the Committee on Social Affairs , Employment and the Working Environment corrects these orientations .
In particular , it requests that the social security regime continue to rest on the principle of solidarity , and pleads for a transfer of the tax burdening labour to other sectors .
Our group estimates that the taxation of capital movements and its contribution to social protection would make it possible to lighten the cost for workers .
Our group rejects the strictly economical approach to social protection , which aims to commercialize everyone 's legitimate aspiration of security , and to turn it into goods .
We request that the principle of solidarity be maintained and made widespread to meet the need for security of the people , the need to protect yourself and to provide jointly against social risks .
Only systems of social protection and social security based on solidarity permit a high level of social protection and services for everyone , with a good contributions / efficacy ratio .
They allow the risks of social fracture or pauperization of a proportion of the population to be reduced .
The maintenance of a high level of social protection is linked to the values of solidarity , respect for individuals and democracy , values which are ridiculed if one applies the rules of competition .
We are anxious to do something about social dumping but do not consider that standardising social security systems and national labour market policies is the best method of achieving this .
This is why we are abstaining from the final vote .
We think it is important that each individual in the EU has the right to reasonable basic levels of social security .
The Weiler report contains a number of sensible points covering actions to promote employment and sustainable economic development .
Taking action against social dumping is also important .
But it was quite clear , from the debate and the report , that this is the first stage towards harmonisation of social welfare .
This means that we cannot support the report .
We think that each individual country should take their own decisions on social legislation , decisions which they consider necessary and reasonable .
This is a national matter and not something which should be dealt with at EU level .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the Weiler report .
This report expresses concurrence with the Commission that Member States should uphold the commitment to promoting a high level of social protection and assist with the gradual coordination of Member States ' social protection regulations for the creation of minimum standards .
Overall the report contains sensible considerations and provides scope for an interesting debate in the future .
The Danish Social Democrats are interested , however , in obtaining further clarification of certain points , e.g. the situation of people who work in border areas .
It is also our opinion that the dividing up and financing of social services should remain a national affair .
The Weiler report clears the way for a thorough debate on how to create real freedom of movement for the people of Europe .
The report reflects the views of all sides of this Parliament .
From a British perspective it is interesting to note that the report reflects a Council Recommendation signed under the British presidency in July 1992 .
Norman Lamont , the then President of ECOFIN , signed the Recommendation on the convergence across Europe of social protection objectives and policies . The ' Lamont ' Recommendation of 1992 underpins much of what has been said in this report and what has been agreed today in Parliament .
It pleases me and the European Parliamentary Labour Party to find such strong support for this report .
However , we could not agree to support the amendments which called for a new tax on carbon fuel and an extension of qualified majority voting in the area of the social protocol . We have abstained on those two issues .
The Commission 's report on social protection in Europe in 1995 , commented on by our colleague Mrs Weiler , proposes a general disputable framework , but nevertheless hides some analyses which are very relevant , especially on interruptions or reductions of activity in order to provide care .
The Commission states that family care reduces the cost of social protection , enabling handicapped people , young children and the elderly to be better taken care of , mainly thanks to the permanent presence of the spouse who performs this service .
The Commission 's report emphasizes in this respect the importance of the informal services rendered by the family , when one of its members does not have a remunerated job in order to be able to look after young children , handicapped adults or disabled elderly persons .
The Commission emphasizes , with regard to the importance of these services , that the benefits which are now attached to them are entirely inadequate , especially if a career is interrupted .
The specific allocations created in certain countries ( child-minding allowance , handicap allowance , etc . ) are very low and the spouse who has interrupted a remunerated activity to provide this type of service is in effect penalized : lower social insurance and unemployment benefits , reduced retirement pensions , ineligibility for additional pensions , etc .
These services provided by the family , particularly important for the whole of society , are all the more so now that the population of elderly people is increasing greatly in European countries .
As our society is also characterized by a growing number of women in remunerated work , it is more difficult now for many women to provide important informal services free of charge .
The Commission unfortunately confines itself to these facts and analyses and does not venture forth into innovative proposals which would be of a nature such as to permit the maintenance and development of these informal services , which it acknowledges would permit a significant reduction in social protection costs .
It might therefore be useful for the Commission to continue its reflection by examining in particular to what measure the introduction , for example , of a parental wage instead of the existing specific allocations , would encourage the development of informal family services which our society , in its current structure , needs most and from which it would draw the most benefit .
The future of social security in Europe is purely and simply crucial to the future of Europe . Developments to date , in which the labour force in the Member States has seen ' Europe ' being used in practice as a battering ram to break down the national systems of social security , must be radically reversed .
We must change to a supranational strategy of social security and integration , creating effective forms of solidarity and cohesion within and across national boundaries .
Mrs Weiler 's report points cautiously to some objectives for the future . That should be supported , precisely because of the current preparations for a monetary union which , unfortunately , is headed in the opposite direction .
At the same time it should once more be stated clearly that our Europe will forfeit its future if it does not really take these first cautious steps , not to mention the necessary parallel steps in other areas , ranging from the restoration of full employment to the establishment of a supranational right to strike .
Papayannakis report ( A4-0037 / 97 )
Recently there has been growing and justified lack of confidence on the part of consumers about eating beef and beef products , as a logical consequence of the scandal of bovine spongiform encephalopathy , popularly known as ' mad cow disease ' .
This disaster is at the root of consumers ' indignation at meat continuing to be marketed as an ' anonymous ' product , with its origin not stated .
The whole distressing situation makes clear the need to establish better control over production , the first requirement of which is modern production of meat products , geared to consumers needs .
As a first step a clear labelling system is required to inform and reassure consumers about the quality and true origin of these products .
Better labelling and an effective identification and registration system for beef cattle are indispensable both in production and subsequent marketing .
Under the circumstances I shall vote in favour .
We have chosen to vote for the report on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the labelling of beef and beef products , although we think it would be better for this to be controlled and determined nationally .
We would like to make it very clear how important we think it is that Member States themselves are able to introduce stricter labelling requirements if they wish .
We are supporting the report as we consider it to be better than the Commission 's proposal .
We particularly support the view that labels on meat must include information on any potential embryo modifications or the animal 's transgenetic origin and information on the use of antibiotics and stimulants during feeding .
Mayer report ( A4-0022 / 97 )
We have voted against the Mayer report as we feel that the basic fault lay with the EU Agriculture Policy itself .
The BSE crisis should be seen as the first warning , a challenge to us to reform agricultural policy .
The proposal for this system of identification and registration of cattle is linked to policies pursued by the EU , the fact that border controls are about to be abolished .
This is already very clear as far as salmonella is concerned .
We think the introduction of this absurd identification and registration scheme for cattle is the wrong way to tackle BSE . We should instead be concentrating on a total ban on the use of carcasses in animal feedstuffs .
It is deplorable that such a large organisation has to be established in order to control the health of cattle within the European Union .
If this is considered necessary in current circumstances then we must accept it .
But , once BSE has been eradicated , I would like to see this huge organisation trimmed , and a thorough evaluation carried out to see if there is still any justification for its existence .
We have not been affected by BSE in Sweden and we have always been able to control disease in cattle without developing a gigantic control body such as the one currently being proposed .
By using relatively limited border controls , we have managed to avoid BSE , salmonella and rabies .
I would like to add the following observations here : spokesmen for the free market maintain that deregulation will bring huge gains as the costs of regulation and support systems disappear .
But , in this case , the free market must develop new regulations and support systems .
We are justified in asking whether anyone will benefit from a heath or economic point of view , as a result of a free market for , in this case , trade in agricultural products .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.21 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Consumer policy priorities ( 1996-1998 ) ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report by Mr Whitehead ( A4-0317 / 96 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the communication from the Commission on priorities for consumer policy ( 1996-1998 ) ( COM ( 95 ) 0519 - C4-0501 / 95 ) .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , in its first paragraph , article 129a of the treaty makes reference to article 100a as the most appropriate instrument to deal with all the legislative , regulatory and administrative measures of the Member States intended for completion of the single market .
The treaty also permits other actions complementary to those carried out by the States in the area of consumer protection .
The authentic single market , the real single market , will only be completed when consumer protection applies in transborder disputes .
And this requires a series of legal , economic , social and informative measures .
From the legal point of view , which is my committee 's remit , it must be stressed that the rights of consumers , as parties in cross-border disputes , will only be effectively protected by a combination of the following measures : at the international level Member States must recognize their duty to apply the 1968 Brussels Convention , the 1980 Rome Convention on the law applicable to contractual obligations and the 1965 and 1970 Hague Conventions , on unification and on the taking of evidence abroad respectively .
We need to put impetus behind a study to identify the reasons why , despite the existence of the Brussels Convention , difficulties are still experienced in securing the enforcement in one Member State of a civil judgement handed down by a court in another Member State .
The possibilities of widening the scope of the Rome Convention on the law applicable to the commercial field should also be analysed .
It would be a good idea to create a Community instrument which incorporates the principles of the Vienna Convention on international purchase and sale contracts and promote an initiative , within the third pillar , aimed at establishing an enforcement order for unpaid debts .
Turning from the international level to the Community level , we would like to propose the following measures : strengthening out-of-court dispute settlement , which is simpler , faster and cheaper , as long as the possibility of recourse to the courts is respected .
We think the Commission 's action plan to promote out-of-court procedures should be implemented as soon as possible .
The European Parliament and Council Directive on injunctions is a very fine instrument to promote recognition of the right of organizations , businesses and consumers to act , to give judges powers under the existing conventions , so that they can take decisions based on law applicable to the grounds for the dispute even if the violation only has an impact in a market other than the national market .
Parliament 's resolution on payment periods contains interesting suggestions which are worth looking at .
Under this resolution , interest payments for delay to creditors would be statutory and automatic , as would compensation for costs incurred in the recovery of debts , in accordance with tariffed fees to be determined by a suitable public authority .
The legal procedures for the recovery of late payments and the costs entailed also need to be harmonized .
Finally , Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is important to support the criticism made in the Whitehead report that the Commission does not include a detailed timetable for the priorities for consumer policy 1996-1998 .
The lack of it can turn these priorities into a mere wish-list which does nothing for the credibility of Union consumer policy .
Finally , we should use existing international and Community instruments to continue to achieve genuine consumer protection at all levels .
Mr President , Commissioner Bonino , I am not one of those Members who are in the habit of offering very profuse thanks to rapporteurs , firstly because it takes up speaking time and secondly because I firmly believe that all our rapporteurs produce good reports .
Today , albeit in Mr Whitehead 's absence , I should like to make an exception and thank him very sincerely on behalf of my group for his work .
I thank him not only for analysing , criticizing and proposing improvements to the consumer policy priorities envisaged by the Commission for 1996-1998 but also for evaluating the 1993-1995 priorities , which enabled us for the first time to perceive clearly the targets that were set and whether we had achieved or missed them .
Some of the priorities have had to be carried over into the programme for 1996-1998 .
It was not until 1996 that we debated which measures had to be taken in response to the discussion on the Green Paper on Access to Justice .
We have adopted the draft directive on injunctions at the first reading as a preventive measure for the collective protection of consumers .
I hope that we shall soon be receiving the common position from the Council .
We have also discussed the Commission Action Plan to promote out-of-court settlement procedures .
This measure will be highly beneficial if the Member States are prepared to set up impartial bodies for all products as well as for services .
However good the legislation we create at European level may be - and good European legislation is needed - it will be of no use to consumers who want to make full use of the single market unless they can assert their rights quickly and at reasonable cost in their own language out of court , or indeed in court .
As Mr Whitehead said this morning , the 1996-1998 priorities look like a wish-list for Europe 's consumers .
In my view they are simply unspecific .
The important thing for us is that the Commission is finally tabling common provisions ; these have not hitherto existed , which has denied consumers the full benefits of the single market .
The Green Paper on Food was announced for 1996 .
We are still waiting for it .
It has , if we reflect on this week 's BSE discussion , become even more urgent .
What is the Commission doing ?
Announcing that it will bring an action against Germany and possibly two other Member States before the European Court of Justice for having excessively strict national legislation on pesticide levels in baby food !
Does the Commission somehow believe that parents will comprehend such a measure ?
This Parliament has always insisted that baby food must be free of pesticides .
We shall be going on to discuss the report on consumer credit and the report on the Green Paper on financial services .
Both reports show where legislation is urgently required .
Cast off your diffidence , Commissioners !
In matters of consumer protection , we as a Parliament are right behind the Commission !
Mr President , first of all I must thank Philip Whitehead for the enormous amount of work he has put in on this .
Why do I make a point of saying that ?
Because , and the Commissioner should take this a little bit to heart , the communication on priorities we are considering is to my mind far , far too wide-ranging .
I think the priorities for 96-98 leave a lot to be desired .
And I am thus grateful to the rapporteur for having achieved an appropriate result .
I totally agree with Mr Whitehead that the communication should have been a far more detailed , more thoroughly thought-out programme and that it should have indicated how and in what way the Commission intends to attain the objectives it has set itself , and with which I have no problem as such .
It should in my view have included a far clearer list , with priorities .
May I pick out a number of sticking points ?
Firstly the question of legal redress .
A Green Paper came out more than three years ago .
In connection with the item of legislation for which I was rapporteur we said that at all costs the right of collective action , in whatever form , had to be established and I know that some Member States had a lot of difficulty approving the directive on distance selling .
But anyway , my question is this : how are you going to establish this and what proposals are you going to come forward with ?
I think the Green Paper which you produced three years ago ought to have generated some action in some form or another .
And I also urge the House to consider extrajudicial procedures .
You may think I am riding my pet hobbyhorse here , and I am , but I think we can often help the consumer far faster , more cheaply and more efficiently if we offer a lot more incentives for settling disputes than we do at present .
I have to declare an interest here , not a financial one but an emotional one , since I am chairman of the Dutch Foundation of consumer dispute settlement committees . This currently comprises twenty five or so committees , in which independent rulings are handed down by consumers and representatives of various industries and manufacturers , and it works extremely well .
I think we should do rather more in this area , and perhaps because I am proud of what we have achieved in the Netherlands with consumer bodies , I think we should enable more people to benefit from our experience than we do at present .
Then there is a question which came up yesterday too . As I recall , Mrs Behrendt said something about it .
I refer to the Green Paper on food .
I do not know what is happening about this .
Will the Green Paper have to be adjusted in the light of all the new agreements and all the new policy measures we are busy shaping ?
Can we perhaps have an answer on this ?
Because if we are to act to calm the fears of the European consumer I think we have firstly to act fast and secondly we have to know the deadlines to which we are working and what changes are likely to come .
We are going to be talking about financial services this afternoon , so I will not go into those now .
In conclusion , something I would have liked to see in the proposals but which is not there : how will the European Commission , possibly in conjunction with European consumer bodies and with business and industry , go about getting rules established through self-regulation in areas where there is no legislation and where legislation is perhaps not needed ?
Perhaps we might see a list of proposed measures here too ?
Mr President , the Liberal Group can express nothing but great satisfaction with the Whitehead report and its attempt to introduce a system of priorities .
One of our great concerns in the Liberal Group is that we not only create a Europe for companies , but also a Europe for citizens , a significant aspect of which is a Europe for consumers .
There are two important aspects which we would emphasize .
One of these is the consumer 's freedom of choice , and the other is the consumer 's access to the courts .
I will not go into the latter because the last three speakers have already spoken on this at length .
But the question of the consumer 's freedom of choice is very , very important .
We in the Liberal Group are staunch supporters of the internal market , but the counterpart to the internal market is free choice for the consumer .
We can say , to borrow English expressions , that we are both internal market freaks and at the same time free choice freaks .
A prerequisite for achieving free choice is that we , as consumer , are given information , which is why I would like to ask the Commissioner about the marking regulations .
We heard yesterday that Mr Santer went all the way and promised that everything should be marked , and that all modified products would be marked .
This is a great declaration of confidence on the part of the Commission .
I also hope that the Commission realizes that this form of marking is not a miracle cure in itself .
It requires clearly defined marking , and not least it requires information as to what the markings mean .
So I very much hope that one of the priorities of implementation of the marking regulations is that the Commission will undertake to provide information on what constitutes the basis for modified food products , and information on the criteria used as a basis for marking , to ensure that we have free choice and that we are not overwhelmed with a whole host of markings which we are unable to interpret .
Thank you . I look forward to the Commissioner 's response .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I realize patience is needed because we Members here may repeat each other , but we do have enormous interest in Mr Whitehead 's report .
And Mr Whitehead 's report , which was unanimously approved , says what all of us are saying , more or less .
But in the time I have available , I want to highlight a few important points .
First , Mr Whitehead himself , the rapporteur himself , welcomes the Commission 's ten priorities covering information to consumers , easy access to justice , food safety - very topical in Parliament this week - and other issues which directly affect consumers ' rights .
But we all endorse the criticism about failure to evaluate the previous period , up to 1995 , and also perhaps of lack of detail on the period up to the year 1998 .
Mr Whitehead himself establishes a very concrete strategy for identifying the problems : identify the objectives of consumer policy , establish a strategy for achieving them and then a timetable for putting them into practice .
I think that is the fundamental criticism .
Because things were done in that period and the Community institutions lack credibility on food safety , for instance on mad cows , contaminated blood , growth hormone , and transgenic maize and transgenic soya , which we will be putting a question on , because there is great concern on the subject in Spain .

A survey shows that in many countries 60 % to 80 % of the population is against consuming products developed through genetic engineering , out of anxiety about their effect on human health .
So one of today 's priorities is food safety and the establishment of an independent food safety watchdog .
Finally , we agree with all the points .
We are going to vote for Mr Whitehead 's report - we know the Commissioner is sensitive to it .
And , of course , it is our duty to be the voice of the disquiet felt today by the European public about food safety and their health .
And we feel compelled to repeat that , although I appreciate that it is tiring for you , because you are hearing it so many times this afternoon .
Mr President , may I thank Mr Whitehead for the highly constructive cooperation , particularly with regard to the labelling of packaging , in this report of his .
I likewise wish Commissioner Bonino every success when she sets about coordinating food safety at the Commission .
I believe that she is a good person for the task .
I should like to draw the attention of Members and of the Commissioner to one detail in this report .
Paragraph 19 refers to an EMU information campaign conducted by Parliament and the Commission .
Regrettably , my Group cannot vote in favour of this paragraph or welcome such campaigns .
It has just emerged that the Commission is requiring independent researchers and experts to give a written assurance that if the Commission sends them to discuss EMU at various events organized by citizens , the experts should undertake to speak only in accordance with the Commission 's line .
I consider this very dangerous .
Thinking of the current BSE debate , Commissioner , how can we continue to trust the experts sent by the Commission if this kind of thing is going on ?
I have tabled a question about this , and I should like to know in what other connections the Commission requires such promises of loyalty from independent experts .
Mr President , I too would like to wish Mr Whitehead well with his far-reaching report , for the most positive thing one can say about the Commission 's statement on consumer policy , to be realistic , is that it is far too vague and superficial .
As consumers we need something better than this .
Regarding DG XXIV 's newly added areas of responsibility in the context of consumer protection , I fully agree with Mr Whitehead that there is an urgent need to draw up a set of priorities and to replace the Commission 's general statements with concrete time frames and plans of action .
There is also need to promote the labelling of products with environmental and energy information , and to establish consumer legislation in all Member States .
Basically one can divide thoughts about a European consumer policy into two different approaches .
One can either , as Mr Whitehead has done , argue for the setting up of European consumer information , with campaigns and information centres , or - and this is the argument which I myself support - one can argue that the already established national consumer organisations should work together for an appropriate re-adjustment , in concrete terms by strengthening BEUC , and then acting jointly in the political arena .
I believe we must recognize that it is would be too difficult and too expensive to produce a completely harmonized consumer policy and consumer information system , because the needs are simply too varied .
But despite this lack of uniformity , we will of course vote in favour of Mr Whitehead 's report .
It is only a proactive consumer policy which can give the EU 's internal market its legitimacy and effectiveness .
That is why it must begin , first and foremost , with the government conference .
It is there that the consumer policy must be strengthened .
It must be clear from the introduction to the treaty that the EU gives due consideration to consumer policy , in just the same way as it gives due consideration to sustainable development .
The treaty must brace itself for a series of other areas , so that it can also become a clear goal to promote consumer policy considerations and consumer interests .
Article 129 A is still lacking a number of points of clarification and improvements .
Only in this way can consumer policy take the important position it deserves .
Mr President , Commissioner , consumer policy increasingly requires a Europe-wide perspective of the problems because of the political attitudes which tend to saddle Europe with responsibility and label it incapable .
Europe should not therefore be perceived by consumers as an ideological choice but as a way of exercising a continual check on the interests of the individual states within a European context .
Having said that , it is well-known that in some Member States , concern for consumer rights has developed at a slower pace than in Europe as a whole .
Italy is certainly one of them , and the development of an awareness of consumer rights there has certainly been the result of the activity and initiatives of the various associations which have had to work without any backing from central government .
We are calling upon the Commission to act resolutely in relation to Italy which - and this is a scandal - is still without national framework legislation on the representation of consumer rights .
For years we have seen government and parliament squabble about who has responsibility , but the opposition appears to be very strong , more especially because the consumer groups are expressing a demand that lies outside the control of the political parties .
In congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Whitehead , on the well-structured motion for a resolution concerning the 19961998 programme , which we support in all respects - legal , economic and social - Alleanza Nazionale must ask the Commission to increase its support for the movement in the countries of southern Europe , where the presence of organized consumer groups is very much small in comparison with the four million units that exist in Europe , mainly in the countries of northern Europe .
By guaranteeing the short and medium-term development of consumer associations we shall in fact avoid undermining the Maastricht Treaty which , while it recognizes a new consumer function in education and other important sectors , also creates new areas which are likely to remain inaccessible to associations with less clout .
Mr President , I also want to congratulate the rapporteur on the excellent report he has produced .
I know that his work has been greatly appreciated by consumer organizations throughout Europe , including BEUC in Brussels , and I wholeheartedly endorse his conclusions .
This , the third consumer programme , offers an inadequate analysis of previous efforts , little continuity from past programmes and no coherent strategy for the future .
Given the establishment of the internal market and the imminent introduction of the single currency , consumer policy must be implemented on a pan-European basis rather than by Member States acting alone .
There also has to be full implementation of existing legislation , as well as simpler and more efficient redress facilities for ordinary citizens .
Obviously , the most important and topical challenge facing consumer policy is indeed the BSE crisis .
Since the Whitehead report was adopted in the Committee on Environment , a number of major events have taken place , the most important being the transfer of responsibility for food safety to DG XXIV .
DGXXIV 's new duties in this field were given further impetus yesterday when the Commission announced to the House their response to the BSE report .
I agree with President Santer 's claim that the European Veterinary Office based in County Meath in Ireland can play a vital role in restoring consumers ' confidence in food safety procedures .
I , too , would urge the Council to reconsider its attitude to this office .
I also welcome the decisions to place all relevant scientific committees under the authority of DG XXIV and to establish a new unit on the assessment of public health risks and the inspection of foodstuffs also under DG XXIV .
I am however concerned that the Commission might be repeating the mistakes already clearly identified in the BSE report .
The tasks of the Veterinary Inspection Office and the new food safety units must be clearly established from the very outset .
If not , then the European consumers will continue to remain deeply sceptical about food safety standards in Europe .
Mr President , what I am saying in my few remarks follows on very neatly from what Mrs Malone has just said .
I should like to reinforce her requests to the Commission .
Like her and like other speakers , I regard this as an absolutely hopeless document which really was not worth writing .
I do not know whether or not the author is among us but I hope not .
I hope he or she is no longer with the Commission , certainly not in DG XXIV .
If this is all that the Commission can come up with on consumer protection , it is not really worth putting it in the Treaty , and I imagine that Mrs Bonino has to all intents and purposes disowned it .
There are some very important areas where consumer protection can work at a Community level , and I say that as a British Conservative .
The three areas which I would focus on particularly are safety , information and help to consumers .
I would say that the Commission should examine the way in which consumers need these three elements , because of the activities of the Community , in particular with regard to cross-border trade .
On safety we have to ask ourselves what DG XXIV was doing about BSE when this was being drawn up .
It is not referred to anywhere .
Here is a great crisis boiling up on the margins of Europe , on the margins of our consciousness , that is being dealt with by DG VI when one presumes that DG XXIV was saying nothing about it .
Well , that is history .
But now I should like to invite the Commissioner to use the opportunity of this debate to tell us - and Mrs Malone raised the point - what is going to happen about food safety .
If DG XXIV , the consumer protection directorate , which produced this document , is now going to be in charge of food safety , then who will actually be involved ?
Will it be the same staff , or are people going to be drafted across from DG III and DG VI ?
Or is it going to be left to the authors of this paper ?
If so Heaven help us .
Secondly , on the matter of information , I should like to draw the Commissioner 's attention to a point which I raised with Commissioner Bangemann yesterday regarding food labelling .
Section 6 of this document states : ' it is not clear that all the information provided on food labels is really helpful to consumers . '
It then goes on to say that it is not going to do anything about it .
I have moved an amendment which I hope the Commission will accept saying that the Commission should live up to its obligation to produce more information to consumers about the E numbers on food labels .
That is essential .
Finally , I would reinforce what the rapporteur has to say about legal aid .
If there is one thing my constituents want out of a consumer protection policy , it is more information and more assuredness that they know what is going to happen if they get into difficulties in another Member State , in particular with regard to buying things such as property : how much help can European law give them here ?
At the moment , very little .
Mr President , I do not know whether it was a coincidence , but almost all the speakers on this issue so far have been women .
I do not know whether that tells us anything .
Fortunately there is yourself and the rapporteur too , who has produced an excellent report .
In my short speech I would like to stress the great gulf that exists between the general principles , between - if you will - the Commissioner 's sincere and ' hyperactive ' intentions , between the legislation on the one hand , and the real situation prevailing in the Member States so far as consumer protection is concerned .
And this does not just concern BSE , but a range of other issues as well .
I think that particularly in my own country , Greece , one only has to switch on a television channel and in no time at all one can see all the European Union 's principles and guidelines being infringed .
And here , I would like to say that I am surprised by the fact that while we see correct trends and impulses from the Commission itself , at the same time some of its services are intervening and putting the interests and protection of consumers in second place , while top priority is reserved for the interests of certain major economic units , as has characteristically happened with the arraignment of Sweden or Greece before the European Court of Justice over the issue of restrictions and bans on the advertising of toys .
While I am on the subject of television , Mr President , I would like to say that there are clauses on consumer protection , protection of the viewer-consumer , for example relating to television without frontiers , concerning the timing of advertisements , etc . , which at least in my own country are completely disregarded .
As for the advertising of drugs , you turn on the television and see one drug after another being paraded in campaigns addressed at adults , minors , children and so on .
Consequently , I think that in the context of implementation by the Member States of the basic regulations and guidelines on consumer protection , there is still a long , long way to go .
Mr President , it is rare for Parliament to urge the Commission not to go too fast .
Usually we are trying to spur the Commission on .
Mr Whitehead , the rapporteur for the Environment Committee , urges the Commission to be more modest in its overall ambitions for consumer protection and I back him fully .
The report exudes a spirit of realism which is most apposite , I think , in consumer policy .
So I am largely happy with the recommendations made in Mr Whitehead 's report .
Consumer policy is a relatively young policy area which has a number of inherent limitations .
Firstly it is an area which is largely governed by private law .
I would venture to say that if policy is good , government involvement with the consumer is minimal .
Secondly , an awful lot depends on the cooperation of business and industry .
If there are powerful consumer bodies which are good at getting their message across clearly to the producers of goods and services , the battle of consumer protection is already half-won .
Thirdly , the European policy is aware of its own limitations .
Precisely because the area is one governed by private law the Commission often cannot do much by way of legislation , unless existing European directives can be invoked .
So I welcome the report 's recommendations for strengthening the position of the consumer by spreading information ( paragraphs 20 to 26 ) .
We have far more clued-up consumers than splendid laws , which will in any case be invoked by only a very small number of consumers , however aware they are .
It is a well-known fact that consumer awareness in the southern countries of the European Community is as yet less well developed and organized .
And this is where we need to start , not with all manner of rules and regulations .
So I also think it is a good thing that the Commission begins by publishing most of the ideas which emerge in green papers rather than coming out straight away with incompletely thought-through draft legislation on which no agreement is then possible in the Council .
I am thus very amenable to the rapporteur 's suggestion that the proposals under the previous programme of consumer policy priorities should be consolidated and I compliment him warmly on his excellent report .
The European Commission will benefit by it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Whitehead , on an excellent report and his indefatigable work with the consumer intergroups .
Perhaps if the Council and the Commission had listened to him and to the intergroup earlier , the ' mad cow ' problem - and others - would not have arisen .
Commissioner , I should like to throw down a challenge to you . The challenge is that you withdraw this document because it is no good .
Commissioner , this document is bad .
This document was drafted by a team under a former Director General who has since been replaced by Mr Papas , who went to the Committee on the Environment and said that the document was no good , and that he was not in agreement with it .
Now Mr Papas has already gone and has been replaced by a new Director General .
This document is not a legislative text , it is not a law with amendments , it is a text of political guidelines , setting priorities .
Therefore I should like to ask the Commissioner if the text of political guidelines is bad and cannot be put into practice , what is its use ?
I think it would be better to withdraw it - and I think that the rapporteur agrees with what I am saying , because I have already had an opportunity to discuss this with him - and present a document which might be more concentrated , with less priorities and which could really be transformed into a genuine action programme .
In this case , I promise her that all of us , in all of the political groups , from every part of the spectrum , will be here to support a report which has just four or five priorities for political action to help consumers in the coming years .
That is what is needed .
The rapporteur , after all , sets five priorities with which I agree : access to justice , either through courts , through arbitration machinery or through other mechanisms , the protection of the financial interests of consumers , improved information , converting consumer information into consumer power , a food policy and a human and animal health policy which is different to the one pursued so far and a clear and simple definition of what a universal public service is and how it can be applied .
Just two comments to finish up : I would like her to use Article 129A , more often , as this is a weapon which she has at her disposal and which she has not used so far .
We think that it could be used more often . The other point is about a policy of granting subsidies to consumer defence organisations .
A few years ago the European Parliament - I was one of its authors - tabled a motion increasing the budgetary amounts for consumer protection associations in order to give them more support especially in the countries where they are lacking , such as Ireland and the southern countries of Europe , and also giving support to smaller associations .
On the contrary , the current policy has lent support only to the large European organisations , often forgetting that it is in the countries where consumer organisations are smaller and weaker that they are the more necessary .
Mr President , Members of Parliament , I must say that I am rather disconcerted by this debate .
First of all , may I remind you that this plan was presented to Parliament on the 3rd November 1995 .
You must have examined it in depth , as you presented to me a report on the priorities in February 1997 !
So , my dear friends , let us be serious !
Mr. Pimenta , this plan is presented under my name and I dare hope that the Director-General has not betrayed me .
If you think that he has done so , why did you not say so ?
That really would be something that would call for disciplinary sanction .
And this Parliament is apparently very fond of disciplinary sanctions .
It would have been preferable , rather than to say it publicly today , to have the kindness to let the Commission know sooner .
I remember very well that before this document was submitted to the Council and to Parliament , Parliament had asked me not to present a detailed action plan , but a general outline of intervention policies .
And if you read this document , you will see that the Commission has chosen as new priorities - as had never been done before - public services , financial services and the information society , and not products any more .
You should have thought about these priorities !
Because had I had to wait for your opinion before starting to do anything , since November 1995 , I would have done nothing until today .
The debate should therefore be put back into context .
While waiting for you to reflect - since the 3rd November 1995 ! - the Commission , which had been asked to present a political plan , and not a plan of action which it worked out subsequently , presented a total of twelve proposals for directives concerning all the policies .
Out of these twelve , three - i.e. one quarter - concern consumer policy , and more precisely access to justice , guarantees and consumption credit , which is being discussed this afternoon .
After which , we presented you with the Green Paper on financial services , which will be debated shortly .
Parliament then rejected the remote financial service , which we will present again .
Everyone must therefore assume their responsibilities , as frankly , I hardly find it acceptable that the Commission is placed under accusation without recognition of everything it did in 1996 .
Mrs Jackson , if you think that the document is of no value because it does not mention BSE , your government and your party could have been of major help to this institution and to the Commission if it had informed us of what was going on .
I would remind you that in 1996 the Commission formed the inter-service group .
We came up with three memorandums and the vademecum for consumers and the document - and maybe this is a detail you did not take on board - was presented in November 1995 and the crisis erupted in March .
( FR ) Indeed , our relationship has always been loyal .
Having said that , I do not wish to review everything we have done , for example with regard to the pursuit of legislative activities , indication of prices , comparative advertising , etc . , but I find the comments I have heard here to be rather unfair , hardly generous and most inaccurate .
Moreover , I would like to say that I obtained the powers with regard to health control exactly a week ago .
I would like to ask the Members of Parliament to be calm , as we will have to define together what it would be best to do .
I do not have a miracle solution , Mr Whitehead , and I have already said that I would come and listen to you in the middle of March to find out what you are proposing .
For example I believe that , bearing in mind my new responsibilities , it would be good for me to re-examine the Green Paper on food law - which was nearly ready - in the light of the changes in policies and priorities which have just been decided .
We have made a leap forward to the advantage of the consumer , but we should now set to work without excessive demagogy .
That is a challenge we must take up together .
I find it rather strange that I am asked today what are my decisions , my programmes , my ideas or - worse - those of the Commission regarding health , controls or the scientific committee .
I received these powers only a week ago !
I am not thinking so much of you , but of other interventions we have heard today .
Having said that , I will nevertheless reply to some more specific observations that have been made .
As regards the Green Paper , it was ready in the inter-service consultations , but I feel that in the new situation that has come to light since last week , it is my duty to re-examine it and see whether it is possible to push things a little further .
Mrs Kuhn , as regards baby food , one can always dream of revolution .
This does not prevent current law from having limits .
For as long as the treaty is not amended , the Commission is obliged to apply it as it is , and Mr Bangemann has started a proceeding against Germany for hindering free circulation .
We must respect the rules , whether or not we like them , until we come to change them .
As regards the instructions , I hope that it is an exceptional case , but I am very willing to find out more , as I did not know about it .
I do not wish to launch into a reply on a subject that I do not know , but I would like to learn more , in order to determine whether it is habitual practice or a particular case .
As regards subsidies to organizations - I am returning to the last remark from Mr Pimenta and others - we have been reproached for distributing money without exactly knowing why , while we introduced a procedure for encouraging consumer organizations to work together on Community projects , and we tried not to grant operating subsidies any more , but only to support specific projects .
I think we are now ready to publish in the Official Journal the result of our work , which has not been easy .
For southern European countries whose need is greatest , I myself sent a special adviser to the four countries , to meet all the consumer organizations , which are now in a position to make proposals .
I would like action from the consumer associations , rather than to tell them myself what they should do .
After a year 's work , we are in a position to start projects covering the four countries of Mediterranean Europe - Italy , Portugal , Greece and Spain - in order to reinforce a consumerism culture which is little developed in southern Europe .
As regards Article 129 A , as you know , six member countries have submitted an amendment to the CIG ; we ourselves have presented an amendment to Article 129 .
We hope in this way to be able to promote the reinforcement of the consumer and health policy .
I would now like to talk about food labelling .
At this stage , I can only confirm what Mr President said yesterday in his speech - I quote : ' I argue for the gradual introduction of a proper food policy and , in this context , I am in favour of compulsory and systematic labelling ' .
The DG XXIV has already launched a consultation and study involving consumer associations to try to define jointly what would be clear , important and pertinent information , so that consumers are no longer flooded with a tide of information in which they are lost .
For the moment , opinions largely conflict , and we will have to cut short as matters have reached political level , but we wanted to know at least the ideas of the consumer associations .
I do not know whether I have answered everyone .
I had a comment for Mr Garosci on the subject of the Euro , which is one of our concerns and which we are trying to discuss with the appropriate Commissioner .
I hope to have answered all the questions .
On financial services , we will hold a debate now .
I will therefore come back to it in detail with my colleague Monti .
With regard to the new health controls , the meeting with Parliament is fixed for mid March .
Mr President , as I had to speak this morning perhaps the Commissioner did not hear me and I should therefore like to address two specific questions to her .
Firstly , does Mrs Bonino agree or disagree with what her Director General said in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection about the consultative paper ?
Secondly , in view of what I said this morning , when will she be able to bring forward the Green Paper on food policies ?
I wish her no harm .
I want to see her strong and powerful .
We know the pressure she has to fight against within the Commission .
All we want now is a certain candour in that matter in this debate .
Just one comment , Mrs Bonino .
You more or less accused our committee of having taken too long .
First of all , it takes several months before a committee receives the relevant documents .
You mentioned that we have also received the draft directive on guarantees for consumer goods .
I wanted to introduce it in committee in March , but when I had had the paper for four weeks , the Commission ordered a cost-benefit analysis .
That is fine , but I should not then be blamed at some future date for not working .
A word on baby food : I would recommend that you check whether , apart from the Baby Food Directive , there is an appendix somewhere with maximum pesticide levels .
If I remember rightly , that has never been done .
We have no European specifications .
Mr President , just to be quite clear : I cannot react to a statement by my Director-General because I have not been informed .
So , if you let me know - and possibly if you had let me know - it would be much more useful .
In any case , if you let me have the documents , I will certainly take a position .
On the Green Paper on food , as I told you , it was ready at service level , so it could come to the college .
Owing to the new responsibility and weight that we have as consumers , I have to take this opportunity to review the Green Paper and I will do it in the light of an empowerment that has been given to consumers .
So I cannot say that it will be ready tomorrow or next week , I am just saying that it was ready , but now there is scope to strengthen it .
But , certainly , in one month or two we can present it back to you .
On pesticides : again , you are asking me questions which I have just received , and we have to discuss this together .
I am not criticising Parliament for the delay , I am just saying that in the meantime of one year I have acted , Mrs Jackson .
This is not a worthless document .
Parliament asked me for a policy document and not for a plan of action , but it also got a plan of action .
So you have simply to decide when you ask for a document what you really want .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Green paper on financial services
The next item is the debate on the report by Mrs Marinucci ( A4-0048 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the Commission Green Paper on ' Financial services : meeting consumers ' expectations ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0209 - C4-0339 / 96 ) .
Mr President , financial services have become increasingly important to families and consumers .
The variety of financial services offered to consumers has increased , as has their use but , as a result of a lack of information or regulation or because of failures to act or fraud on the part of unscrupulous operators , many citizens have suffered damage and others have developed prejudices .
In this sector also , the internal market offers consumers new opportunities but it can also add to their unease and increase the disadvantages .
The fact is that while , on the one hand , competition and the opportunity of choosing between suppliers of these services , including from outside the national territory , add to consumer freedom of choice , the differences in legislation may be the source of new problems .
It is no coincidence that the use of crossborder financial services remains limited .
Consumers may refrain from using more advantageous or less expensive services because they lack the necessary information or , indeed , security .
We therefore need Community legislative action , and this is something that has become all the more urgent as we look to the achievement of monetary union .
In December 1995 , at the same plenary session at which the exclusion of financial services from the proposal for a directive on distance selling was confirmed , the Commissioner , Mrs Bonino , undertook to the House to present a Communication which would - and these are her words - contain an action programme or even , should it prove necessary , a directive .
The House welcomed the fact that that promise was very shortly followed by the submission of the Green Paper we are today discussing .
But we do not agree with the Commission when it says that the aim of the single market in this area has largely been achieved through some 50 directives .
Furthermore , the second part of the Green Paper itself analyses the problems that still exist , such as the possible discrimination against non-residents , the lack or poor quality of information , the lack of rules on intermediaries and the lack of fiscal harmonization .
But that is not the whole story : to take just a few examples , in the area of insurance : a cooling-off period is provided for life assurance only but not , for example , for insurance against fire and theft .
As regards intermediaries , and again in the field of insurance , there is a recommendation dating from 1991 , but it is by no means binding : there is no protection against the fraudulent use of credit cards .
Here too , recommendation 595 of 1988 did not have the effect of inciting the Member States to take positive measures to protect consumers .
On the issue of consumer credit , directive 102 of 1987 does not cover new services that did not exist at the time of its adoption .
The concept of the general interest has therefore to be better defined .
The reference in the banking directives , and the second banking directive in particular , allows scope for serious legal uncertainties .
And the list goes on .
The problem of distance selling , finally , dealt with in the third part of the Green Paper , is not covered by the legislation in force .
The relevant legislative committees have discussed the Green Paper in great detail and very perceptively and have overwhelmingly focused their proposals on the need for a coherent and complete Community legislative framework that takes a horizontal approach to problems recurring in more than one sector and a vertical approach to specific issues such as distance selling .
While we await the Commission response , I recommend to honourable Members - who are not now present in the Chamber but will , we hope , be here tomorrow - the amendments approved by a more or less absolute majority of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the opinion I drafted on this Green Paper for the Economic Affairs Committee I came largely to the same conclusions regarding the continuing problems which the consumer encounters over financial services .
The Economic Affairs Committee has identified five .
One : the internal market is not really working .
Using the national interest as an excuse , Member States cling to national laws which protect their market rather than their consumers .
It is time a case was brought before the European Court against the mandatory bonus / malus scale , the mandatory no-claim discount , the outlawing of interest-bearing sight accounts and other things .
To prevent further impediments a common definition of the general interest is also needed .
Two : the absence of fiscal harmonization forms a serious obstacle to the free movement of financial services .
In some Member States life assurance policies are still not tax-deductible if they are taken out in another Member State .
That is unacceptable .
Three : the dubious activities of non-regulated financial intermediaries , often operating by post or telephone , cast a shadow over the whole sector .
There must be Community rules on qualifications for and the exercise of this profession so that the consumer can sort the wheat from the chaff and know he can trust financial service providers .
Four : the provision of efficient and clear information must enable the consumer to reap the benefits of the single market in financial services .
He must be given enough knowledge of the advantages and know what enforceable rights he has in that market .
Financial service providers must operate voluntary codes of conduct as a way of optimizing the quality of information made available to the consumer .
And lastly I would advocate a further extension of the role of independent ombudsmen for the banking and insurance sector .
They must report on their activities so that those concerned can learn the necessary lessons and they must henceforth be involved in the preparation , realization and evaluation of legislation in the financial and insurance sector .
These are the issues which the Economic Affairs Committee regards as paramount .
I disagree with the rapporteur on one point .
I see no justification for a separate directive on distance selling of financial services .
For financial services the difference between transactions concluded at a distance and those not concluded at a distance is less relevant than when one buys a simple consumer good such as a book or a sweater .
Financial services are a different kettle of fish .
They are not visible or tangible and consequently they entail trust irrespective of whether they are sold at a distance or face to face .
The Liberal Group thus sets great store by rules to ensure better guarantees of the integrity of those who offer financial services .
Ladies and gentlemen , my Group is largely happy with the points made in Mrs Marinucci 's report , but we do not want legislation always to be the first and preferred instrument of policy in solving these problems .
The sector of banking , insurance and investment is already the subject of no fewer than 50 directives and still the consumer cannot fully reap the benefits of the single market .
My Group suggests that the solution to some problems should be sought for example in voluntary codes of conduct , and that additional legislation should be proposed only where it is necessary .
Because legislation usually means an increased cost which is invariably passed on to the consumer .
We must indeed strive , not for more but for better and justifiable legislation .
I should appreciate the Commission 's views here .
Madam President , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizen 's Rights has welcomed the work done by the rapporteur and has put to the committee responsible for the substance a number of points which I wish briefly to mention .
We have , in particular , stressed that Community legislation should be designed to guarantee greater competition on the supply side , effective freedom of movement on both the supply and demand sides , provision of adequate , accurate and effective information for individual consumers - who seem to us to be the least well protected under the current legislation - and greater transparency and certainty regarding cross-border contracts .
We have also sought to stress that Community legislation should act to limit the costs of cross-border contracts ; promote the use of the language of the potential client ; promote the search for and acquisition of information by one contracting party on the other on the basis of respect for rules governing personal data ; promote the exercise of the rights of each contracting party in the Member State of the other contracting party ; promote consumer information and education ; guarantee respect for the principle of mutual recognition and ensure that due respect for the regulations of the client 's Member State of stay or residence does not hinder effective freedom of movement and competition between financial products .
Those are some of the issues we sought to highlight .
It seems to us that there is still , at this stage , much to be done to provide genuine protection for consumers in this sector .
We are in any event persuaded that the Commission intends moving in the right direction by filling what we consider to be a number of gaps in the Green Paper .
Madam President , Commissioner Bonino has left us but it is worth remembering that this Green Paper is the result of a promise she made during the debate on distance-selling .
Since she accused the Parliament today of dilatoriness , it is also worth remembering that it was not introduced to us in either the timescale or the form that was promised .
I want to congratulate Mrs Marinucci on what she has had to say about these matters for our committee and , indeed , for the Parliament .
She has done an admirable job .
When one looks at the Green Paper the heading is perhaps the most impressive thing about it .
After that we get far more on summaries of the existing provision with regard to the financial services than we do of the future challenges .
What I want to say , is that we need to have more questions asked than this kind of tokenism .
The rapporteur rightly says that what we need is a clearly defined framework covering issues that are common to all financial services legislation , supplemented by vertical measures covering issues such as the distance-selling of financial products and the market for credit .
The more the single market develops and the more the proportion of cross-border trade develops , the need for consumer protection will also increase .
If the Commission recognizes that at a very simple level , it is surprising that they will not look at the issues which are involved as financial services themselves develop with the possibilities for consumers being ripped-off in the process .
The Marinucci report begins and ends with the recommendation that we begin to move towards a directive that will specifically protect consumers in this field .
That is what we have called for - constantly .
That is what we said was necessary when we debated distance-selling in this House a year ago .
We are supporters of the single market .
We want it to work but at each stage it must keep pace with levels of consumer protection that match the sophistication of those who might prey upon the consumer .
Commissioner Bonino and her newest Director-General would do well to ponder on how they use their extended power .
I hope that her colleague will report the strong feelings of the House on that matter .
Madam President , it is worth remembering that the whole debate on financial services actually got going after the European Commission initially included financial services with distance selling in the distance selling directive . Parliament endorsed that , the Council of Ministers scrapped it and we then had a debate in the second reading .
At the first reading - I say this for Mrs Kestelijn 's benefit , she was nodding her head emphatically - at the first reading it was still firmly in there and not one of your Liberal members put down any amendments to get it removed .
At the second reading , when the Council had removed it , you did manage to get it removed by a couple of votes .
And then we had our debate .
Then we had a promise from Mrs Bonino that there would be a green paper on financial services because some people in the European Commission , notably Mrs Bonino , realized that something would have to be done .
The Green Paper appeared , and a list was compiled of the various laws governing banks , insurance companies and share dealing , and a number of problem areas were identified .
What I find unfortunate is that no concrete proposals were put forward .
I had hoped to see some .
I put down a number of amendments to Mrs Marinucci 's report , aimed at impressing upon the Commission the need for rules on financial intermediaries .
My belief is that we shall also need legislation on electronic money transfers and credit and payment cards .
For the benefit of Mr Monti I would say that we sorely need this .
Then there is credit registration : no mention is made of this anywhere .
We know that there is voluntary credit registration in most of the Member States , and we know that some of those voluntary credit registrations liaise with each other , and I think the European Union should give an extra boost to that .
That is not to say that we have to do it ourselves , but we can give encouragement so that some form of greater cooperation takes shape .
If you apply for a loan from a distance and it is not known what level of borrowing you already have , what commitments you have entered into , that can cause problems not only for those receiving the loans but also for the provider .
So I think that some measure of support needs to be given to this voluntary cooperation which already exists in a number of countries .
Madam President , the specific question I should like to put to Mr Monti is whether or not he really intends to come up with a separate piece of legislation on distance selling within the next year .
I say that with a backward glance at Mrs Kestelijn ; I am not happy that people should have fail-safe guarantees if they buy an insurance or savings policy or whatever from a door-to-door salesman , and that if sitting in your easy chair one fine evening you order something from the TV which has major consequences later , the supplier has no obligations towards you .
That is not covered .
Madam President , I hope the Commission will at last grasp that something needs to be done , that the decisions which have been taken must be reversed , and that a prompt debate is needed with a view to legislation .
It really is very necessary .
Madam President , I too agree that anyone reading the title of the Green Paper ' Financial services : meeting consumers ' expectations ' would say that this is a very useful and necessary thing , which especially in the countries in the South such as Greece , would make a serious contribution towards serving the needs of consumers , especially those who do not read the Financial Times , those who probably do not know many foreign languages , cannot read the small print , and do not have attorneys .
In other words , they might think that such a directive would have a serious and positive social dimension .
However , I think that when one looks more closely , it becomes evident that the directive deviates a long way from the ideals that inspired its title , it is mainly limited to remote sales and new electronic systems , as Mrs Marinucci very rightly stresses in paragraph 5 of the motion for a resolution , while a very broad sector relating to banks , insurance companies or securities is not covered by the directive at all .
I think this means that the Green Paper contributes very little to solving the problems it is supposed to address , and it mainly draws attention to the great gulf which must be bridged , because I think that with the development of technology and the increasing numbers of small savers , the problems to be addressed are indeed very serious and very difficult for the consumer to discern on his own .
Mr President , in welcoming this report and in congratulating Mrs Marinucci in the presentation that she had made , I should like to address specifically the points about the need to protect consumer rights within forthcoming legislation on the financial services .
The two amendments that I put forward at the Committee on the Environment - and I thank my colleagues for supporting them - deal particularly with issues affecting vulnerable people living in our communities who have fallen prey to unscrupulous cowboys operating in the financial sector and who have lost out very badly indeed .
The example in Britain and in my own constituency is that of home income plans .
This is a type of remortgage scheme which promised to retired people the opportunity of remortgaging their property and obtaining an income for which they would have no loss for the rest of their lives .
Twenty-eight people in my Essex South constituency , 700 people in the United Kingdom as a whole , fell for that false promise and have lost many thousands of pounds in the process .
Many of those in their late seventies and early eighties are facing being evicted from their homes altogether .
In response to that , a petition was brought to this Parliament by Mr James Fielding from my constituency and others .
The Committee on Petitions upheld the justice of their case and asked that when forthcoming legislation on financial services was produced that the position of these vulnerable people - not just in Britain , but throughout Europe - be protected .
That is what we call for in this debate today .
Clearly we cannot deal in more detail with the specific case that I cite but our contribution to this debate today should signal our determination to ensure that the rights of vulnerable people in these circumstances are protected .
These people were promised an income for life .
They did not realize the risks associated with their investments and they have suffered at a time in their lives when they really cannot deal with it .
We want good information , understandable and clear , so people cannot be misled .
We want clear rights of redress where people have been misled and we want compensation for them .
That is what this legislation should address .
Madam President , let me begin by thanking the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and , in particular , the rapporteur , Mrs Marinucci , for their support for the Commission initiative ; that support is reflected in the report the House is today debating .
The report is also the product of the work of the two associated committees , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , and I should like also to thank warmly the rapporteurs for those two committees , Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens and Mr Florio .
On the occasion of the vote on the second reading of the - now adopted - distance selling directive , the Commission said that in agreeing to the exclusion of financial services , it would undertake to assess the need to protect consumers in relation to the distance selling of financial services and , more generally , the whole of the financial sector .
And we have done just that .
Today 's report backs the effort the Commission has made to strengthen the protection of consumers as natural persons .
At the same time , taking into account the high level of interest attaching to consumer policy in the field of financial services , I have , together with Commissioner Bonino , undertaken to present a communication as soon as possible .
This will mark the Commission 's official response to the wideranging consultation launched via the Green Paper , by establishing the priorities and time-scales for the measures we intend taking .
That communication will , of course , take account of the opinion of this House .
I shall discuss briefly the individual proposals that have been the subject of detailed discussion between Mrs Bonino and myself and on which we are in agreement .
Basically , we are able to accept various of the proposals put forward and I am referring in particular here to paragraph 5 .
The report rightly points out that the absence of a clear definition of the concept of the general good may lead to its being applied in such a way as to create barriers to the free movement of services .
In the field of banking services , the Commission has already published a draft communication on the exercise of the freedom to provide services and the concept of the general good , firmly established in the second banking directive .
And I intend to finalize that communication as soon as possible and set under way a similar process of reflection for insurance services .
Paragraph 13 of the report calls upon the Commission to set under way a dialogue with the professional associations and bodies to identify , where possible , agreed solutions to disputes between consumers and the industry .
We intend encouraging dialogue between the parties at a European level , as frequently already happens at a national level , to promote codes of good conduct , in particular as regards consumer information .
I therefore intend monitoring closely its application and , should this prove unsatisfactory , I shall provide for binding legal instruments .
The dialogue has already been launched and needs to be extended .
The important paragraphs 14 and 15 of the report call for a variety of proposals .
Although we support the underlying objective , we are still considering whether or not horizontal legislation would be the most effective solution .
As regards consumer information in particular , we are considering inviting the parties to enter into discussion in order to have professional codes of conduct drawn up by the end of 1997 .
After an appropriate period to allow for these to be applied , the Commission will monitor the results and , should that prove not to be a helpful approach , it will undertake to propose more binding measures , the feasibility of which will be considered at the same time .
But I do think it would be difficult to apply a measure on the quality and security of financial products .
It would also be difficult to arrive at an appropriate definition of their content and purpose .
Turning to the competence and integrity of financial intermediaries , we are persuaded that legislative measures concerning non-regulated intermediaries in the insurance and banking services sector are useful , and these measures are to be put to the Commission shortly .
As regards the problem of access to basic services , a detailed analysis of the situation indicates that there are many different causes and that the impact differs from one place to another .
The Commission intends monitoring closely the experiments under way in the Member States .
Similar considerations would apply to excessive debt , and here I would suggest giving priority above all to measures designed to educate and inform consumers .
Let me now move on to the vertical measures , Madam President .
We shall shortly be proposing to the Commission a proposal for a directive on the distance selling of financial services ; this is based on the provisions of the general directive that has already been adopted but takes account of the particular features of the financial services sector .
This would protect consumers by according them , for instance , the right to a cooling-off period , where appropriate , and to information , and would also allow the industry to benefit from a market without frontiers which would otherwise be hampered by differing national legislation .
As regards credit cards , pre-paid cards and home-banking , we are looking into the appropriateness of proposing legislative measures at this stage , given that the market is developing at a great pace - we have therefore to consider whether this is appropriate just now .
An alternative solution could be substantially to revise the 1988 recommendation , extending it to cover new methods of payment and , possibly , following this up with more binding measures at a later stage .
As regards those technological aspects which require special handling , while we accept that the suggestion is timely , we propose dealing with them on a sectoral basis .
On the issue of mortgage credit , we agree that there needs to be a more detailed review - in particular on the point of transparency - before further measures are taken .
The Commission has recently set under way a study , the results of which will be available by the summer of 1997 .
We therefore propose informing the House of the results of that study along with the necessary measures , if appropriate .
In that context , we have also to bear in mind that all of the vertical measures involve some standardization of the financial products , and this would automatically lead to greater transparency of the markets but would also make it easier for operators to reach agreements on prices , to the detriment of consumers .
Finally , in response to the demand of the House for initiatives in the insurance sector , I have to say that the Commission will be proposing , by the summer , a directive to protect the victims of accidents that have occurred in a country other than their country of residence .

I shall conclude with a number of rapid comments on points raised during the debate : in the area of bonus-malus , the Commission has already opened infringement proceedings ; on the point of fiscal harmonization I fully endorse what was said in the Marinucci report and , as you will perhaps be aware , as Commissioner with responsibility for taxation , I have launched an effort to make the measures designed to coordinate taxation more effective , and that is something which will certainly affect the financial institutions also ; it is our intention that completion of the internal market will be momentous and will be geared towards those who are its end-users , namely consumers themselves .
The Commission has undertaken to submit an action plan for the completion of the single market in time for the Amsterdam European Council .
Particular emphasis will be placed on the services sector , including financial services , and we believe that all this benefits consumers .
As you will remember , the Commission does not hesitate to propose legislative measures when they seem appropriate and beneficial to consumers .
The most recent examples of this have been the guarantee of bank deposits , the guarantee on investments - on which agreement , I am pleased to say , has just been reached - the directive that has been approved on cross-border payments and the new measures we have today announced in the House .
Firstly , Madam President : did I understand correctly that there is shortly to be legislation on financial services and distance selling ?
Can you confirm that ?
How soon is shortly ?
Secondly , concerning payment cards : I know that our fellow-parliamentarians who addressed this matter in the eighties together with business and industry made a heartfelt plea to us for legislation .
I find the Commissioner is rather reticent about that .
Can he tell us a little more ?
Madam President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for his very clear statement of what the Commission is committed to doing .
I largely share his point of view but I wonder why we should defer the question of credit cards given that they have now become common currency .
We know that another recommendation would have more or less the same effect as the last one .
I do not understand why further evaluation is needed here .
While I appreciate the need in regard to other issues , where there is perhaps need for reflection , I do not understand the need for it here .
On the matter of the general good also , is it sufficient to draw up a communication and then wait still further ?
This too seems to me to be an issue on which the time is ripe .
I am very grateful for the information on the forthcoming proposal for a directive on the distance selling of financial services and hope that this will in fact come into being quickly .
I am grateful to both honourable Members for their questions which give me an opportunity to provide specific details .
As regards the legislation on the distance selling of financial services , I have already said that we believe this to be a useful measure and can tell you that we are aiming to submit it by September 1997 .
On the issue of the new methods of payment : we intend to take action .
We are assessing - responsibly , I think , given that these are such new developments - the best way of doing this .
I wish simply to point out that this matter is the focus of particular attention , including by the banking supervisory authorities .
New methods of payment may involve problems of stability and security which may conflict with the contrasting needs of competition .
And so , from the point of view of the consumer also - and , as I believe I have made clear , we attach great priority to consumers - there are cases in which it is not clear which is the best solution because while consumers certainly have an interest in markets with a high level of competition , they also have an interest in financial instruments and methods of payment that are extremely stable and secure .
We are assessing the best way of balancing out these - at times conflicting - interests .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Union policy towards Algeria
The next item is the Council statement on Union policy towards Algeria , followed by a debate .
Madam President , I am very grateful to the European Parliament for this chance to explain the Council 's position on the crisis in Algeria , because the Council fully shares the European Parliament 's concern at the situation in Algeria and is watching events there carefully .
Just the night before last 33 inhabitants of a village south of Algiers were murdered .
According to press reports the victims included eight women and two four-year-old children .
The sharp increase in violence alarms us greatly .
Both sides are waging the political struggle remorselessly and it has been going on for years now .
Since the beginning of this year more than 350 people have already been killed who had nothing to do with the political conflict .
Many of them women and children .
They were dispatched without any form of legal process .
We read such things almost daily in the papers .
The random killing of innocent civilians by way of intimidation or political reprisal has constantly shocked the Council and always will .
Such attacks are not only amoral but senseless .
Support for islamic fundamentalism has not noticeably increased as a result , rather the opposite .
The Council retains its faith in the efforts of the current Algerian leadership to control the crisis and continue along the road to democracy which it has begun .
In its contacts with the Algerian leadership the Council unceasingly and repeatedly expresses its concern at the situation .
It also makes the point that precisely a country with which a new association agreement is being prepared can be expected to manage a crisis like this one with wisdom and restraint .
International human rights organizations have pointed to human rights abuses in Algeria , on the part of the Government too .
The European Parliament has also criticized the way in which Algeria deals with islamic fundamentalism .
The Council is aware of this and will not shrink from urging the Algerian Government to adopt a controlled approach to the crisis .
In so doing it must not , I repeat not , overstep the mark on human rights .
The speedy conclusion of an association agreement with Algeria may be a favourable political factor in that country 's efforts to restore law and order and democracy .
The Council thus hopes that the Commission will be able to bring the negotiations which have just started to a satisfactory conclusion within the near future .
This association agreement will after all offer the European Union the chance of a structured political dialogue with Algeria and in the context of that we can raise the question of the Algerian Government 's human rights policy with it .
The only way out of the crisis seems to be for Algeria to hold fast to its policy of a return to democracy , to legitimate government .
The Algerian Government has already taken a number of important steps in that direction .
For example the 1995 presidential elections and the 1996 change to the constitution .
The Council is expressly urging Algeria to complete by the end of 1997 a next step in this vital series of measures leading to democratic legitimation , namely the holding of general elections .
To conclude , Madam President , in the Council 's view Algeria still deserves international trust and support , especially from the European Union , in its efforts to overcome this deep and serious crisis .
It is not merely in the economic interest of both sides that this European support should still be forthcoming .
It is also part of the spirit of political partnership which must inform our cooperation with Algeria .
That spirit is evident in the Union 's efforts towards an association agreement with Algeria .
It reflects the desire of all of us for cooperation with the Mediterranean region as part of the so-called & # x02BC ; Barcelona process ' .
This desire for dialogue does not mean unconditional support .
Quite the contrary , we are equipping ourselves with instruments which will enable us to be both critical and constructive .
And I am convinced that the Council will persevere wisely with its present course as long as the Algerian crisis continues .
This course comprises two essential elements .
One : the maintenance of European faith in and European support for Algeria and the Algerian Government in their efforts to give a stronger democratic legitimacy to the administration .
Two : the continuance of pressure for that democratization and better respect for human rights .
Only in this way does the Council believe that the European Union can contribute to a lasting solution of the crisis in Algeria .
So the Council takes a long-term view .
That view is as follows : the Algerians must resolve the crisis themselves by means of a return to democratic national government and by continuing economic structural adjustments .
And to this end the European Union gave Algeria 125 million ECU at the end of December 1996 .
The European Commission recently appointed a new delegate to Algeria .
Talks on the association agreement are ongoing .
High-level political contacts are held regularly .
The Europeans are standing by Algeria .
Cooperation continues .
Madam President , we are talking today about Algeria and quite rightly , in my Group 's opinion , since Algeria is a frightening example of a very deep-rooted social conflict which we see elsewhere too , the secular state clashing with violent fundamentalist groupings .
The situation is demoralizing and seems hopeless .
Dozens more people have lost their lives in the last few days .
The present Government has not yet managed to stamp out the violence and there seems to be no political solution to the conflict in sight .
Algeria look set to become a kind of North African Yugoslavia .
Moderate groups have no chance in the battle going on between the Government and the armed islamic groups .
We naturally condemn the attacks in the strongest terms , but at the same time find it hard to give unequivocal support to the Algerian Government .
It still has a credibility problem .
There can be no unconditional support , as the President said just now .
What counts is to isolate the terrorists completely .
It is easy to agree on that , but the Algerian Government cannot do it by itself .
National dialogue , with a place for everyone and elections in which all peaceful parties can take part , are needed to achieve that objective .
The Government has taken a few steps along that road and must continue , with encouragement from the Union .
The people of Algeria must again have a chance to make their views heard .
The elections must be free and safe .
What , for example , is the Algerian Government doing here to persuade those parties which do not want to cooperate ?
Whether or not the elections can succeed is one of the big questions .
The European Union can at least try to further this process of dialogue and elections and I think the Algerian Government would welcome it ; we can stimulate national dialogue , insist on room for a civil society , on fair elections with maximum participation and fair terms for all , and where problems arise the Union must not hesitate to offer itself as a mediator .
The Algerian Government does not always seem able to make bridges to large sections of the public .
Until it can , it is impossible to isolate the terrorists totally and find the way back to a more peaceful society .
The EU should take action as outlined in the compromise resolution now before us , in the form of collective measures by the Union , a signal that the EU takes its relations with the region seriously and does not back away from serious problems .
Unanimous action by the Union is needed and collective measures like this are an excellent basis for it .
The question is whether the Union , the Dutch presidency , will have to courage to go for it .
Let us hope so , because the region will never be really safe if the Union avoids this kind of problem , this kind of wasp 's nest , and it is at the same time a stern test of the Union 's human rights policy and its efforts to integrate human rights into its strategy for the Mediterranean region .
Mr President , I listened to your statement with a fair degree of astonishment .
You spoke of trust in the Algerian Government , but you overlooked the fact that Mr Zeroual was only recently talking about extermination .
If that is a basis for trust , I am quite astounded .
You also said that reforms have taken place .
I am absolutely convinced that virtually no reforms have been implemented yet .
There is one thing you must not forget , Mr President-in-Office : it takes two to live in peace , but only one to start a war .
In this case it is not right to pick and choose negotiating partners either , as Mr Zeroual does ; on the contrary , a statesman must speak to everyone .
This means being open and accommodating .
Allowing religion to influence these matters is not entirely helpful .
It must not be forgotten that many occurrences are ascribable to the feeling of despair that arose from the democratic elections simply being cancelled because their result did not please the potentates , who are noted , moreover , for their corrupt practices .
That simply must not be forgotten , Mr President .
That is why we must be clear about something else too .
Terrorism is a consequence of many sins that have been committed .
Since the French moved out of Algeria , there has been one dictatorship after another .
There has been no democracy , and what they call democracy today operates like this : parties are declared to be democratic and selected to take part in the elections , while the Algerian people are not allowed to present the parties of their choice .
We must therefore consider the situation as it really is and be absolutely clear about the fact that it is high time to consider the basic principles of peace here .
We regard peace and reconciliation in Algeria as vitally important .
We said that in Barcelona .
We say it again and again .
But it will never be achieved if we only support one side , criticizing it mildly , perhaps , but not demanding the fundamental prerequisite of democracy , namely that all parties be allowed to take part in the elections on a basis of equal rights and opportunities .
We must therefore follow an unequivocal political line here .
A second aspect , Mr President-in-Office , is that we shall not succeed on our own .
The European Union is far too weak to take real action at the present time .
Let us not forget that we have already ruined our reputation as it is in Bosnia and elsewhere .
The plain fact is that we are regarded by many as a paper tiger .
We should therefore be trying to ensure that other forces join us in the peacemaking venture in Algeria .
It could be the Arab League , which was mentioned in our resolution .
It could be the Organization of African Unity .
We shall not manage it alone , so if we are serious in our intent , we must make a concerted effort with other bodies .
There is something else we should not forget .
There is such a thing as a brave pursuit of peace .
We saw it with General de Gaulle .
He succeeded . He was prepared to speak to his adversaries , and that led to the solution which undoubtedly resulted in certain benefits for France too , painful though it may have been for the French people .
I have visited Algeria many times , and I know what that meant to the French people , including those who lived in Algeria , but we have a responsibility towards that country .
We are in a Community with the Mediterranean region , and the path you have described to us , Mr President , will certainly not lead to peace .
We must apply quite different principles , and that is the purpose of our resolution .
Madam President , President of the Council , it is not without some outrage that I speak today in this context to denounce yet again the fresh outbreak of blind terrorism experienced by Algeria these past few hours .
I would like to send a message of solidarity to all those who are fighting , in peril of their lives , against terrorism , for the enforcement of democratic rights and respect for human persons .
I am thinking in particular of women and children .
The situation in Algeria preoccupies all Western democracies who are seeking positive dialogue whilst respecting cultural differences .
The European Union is searching for an association agreement with Algeria , wishing to establish structured political dialogue .
Last December , the European Parliament already voted on a resolution concerning Algeria , which the UPE group neither signed nor voted on .
This resolution certainly had the effect of irritating President Zeroual and sowing the seeds of misunderstanding between the European Parliament and this country .
Why do we have to go through it again now ?
What is new that has not been evoked in this context ?
The new important element which would justify further statements of opinion is the start of an electoral process , the exact dates of which have not been decided but are expected to be at the end of May , beginning of June .
Discussions have been undertaken with all the parties , except the FFS .
All the parties have let it be known that they would take part in the elections .
In the face of this situation , how can the European Parliament play a positive role ?
Certainly not by relaying the declarations of one or another party .
Even less by posing as lesson-giver through resolutions which risk reducing dialogue between members of Parliament and Algeria , with the issue of successive resolutions which lead to negative reactions .
This is not the wish of our group , UPE , whose desire it is to respect and consider as responsible the declarations of the political authorities of Italy , Spain and France , and also those of the United States , which refuse to practice political interference disguised as mediation .
That we , as members of Parliament , are concerned about the situation is normal .
But for goodness ' sake let us keep to our own place .
Let us plainly condemn terrorism and violence .
Let us support the successful performance of the electoral process so that it may take place with complete transparency .
Let us take part in the observation missions organized for this purpose , so that the result of this electoral consultation cannot be contested by anyone and democracy can finally be installed in Algeria , favouring the re-establishment of peace .
We are replying today to the invitation of the Council , which desired a debate on Algeria .
Does this initiative have to lead to a resolution , or would we prefer to invite the Algerian Foreign Affairs Minister , who holds bilateral dialogue with our countries , to come to talk to our own Foreign Affairs Committee , and answer questions posed by the members of Parliament ?
It is not by voting on resolutions such as that put forward today to our vote that we will encourage a climate of meetings and dialogue .
So my group will not vote in favour of this resolution .
Like the Council , we say that Algeria deserves confidence and critical support .
Madam President , this year Ramadan will have been one of the most murderous in the history of Algeria .
Over 300 Algerians , men , women and children , have died .
The GIA promised terror ... it has certainly kept its word .
Nevertheless , the Algerian authorities do not appear to be unduly concerned about this terrorism , which they qualify as ' residual ' .
The dirty war thus continues with its procession of victims , for the most part civilians .
The constitution of armed militia by the authorities is tending to precipitate the infernal cycle of vengeance and to lead inexorably towards civil war .
The spiral of violence which Algeria is experiencing is allowing the authorities to justify and consolidate the legislation of exception which it has introduced .
Since the end of Ramadan , press accounts issued during these last few days have recorded over 200 deaths .
The methods used by the armed groups are becoming more extreme ; entire villages are thus being burned down and their inhabitants are suffering the most abject barbarism that can be imagined .
The population lives in permanent anguish , threatened either by bombs in the towns , or by massacres in the villages .
The resolution passed here by our Parliament last December was , it is true , severely condemned by the Algerian authorities .
I am sorry , and we are sorry , as all we did was denounce the atrocities whose victims are the Algerian people , this people who rejects violence and wishes to live freely and in dignity , this people who , more than any other , aspires to peace , freedom and democracy .
To regain peace and eradicate the terrorism which rages in Algeria , the government must establish dialogue with all the democratic opposition .
The European Council will have to assume its responsibilities and take part in the negotiations which will allow Algeria to go towards truly democratic elections , next June .
The good mark accorded to the Algerian team by the Commissioner Mr Marín seems to be to be rather naive in the current political and social context .
And with reason : the new law passed yesterday by the national Council of transition aims to harden the conditions of creation of political parties ; all references to religion , language or region are prohibited .
The social climate is not ceasing to deteriorate , over one quarter of the population is unemployed , and naturally the young are the most affected .
Entire families have nothing to eat , for lack of decent incomes .
For all these reasons , the Council and the Commission must be excessively vigilant with regard to allocating aid .
The Euro-Mediterranean agreement must be targeted on development projects and projects which recognize the important role of women .
The European Union must aim to support an economic transformation of Algeria , so that it can change from a State-controlled and oil-dependent economy to a more diversified economy with more emphasis on the private sector .
This aid must be accompanied by conditions to be met with regard to fundamental human rights .
Although it is true that it is not possible to imagine the construction of a democratic State without freedom of expression - as declared by Mr Zeroual - the Council must exert pressure so that the censure on information in the field of security may be lifted .
The new draft law on the press which the government is preparing to introduce aims to muzzle the press .
It is unacceptable for fundamental human rights - which include indefeasibly freedom of expression and consequently freedom of the press - to be called into question .
Although I can understand the difficulties facing the Algerian government , I cannot accept that , every day , civilians pay with their lives for this violence which unfortunately has become established in Algeria .
We must help the Algerian government and people to reinstate well-deserved peace .
It is also a matter of our credibility .
Madam President , the terror which has befallen Algeria is constantly crossing new thresholds of atrocity .
In contempt of all civilized values , murder , rape and massacres are increasing , barbarism is becoming established .
By means of the most horrible crimes , fanatical groups are opening the way to power to an obscurantist system which crushes all freedom and punishes by death those who do not submit .
We must not hide our faces , that is the point .
I would like to express the full and complete solidarity of our group with the Algerian people , and in particular Algerian women who suffer absolute martyrdom and reject the unacceptable .
We must help the Algerian people , without setting ourselves up as lesson-givers .
It is an entirely democratic , humanistic duty .
Unfortunately it is not the direction our Parliament would take by passing the draft joint resolution of certain groups , which we strongly oppose .
Firstly , the condemnation of terrorism must be total , not only with regard to the perpetrators of the crimes committed , but also with regard to those who finance and justify them .
Placing all the parties involved in this conflict on the same footing , as in point 8 , is to consider the murderers as political interlocutors .
That is unacceptable , as are the presence and activity in broad daylight of some of these financial partners in the Member States .
These networks must be dismantled .
We can thus help the Algerian people by encouraging the dialogue currently engaged with the political and social forces which condemn terrorism , so that legislative elections may be held and favour the process of transition .
The Member States and the European Union should effectively support the eonomic recovery of Algeria .
The opening of negotiations for an association agreement can help , provided we go beyond the free trade logic which too frequently characterizes relations between the European Union and its external partners .
Thus , we must remove the structural obstacles to development , which are the debt and intolerable financial constraints imposed by international financial institutions .
These matters cannot continue to be considered as tabooed by our countries and the Union .
At all events , the right of the Algerian people to decide its future for itself , with no foreign interference , is not only an intangible principle but also a guarantee of efficacy for any solution .
Madam President , when horror reaches such a degree , reason often fails to accompany our actions .
Here , we are behaving as if to give lessons was not our duty .
With reason , we gave lessons on South Africa .
With reason , we are giving lessons on Turkey .
And if we wished to give lessons on Algeria , well , we are giving lessons on Algeria .
Let us stop lying to each other .
Representative of the Council , stop , in your naivety , which is the naivety of French foreign policy , saying : ' Everything is fine in Algeria - things are going in the right direction ' .
A book has just been published , by Graham Fuller , who was the former CIA official for the Middle East , in which he explains that American policy aims for victory by the FIS .
I would like to know what Western and democratic countries want in Algeria .
There is the same political framework as in Afghanistan , where the Americans played the integrists , with the broken pots we know about .
On the other hand , it is clear that we are on the side of the Algerian victims and people .
It is clear that we condemn religious integrist terrorism .
But it is clear that Mr Zeroual 's government will not take Algeria out of the rut it has fallen into .
That is our problem .
Let us stop lying .
When we now say we would like a solution involving dialogue , we must obviously ask the so-called Islamic organizations to condemn , not only politically but also morally , the use of terrorism .
But it should also be said that the Islamic family code was introduced by the FLN , that Mr Zeroual 's government maintains the Islamic family code , that Mr Zeroual 's government also wants an Islamic state .
That is the terror of Islamic terrorism .
Why am I saying this ?
Because I believe that we should push each other towards a certain laicity .
We should push each other in a certain direction , and this means dialogue between murderers .
Because some , I do not say all the government , but some of the institutions of the Algerian state are sheltering murderers , as on the other side there are murderers .
In this dramatic and difficult situation , there is no easy solution .
Does the FIS have to participate in the elections ?
I do not know .
Should it be excluded ?
I am not sure .
But if we do not move in the direction of democratic dialogue with a special European envoy , we will come to grief .
We must give lessons in politics to all those who dream of a society that does not exist in Algeria .
Madam President , in Algeria , in a few months , a few thousand people have been killed either by murderers who adorn themselves with the tawdry finery of Islam , or by solders transformed into executioners .
Several years of this regime have led the Algerian people to a state of absolute despair , but the time has nevertheless come to recall the contents of the texts signed by the Algerian government in Barcelona , in 1995 , on the exercise of fundamental freedoms and human rights .
The signing of an association agreement between the European Union and Algeria is on the agenda .
Parliament must render its attitude strictly subject to the guarantees the Algerian authorities will give with regard to keeping the promises they have made .
I am not sure that we have to give lessons !
At all events , my country , which already has many towns in the hands of racists and xenophobes , would be in a particularly bad position for doing so .
Instead let us be glad to see an electoral consultation take form on the horizon in the next few months .
But a previous disturbing interruption of voting somewhat darkens this horizon .
It remains that a sort of rationing for access of candidates must be avoided .
All the political forces which oppose violence , which refuse to approve , excuse or ' understand ' it , must be the recipient in this political battle .
As regards the conference which would bring together all the parties concerned , it is probably premature and a cessation of the massacres would probably follow talks held protected from the eyes of the press .
With regard to the proposal of mediation that could help the Algerians emerge from the drama which is tearing them apart , it arouses considerable emotion , especially among those who consider such a proposal as imperialistic , colonial , what do I know ?
It should be said to all anti-colonial and anti-imperial supporters - among whom I count myself - that by force of being held back by blame or a guilty conscience , we should therefore accept that , as in Bosnia or the Middle East , a special envoy of the President of the United States should take the place that we have not had the courage to occupy .
Madam President , Algeria continues to offer us a devastating spectacle of daily barbarism .
The multiplication of armed groups places national unity in peril .
The confrontations between progovernment militia and armed integrist groups maintain a permanent climate of violence in both urban and rural environments , which is ruining and discouraging efforts of development .
A country which has all the necessary assets for achieving a rise similar to that of Asian countries is spoiling its chances and squandering its assets .
What can Europe do to help the reconstruction of the Algerian nation ?
Firstly reaffirm , very clearly , its desire for the survival of Algeria as a State .
We have nothing positive to expect from a disintegration of the unified Algerian State .
Within the Arab world , sound States constitute the best possible counterweights against the propagation of an Islamic fundamentalism which generates instability .
No one will gain advantage from Algeria sinking into a ' hundred year war ' and forming , on our southern border , an area of long-lasting instability .
Instead each of our countries has an interest in that it should emerge from chaos , even if in a fumbling manner , and become a stable pole , organizing its development in partnership with us .
The development of Algeria and better mastery of migration phenomena are unquestionably linked .
Secondly , it is best to avoid anything that can feed civil war .
In particular , avoid irresponsible interference , partisan gesticulations or irrelevant parliamentary resolutions which each Algerian faction immediately hastens to turn to its advantage .
It would be the worst possible service we could render Algeria to give the impression that we are with one camp rather than another .
We do not have to take the place of the Algerians to determine their fate .
What we can do , if necessary , is to help ensure that the forthcoming legislative elections are as incontestable as possible , so that political confrontation replaces armed confrontation .
We can also propose cooperation principally orientated , within the framework of the association agreement , in favour of reconstituting the social fabric , so that Algeria can one day have the intermediary bodies and mediation authorities necessary for the operation of a democracy .
Madam President , so the House is trying once again to take a position on the civil war in Algeria .
What will it lead to ?
Nothing .
Because a text of this Parliament will have condemned violence , denounced terrorism - blind , of course , as if terrorism were anything but blind ! - denounced infringements of human rights , called on democratic elections and dialogue between all parties and expressed its support for democratic forums , will the number of deaths decrease in Algeria ?
No one is deceived and , in particular , none of the signatories of this text , nor you , Mr Cohn-Bendit and Mr Kouchner , nor the self-proclaimed intellectuals , brought together at the Mutualité by solidarity with the Algerian people .
You know well that the calls issued from Boulevard Saint-German in Paris or from this floor will not save a single Algerian life .
On the other hand , it is our compatriots who are risking to pay with their lives for some remarks whose only effect is to increase the fervour of the Algerian terrorists , both those of the Islamic opposition and those of the military power , already active in our urban centres .
But bombs do not concern those who do not travel either by RER or by metro .
In actual fact , some wish to redeem themselves for behaviour in that which stands instead of conscience , media opinion .
They are often the same who , in 1980 , partisans of the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia , of the Vietcong in Vietnam , Maoists converted in the ' New Philosophy ' , the press , show business , advertising , signed petitions in favour of the ' boat people ' , victims of their ideology .
They carry a fairly high responsibility in the misfortunes of Algeria , which do not go back to 1992 , but to 1962 .
Some of our colleagues - is it not so , Mr Rocard ? - have devoted their youth to supporting the FLN terrorists !
In 1962 , did they not bear witness to the 3 , 000 Algerian-born French people deported to the FLN death camps , the 150 , 000 harka members scalded , buried alive , emasculated , dismembered by their friends !
Did they show one hundredth of the compassion they now show for the Nomenklatura fellaga ?
I remember Melouza , I remember all these crimes against humanity ... but who will judge these crimes against humanity ?
It is true that the victims were French and that the French are subhuman and do not have the right to justice or to the court of History .
In defence of the latter , it could be said that they were not the only ones .
All the governments of the Vth Republic , after delivering French Algeria to the killers of the FLN , did not stop supporting the Algerian dictators from Ben Bella to Zeroual .
This support cost dearly .
In 1962 , our compatriots were led to believe that the withdrawal of our nation from the frontiers of France would have the advantage of relieving them of the burden of Algeria .
Untrue !
This burden has become crushing .
By the million , Algerians are leaving the poverty which engulfs their country .
Each year , we are paying tens of thousands of million francs to the Zeroual nomenklatura , which only gives us spit in return and now even prohibits the teaching of French in Algerian schools .
In January 1992 , our leaders took part in the Algerian civil war , supporting the military coup d 'état which quashed the first free elections .
Our country has been gradually dragged into this conflict .
At the time , we were the only ones in the House to point out the dangers of such a position .
What should we do now ?
In the first instance , protect the nationals of our States .
In the short term , our governments - and the French government in particular - must stop supporting the faction which is currently in power , prevent the arrival of Algerian nationals and re-establish order in districts harbouring terrorist networks .
For the rest , you do not know what to do , and moreover you cannot do anything .
Madam President , no one with the slightest concern about human rights can possibly be other than horrified by the savage murders and devastating atrocities perpetrated in Algeria over the course of the last five years .
Let us at least agree on that .
Every day brings new massacres like the thirty-three villagers beheaded to which Mr Patijn referred .
Schoolgirls have been murdered for refusing to wear a veil .
Trade unionists have been killed like the leader of the General Workers Union .
Innocent people are targeted .
In this Parliament we surely are going to condemn that out of hand and condemn all those who support it .
It is said that some of these people receive funds from Iran and other fundamentalists centres in the Middle East and that there are people in Europe who are supporting them .
We must take whatever action we can to oppose terrorism of that kind .
The Algerian Government must of course recognise that it cannot underestimate the immense importance of upholding democratic values and human rights if it is not to alienate those who oppose fundamentalism but believe in freedom and democracy .
We welcome the proposals to hold elections later this year .
It is vital that everything possible should be done in the difficult circumstances which prevail to enable all genuinely democratic forces to participate .
That is not the position yet .
In the long run , however , we must recognise in the European Union , as well as elsewhere , that people in the developing countries throughout the world are being driven towards support for intolerant and violent movements by the experience of increasing poverty and deprivation .
Neo-liberal economics which result in more unemployment and hopelessness will bring in new recruits for fundamentalism and other intolerant creeds and fan the flames of terrorism and violence .
Only by achieving better living standards for all can we provide the conditions for the advance of democracy and human rights which we all support and I hope that also will be borne very much in mind by the Council .
Madam President , for quite a long time now European citizens have been horrified - and that word has been used quite a lot in this debate - by events in a country very close to the southern countries of Europe , and as a Spaniard I am particularly aware of that .
The terrorists in Algeria are knifing hundreds of innocent citizens almost daily , including women , children and journalists , as the President of the Council has mentioned .
We cannot keep silent in the face of such barbarity as human beings , let alone as politicians .
But it also requires a very cool head and considerable objectivity , prudence and wisdom to grasp the complex problem it raises .
Algeria is a Maghreb country , and like all the Maghreb countries , its political , economic , social and cultural development has special features which should not be forgotten .
Countries like Spain , Italy and France , which are close geographically and in terms of their economic and social inter-relationships , are especially sensitive to the vagaries of the events taking place there , and hence they affect the interests of the European Union as a whole very directly .
The Euro-Mediterranean Conference is a good forum for extending the search for solutions contributing to the stability of a zone which affects us all .
The policy of assisting the economic and social development of those countries is intelligent and right , because the spread of fanaticism and violence has economic roots in underdevelopment and real misery and hunger .
Furthermore , everything that can contribute to its political development , in terms of technical support and observation of its electoral processes and in the sphere of dialogue with the government , which has to deal with the terrorist violence , will undoubtedly contribute to bringing that country closer to the democratic culture and respect for human rights espoused by western countries .
The European Union cannot turn its back on what is going on in Algeria at this moment .
A great deal is at stake .
The Council must bring forward initiatives which foster understanding and dialogue between the political and democratic forces in that country and cooperate in the fight against terrorism , which is unfortunately being transmitted to our own European soil .
Finally , the European Union must play an active role to avoid projecting the poor image it has had in other conflicts very close to us in time and space .
Madam President , the citizens of Algeria will only be able to live together in peace when the terrorist crimes have ceased and the process of democratic transition has been restarted .
This calls for a dialogue between the representative political forces which can isolate the men of violence and allow a free and pluralist general election to be held .
That is the direction European Union action and , of course , this Parliament 's support , should take , rather than the one proposed in the resolution . We should work towards an agreement with Algeria , which would benefit both parties , contribute to solving the socio-economic problems of that country , for example massive youth unemployment , and promote full respect for human rights of both men and women .
To end the Algerian tragedy , it is essential to guarantee the stability of the Maghreb and the Mediterranean , a priority objective for Europeans and even more so for neighbouring countries like Spain .
Because , Madam President , it would be quite wrong to see European action in Algeria as an exclusively French issue .
France has political responsibilities , but the first group of speeches in this sitting have shown that we too have the right and indeed the duty to speak .
Madam President , what is at stake in Algeria is the safety of the people , and also respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , the stability of the Mediterranean basin and the future of EuroMediterranean policy .
The European Union cannot remain silent , powerless and passive in the face of the dramatic events that are taking place in that country .
We must first of all denounce the blind violence in which the Islamic terrorists are indulging , the daily massacres , the cars exploding in the streets of towns , the systematic massacre of journalists , intellectuals , of all those who commit the crime of wishing to think freely . But we must also denounce with equal vigour the violence and infringements of human rights committed by the security forces .
The legitimacy enjoyed by the power following the presidential elections does not make all the means it uses also legitimate .
Barbarism should never be answered with barbarism .
That said , it would be dangerous to class together scandalous extortion , which must be denounced , committed by the authorities and the criminal fanaticism of the integrists .
The sometimes scandalous behaviour of the authorities must not incite us to showing more complaisance towards the Islamic terrorists .
The democrats must also be supported .
One often forgets that there are democrats in Algeria .
I am sure that they represent the majority of the Algerian people .
These democrats are unfortunately divided , which is a factor of weakness , but they all lead the same courageous fight against the power at the risk of their lives , also against the Islamics .
We must therefore show them our solidarity and give them our support .
We must urge the Algerian government very strongly to finally open a dialogue without second thoughts , with all the democrats in Algeria and all the politicians and groups which would agree to renounce violence .
Finally , we must announce our confidence in the Algerian people .
Many Algerians today despair of their country .
They see no future at the end of the road of pain and suffering .
We must help Algerians to believe in Algeria , to be aware of Algeria 's assets , as Algeria does have assets . First of all the quality of the men - and especially the women - who are fighting often with admirable courage .
In May 1992 , I had a long conversation with President Boudiaf .
He told me his dream of making Algeria the leading Muslim country which , without renouncing its roots - all its roots - could become both a democracy and a nonreligious country .
A few days later , President Boudiaf was assassinated .
I believe that we must help the Algerians represent Mr Boudiaf 's dream on their own behalf and make it a reality .
Madam President , Mr President of the Council , despite the parliamentary respect you are entitled to receive from me and the respect I accord to the fine parliamentary speeches - flamboyant , emotional , stirring speeches - that we have heard this afternoon in this debate , with all due respect I do not think this is what is needed in Algeria now .
What is needed is effective policy , no more , no less .
We need to help .
And we need to be capable of knowing how to help in the right way .
Last Ramadan indeed resulted in an escalation of violence and terror .
Faced with that we must condemn the massacre - and we do . We must also combat it with all the weapons at our disposal .
Mr President of the Council , the next general election must become a genuine step forward towards democracy and peace .
And for that to happen I have two suggestions .
The first is for Algerian women to play an important political role in the future .
Efforts must be made in that direction .
It is possible and it will be effective .
Algerian women should lead civil and political society in that country .
And the Algerian people will support this aim .
The second proposal is for the European Union to join forces with Algeria to provide some minimum guarantees of safety and freedom at the next elections .
That is the kind of action we need .
Mr President of the Council , the motion for a resolution the European Parliament is going to adopt also makes positive points which need to be taken into account .
Since 11 February , President Zerual and the representatives of the various political forces have been involved in the necessary dialogue we are calling for , and that is an encouraging sign .
Sending observers to the next general election is another positive signal .
I repeat , we must act effectively .
Let us do so .
Madam President , I am grateful to all those who have spoken for their blunt and unconditional condemnation of terror and mindless violence .
But I think that the great majority of speakers also advocated continuing our cooperation with Algeria and I should like to stress the importance of that again .
The peoples of the European Union and Algeria are , if you like , & # x02BC ; condemned ' to work together .
For reasons of geography , for reasons of history and for social and humanitarian reasons .
And from the European point of view we do that with total respect for the cultural and religious traditions of our North African friends and total repudiation of the fundamentalists ' abuse of those traditions .
The Council remains willing to work with the present Algerian Government provided we are convinced that it is working to restore democracy and better respect for human rights .
We thus call on the Government to hold elections in 1997 and to make them open and free .
For our part I repeat that the European Union is prepared , as part of its Mediterranean policy , to give structural aid on a longterm basis for the social and economic development of the Algerian people under a bilateral cooperation agreement .
Thank you very much , Mr President-in-Office .
I should like to inform the House that I have received six motions for resolutions under Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time to the Council ( B4-0001 / 97 ) .
Question No 1 by Wayne David ( H-1026 / 96 )
Subject : Police treatment of Sonia Esmeralda Gomez Guevara and Carmen Velasquez
Is the European Council aware of reports by Amnesty International concerning two Guatemalan girls , Sonia Esmeralda Gomez Guevara and Carmen Velasquez ?
It is alleged that the two girls were detained on the 18th street in Guatemala City , accused by three uniformed men of being street children .
The men apparently threatened the girls by saying that they would be arrested for marijuana possession if they did not go with them to the police station .
En route , the girls were dragged into a back alley and , allegedly , Sonia was raped by two of the three men .
To date , I have received no reply to my correspondence from either the President of Guatemala or the Guatemalan Embassy .
Will the European Council inform the European Parliament how it intends to bring pressure to bear on the Guatemalan government on the issue of street children in particular and on human rights in general ?
I should like to comment as follows on Mr Wayne David 's question concerning the treatment by police of Sonia Esmeralda Gomez Guevara and Carmen Velasquez .
The Council has not discussed the matter to which the honourable member refers .
As he is aware the Council attaches great importance to human rights and fundamental freedoms .
In the context of renewing the San José dialogue , to which Guatemala is a party , the promotion of human rights , including the issue of street children , is seen as a key objective which must be given priority in the European Union 's relations with the countries of Central America .
This is apparent too from the fact that the development cooperation programmes of the European Union and its Member States in Guatemala are aimed particularly at promoting human rights and providing information and training on human rights .
I thank the President-in-Office very much indeed for that encouraging response .
However , I wonder whether I could press him slightly further , and ask if he would explicitly state that , unless there is an improvement generally in the human rights situation , the European Union would consider withholding development aid funding ?
Secondly , is the Council prepared to make any kind of representations concerning the specific case which I have cited in my question ?
In view of recent political developments in Guatemala I wonder if now is the right time for the European Union to draw attention to political conditions there .
I recall that very recently an important process of political reconciliation was completed there , something absolutely essential if democratic conditions are to be fully restored , and if human rights , including the rights of street children , are to be properly upheld , and in these circumstances there is little reason at present to do anything specific on behalf of the European Union .
As part of the San José dialogue , which resumes in a few weeks ' time , we shall of course raise this specific issue in the appropriate manner .
Question No 2 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-1029 / 96 )
Subject : Multilingual computerized services
What plans does the Council have to promote language diversity so as to encourage multilingual computerized services ?
On 21 November 1996 the Council adopted a multiannual programme to promote linguistic diversity in the information society in the European Community which exactly meets the concerns of the honourable member .
This programme , which has already begun and for which a total of 15 million ECU has been earmarked to be spread over three years , has the following objectives : firstly to encourage the use of technologies , aids and methods which will cut the cost of information transfer between languages and of developing multilingual services .
Secondly , to further the growth of the language industries .
Thirdly , to encourage the development of multilingual services .
The Commission is responsible for implementing the programme and for coordinating it with the other programmes of the Community .
I am delighted the Council has decided to boost all activities to facilitate the introduction of all its languages into electronic communications , but I have to remind you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that we are faced with an urgent operation which ought to be completed , if possible , even faster than the three years you have announced .
It does not seem reasonable to continue with the current situation , where most or all computerized information services are offered exclusively in English , because that is an assault on the linguistic diversity of the Union , and an obstacle to the corresponding language industries , which are so important .
The Council has told us today that it has made a budget of ECU 15 million available for the promotion of a programme of linguistic diversity within the Union .
That is not much , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , but at least it is a start .
I note that a series of objectives are mentioned - all of them are important , and naturally they include employment .
But I want to draw attention to the fact that , in addition to this , there should be recognition of the importance of facilitating access for SMEs to this type of facility and reducing the conversion costs .
I shall end , Mr President , by saying that all this is necessary because , unfortunately , the goal of a single language is not as close as the goal of a single currency .
My thanks to the honourable member for prompting me on that .
Coming as I do from a language region of 22 million people , rather smaller than your own , I understand your concern very well and I shall pass your comments on to the Council and Commission so that we can see if in the course of implementing this programme we can add some particular refinements .
Question No 3 by Mihail Papayannakis ( H-1030 / 96 )
Subject : Convergence criteria and defence spending
The recent debate and commentaries concerning the ' criteria ' set by the Treaty for the inclusion of individual Member States in EMU are a matter of particular interest .
It has been increasingly suggested by many different , more or less official circles that the fulfilment of these criteria by each individual country is subject to a ' political interpretation ' , although the content of this ' political interpretation ' varies from case to case .
The Council has already formulated a policy on this matter , representing as far as possible a uniform view .
Would it be possible , for instance , for a ' political ' discussion and interpretation of this kind to cover the disproportionately high defence spending of one country ( whose purpose is not to solve economic problems ) if , for example , this spending accounted for a higher proportion of GNP than the average in the other Member States , so that at least the excess spending would not be taken into account in a ' political ' evaluation of the progress of this country towards EMU ?
My answer to Mr Papayannakis is as follows .
Regarding the possibility to which the honourable member refers I must say for the record that under the current rules for EMU the convergence criteria are entirely clear .
Defence spending usually counts just like other government spending when calculating the maximum deficit which must remain below 3 % of gross national product in every Member State , and if that level is exceeded it may mean the denial of access to stage three of EMU .
Mr President , I do not know whether I understood the President-in-Office 's answer correctly .
Military expenditure is clearly public expenditure .
There is no questioning that .
Yet , in Dublin the following issue was discussed : that it could be debated whether the 3 % limit is being exceeded and whether that is permissible , since there are exceptional circumstances independent of the wishes of the Member State .
It must be accepted that situations exist in which extraordinary military expenditure may be both exceptional and independent of the wishes of the Member State , especially when that expenditure is motivated by threats of force which are in any case internationally prohibited .
So the question I asked the President-in-Office was to what extent , in such a situation , would it be possible to regard that kind of expenditure as a justification for exceeding the 3 % .
I find the honourable member 's whole case somewhat hypothetical .
In principle I think we cannot , for the correct application of the convergence criteria for Economic and Monetary Union , really differentiate between categories of expenditure ; spending is spending .
Special extraneous circumstances are more concerned with special economic circumstances and not so much with external threats .
Take my own country , for example .
About half my country lies below sea level .
But I do not expect special treatment on the convergence criteria because of the especially high costs of pumping out all that extra water .
Question No 4 by Anne McIntosh ( H-1033 / 96 )
Subject : European Union measures to combat paedophilia
Will the Council outline the measures it proposes to take to ensure a common European Union approach to tackle the sexual exploitation of children , including measures that will ensure judicial cooperation between Member States in this area ?
In view of the Council decision to agree to joint action to fight paedophilia , can it give further details on the multi-annual programme ( 1996-2000 ) for the training and exchange of persons involved in combating the problem ?
In what ways does the Council envisage that its budget will be utilized ?
Mrs McIntosh has asked an important question and I shall respond for the Council as follows .
The European Council in Dublin expressed its abhorrence at the sexual exploitation of children and trafficking in human beings and undertook to take all necessary action against it .
The European Council called on the Council and Commission to implement the measures agreed by the Council during the Irish presidency in an ongoing manner and to consult about the further measures required .
As the Council previously indicated in earlier replies to the honourable member , the measures , some of which admittedly have not yet been formally adopted , aim to improve police and justice cooperation and they also relate to training .
The measures are as follows .
Firstly , a proposal by the Irish presidency to have trafficking in human beings included in the remit of the Europol drugs unit .
Secondly , a Belgian proposal for a programme to encourage exchanges and training for persons in charge of measures to counter trafficking in human beings .
This is the so-called STOP programme . It would need a budget of 6.5 million ECU .
Thirdly , a proposal by the Belgian delegation and others to compile a list of experts and specialist bodies with a view to preventing trafficking in human beings .
Fourthly , a Belgian proposal for a collective approach to the prevention of sexual exploitation of children and trafficking in human beings , together with measures for cooperation among Member States .
The Council attaches great importance to the need to have these issues tackled swiftly and efficiently and the Dutch presidency will also give these things high priority .
I thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
My concern is that now in 1997 we are half way through the multiannual programme .
It would be easier for us in the European Parliament to monitor this if we knew in some more detail what these measures are , as they are agreed .
The President-in-Office referred to the work of the outgoing Irish presidency .
Could he share with us his priorities during his tenure of office ?
For example , the Irish President-in-Office was very keen on safe streets and proposed measures to make them safe for children as well as adults .
I particularly welcome the cooperation we are going to see between the police and the courts , with an emphasis on training .
I am particularly concerned that the Internet is being abused by both pornographers and paedophiles .
If , for example , there is ever going to be a national register of known paedophiles within a Member State , would this also be shared between the other Member States ' authorities ?
Let me fill the honourable member in a bit .
The motto of the Irish presidency was not just & # x02BC ; safe streets ' but also & # x02BC ; sound money ' .
I have taken due note of what she says .
Please do not hold it against me if I cannot give you a precise answer at the present time , but I shall ask the Council , and notably the section of it which deals with justice and home affairs , to brief you later either in writing or verbally at a meeting with the Legal Affairs Committee on progress in the programme 's implementation .
I would like to return to the subject of the Internet .
I am sure the Minister will agree with me that the Internet at the present time is still in its infancy .
We know that paedophiles are using the Internet .
Would the President-in-Office agree that this is the ideal moment to establish a European Union and , indeed , a worldwide code of conduct with mandatory ability to cut off sources which allow paedophile material to be accessed via the Internet ?
This is an opportunity which we really ought to take and I hope the Minister can give us some concrete assurances in this regard .
I share the honourable member 's concern for efficient ways to tackle misuse of the Internet for the sexual exploitation of children and paedophilia .
The Council of justice and home affairs ministers , and the telecommunications ministers too , are currently working on this .
The main concern is to stop abuse by means of good national and international agreements and measures , but at the same time to prevent the huge economic potential of the Internet from being fragmented and weakened by a multiplicity of uncoordinated national measures .
Question No 5 by Irini Lambraki ( H-1036 / 96 ) :
Subject : Funding Community action to deal with exceptional circumstances
Everyone knows that agricultural production is directly dependent on weather conditions and a number of other unforeseen factors .
Effective measures to deal with the problems which arise from time to time - either from acts of God or from other causes , such as the recent case of BSE - often come up against the failure to provide the necessary appropriations in the budget .
Does the Council consider that a mechanism should be created for tackling such exceptional circumstances , and what does it think of funding Community action by creating a specific line in the budget ?
In reply to Mrs Lambraki I should say first of all that the European Community budget contains a number of headings under which emergency aid can be given to victims of natural disasters .
They include heading B 4 / 3400 , emergency aid to victims of disasters in the Community .
Likewise all headings under Title B 5.2 , which fund interest subsidies on loans for natural disasters occurring in the Community , and aid was provided under these to victims of the Italian earthquakes in November 1990 and Greece in March 1988 and September 1986 and of the hurricane in Madeira in 1993 .
We also have Title B 7.2 , which covers food aid and humanitarian aid to population groups in the developing countries who are the victims of natural disasters or serious crises .
In general and in line with the Treaty the Commission is responsible when drawing up the budget for proposing a level of budget appropriations as close as possible to anticipated needs .
In the second place the recent BSE crisis has shown that the Community is reliably able to be flexible and to find the resources it needs to meet dramatic and unforeseen situations which cannot be categorized as natural disasters .
The existing provisions and existing practices thus suggest that crises such as the BSE affair can be absorbed perfectly well .
So I do not believe it is necessary to have large sums in reserve at all times to meet possible unforeseen emergencies .
Mr President , I would agree with the President-in-Office if I had not scrutinized the lines to which he referred .
Line B4 , Mr President-in-Office , involves not a single ECU .
Title B5 which you mentioned relates to specific cases of natural disasters , such as earthquakes , which happened in the past .
It does not apply to the present .
Title B7 provides for European Union aid , not to the EU Member States , but to third countries .
So the three lines you mentioned are not relevant to my question .
You also said , however , that in the case of the BSE crisis we did indeed find it possible to help with the great economic problems created by BSE .
But , Mr President-in-Office , we found the resources to do so only by taking them from other lines , in other words farmers in other EU countries were deprived so that we could help Great Britain 's livestock breeders .
It was right to help them , but not to the cost of other breeders or farmers in our countries .
For that reason , I believe that this reserve of 1 billion ECU - it is a reserve today , it is for the needs of agriculture , Mr President-in-Office , and we are holding it in reserve - could be used within the scope of the EAGGF to create a fund under the control not of the Commission but the Council , which would be used in cases such as BSE and other agricultural disasters in all the European Union 's countries .
I understand the thrust of the honourable member 's argument , but I hope she will agree with me that we have to abide by a number of premises .
Firstly , whether you agree with this or not , when drawing up the budget in the Council we work very strictly within the agreed financial perspective and the budget ceiling .
If you ask for a large sum to be hived off for a general contingency reserve , that means that when the budget is drawn up that sum will of necessity be unavailable for legitimate , predictable budgetary spending .
The cuts will be entered afresh .
But what happens is that with a budget of some 70 billion ECU you find in the course of the year that here and there the funds are not fully used up , and these can then be used to cope with special unforeseen emergencies like the BSE crisis .
I do not regard it as sophisticated budgetary policy to set aside very large contignency amounts which directly reduce the expenditure items which have priority and which are predictable .
In reply to Mr Sjöstedt I must say that it is true that when the Intergovernmental Conference addresses the question of greater cooperation under the third pillar it will have to consider the question of how to integrate the cooperation which already exists amongst the Member States which are parties to Schengen and how to implement it .
I can confirm that special consideration will be given and is already being given as part of those deliberations to the position of Norway and Iceland , which concluded a cooperation agreement with the Schengen countries in the form of the agreement signed on 19 December 1996 , though it has not yet come into force . But it is too soon to say anything pertinent about how exactly all that will translate at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Further to the response from the Council of Ministers , for which I am grateful , I have three supplementary questions .
The first is whether we need a new agreement with Norway and Iceland if the Schengen Agreement is incorporated into EU law , or whether we can use the agreement which is already in place and which has been signed by representatives from these countries .
My second question concerns the role of the courts : If , as a result of the amendment of the Treaty , the EEC Courts will now determine issues concerning the Schengen Agreement , does this mean that Iceland and Norway are now under the jurisdiction of the EEC Courts ?
My third question is : If the Schengen Agreement is incorporated into the Treaty , how will we be able to distinguish what was originally the Schengen Agreement or what was Europol , for example , or any other aspect of the work which is currently part of the Third Pillar ?
Will it not be impossible , in practice , to keep these matters separate when we are considering how they will apply in cooperating countries .
I think it is still too soon to talk about whether a new agreement is needed with Norway and Iceland as a result of any change in the treaty relationship between the European Union and the countries cooperating under Schengen .
Perhaps it will be , and in that case the Schengen Member States plan to consult with Norway and Iceland at the appropriate time .
We shall see to it that we never confront Norway and Iceland with surprises or faits accomplis on this .
Concerning your second question about the case law of the European Court of Justice .
If the European Court of Justice is given powers over parts of the total scope of Schengen cooperation , if it ever comes to full integration of Schengen into the European Union , we shall need to regulate the position of Norway and Iceland in greater detail .
And the case law of the European Court of Justice in relation to Norway and Iceland is nothing new ; there are also special links to the Court 's case law under the European Economic Area .
The question is whether , if Schengen is ever integrated under the third pillar , it will still be possible to differentiate .
Of course , that is just a question of good drafting and good implementation of the agreements , so that one little signature concerning the integration of Schengen does not create great confusion about what exactly Norway and Iceland are tied to and what they are not tied to ; that is simply a question of good agreements and my feeling is that within the whole concept of flexible cooperation under the third pillar this is no big deal .
Mr President , I represent Bavaria here , and I should like to ask you first of all whether the timetable has been fixed for the accession of Austria and Italy to the Schengen Agreement and what you can tell us about the current timetable for accession .
Secondly , I should like to ask you about security at the eastern borders of the European Union .
As President of the Council I cannot and should not answer the question about when and how Austria will sign the Schengen Treaty .
I hope you will appreciate that , and concerning your further question about security at the Union 's eastern frontier , I suggest you put it first to the appropriate authority in Bonn , in line with the usual rules on subsidiarity .
I would like to link this to the question asked by Mr Sjöstedt a moment ago concerning the confusion which could arise if the Intergovernmental Conference proposes that the Schengen Agreement be incorporated into EU law .
My question is : Would it not be more sensible to wait until the existing agreements have been discussed in the respective Parliaments of Sweden , Norway and Iceland ?
There could be great confusion if the Schengen Agreement is incorporated into EU law before these agreements have been ratified by the respective parliaments .
You are putting a question now not to the President of the Council but to a member of the Intergovernmental Conference ; I must make the distinction .
I should say firstly that it is not every year that we have an Intergovernmental Conference , so waiting means waiting sine die , and I think it is most important to remove the uncertainty which has arisen because we have a legal situation developing under the first and third pillars of the European Union on the one hand , and a different legal situation and legal practice as part of cooperation under Schengen which are poorly coordinated with each other .
I freely admit that , it is an institutional weakness in an area of cooperation , and that cooperation is judged an exceptionally high priority by all Member States working together both in the European Union and under the Schengen Treaty .
The issue you raise of how exactly the relationship between Norway and Iceland will look once freedom of movement for individuals is regulated within the European Union is a question which also needs consideration under Article 7A of the Union Treaty .
The parallel existence of free movement for individuals under the European Union and the existence of the Nordic passport union must be properly regulated either under Schengen or by the European Union , and I do not buy the idea that all that will lead to great confusion or insurmountable problems .
In my capacity as Dutch state secretary I myself headed the negotiations we had with Norway and Iceland about integrating them into the Schengen cooperation process and I found that it was all very flexible .
I have come to expect the whole approach of the Nordic countries and of Norway and Iceland in particular to be that they choose pragmatic approaches and solutions which fully preserve the sovereignty of these two countries ; that is something which has never been in dispute .
I anticipate no problems at all here , and I think your suggestion that we shall create confusion and should delay the whole thing amounts to a desire to back away from problems which urgently need to be sorted out .

The questions put down by Mr Medina Ortega and Mr Holm both concerned the physical appearance of the new Euro notes and coins .
Firstly , as far as notes are concerned the European Central Bank alone is empowered to commission the printing of bank notes .
The European Monetary Institute oversees the technical preparation of the Euro banknotes .
The European Monetary Institute , in its press release of 13 December 1996 when the model to which Mr Medina Ortega refers was presented , emphasized that firstly , it would go on working together with the designers to improve the banknotes and , secondly , that the European Central Bank would decide in 1998 on the final design and when manufacture of the notes should begin .
As for the Euro coins , I think Mr Holm asked about these , I can tell you that the directors of the mints are currently studying the technical specifications for the coins .
The shape and materials to be used in the Euro coin were discussed for the first time by the Council of the Union 's finance ministers on 27 January .
And here , I should stress , the nickel content of the coins or whether their composition should include nickel , was discussed .
The Council of finance ministers asked the group of mint directors to carry out a more detailed study and suggest solutions .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , first I want to say that I am reassured by your remarks because we still have until 1998 for the final design .
I would just like the European Central Bank to be informed , through the Presidency of the Council , of the concern of millions of European citizens who live in the Canary Islands , the Azores , Madeira , the Greek Islands , Ceuta and Melilla , in other words a series of very important territories , because this map does not show their territories , so it could be thought that the currency is not valid in these regions - given that there does seem to be an identification between the map and validity of the currency .
The problem may seem trivial to you , but it is of fundamental concern to the inhabitants of these regions and I would like an assurance that the Presidency of the Council will transmit the concern of the Members who represent these regions .
I shall be happy to pass on Mr Medina Ortega 's comments to the European Monetary Institute .
Thank you for the response from the minister responsible .
I am pleased that you have not adopted a definitive position on the issue of the nickel content of coins .
It is indeed possible to produce coins which are totally nickel free .
In Sweden , for example , we have both ten crown pieces and five crown pieces which are nickel free .
You have spoken about reducing the percentage of nickel in new coins .
Swedish one crown pieces contain a maximum of 25 percent nickel .
It would be interesting to know what percentage level we are talking about here .
Mr Holm will appreciate that he is at this point questioning the President-in-Office of the Council .
I would suggest he waits to see the mint directors ' report to the finance ministers and the conclusions which the finance minsters draw from that report .
Question No 11 by Nikitas Kaklamanis ( H-1046 / 96 ) :
Subject : Threats by Mrs Ciller against a Member State
All the news agencies report from Ankara that , on her return from the European Council meeting in Dublin , the Turkish Foreign Minister , Mrs Ciller , made the following statement at the Turkish capital 's airport :
' If Europe does not accept the hand of peace that we are extending and Turkey remains outside , then Greece should really be fearful . '
How will the Council respond to such a direct threat to an EU Member State which is totally contrary to the spirit of the July 1996 Declaration of the ' 15 ' ?
The Council attaches great significance to the further development of the European Union 's relations with Turkey in both the economic and political fields .
But a number of issues affecting relations between the European Union and Turkey still remain to be resolved .
In line with the Council 's declaration of 15 July 1996 the presidency is continuing its efforts to develop its dialogue and cooperation with Turkey further , with a view to helping in the search for solutions to questions still outstanding .
Mr President , I thank the President-in-Office for his answer . However , I would like to tell him this : I am one of those who support Turkey 's European orientation .
I would even go as far as saying to the Council 's representative that I am in favour of Turkey 's full accession to the European Union , subject to one condition , however : that Turkey accepts the European Union 's principles concerning democracy , human rights and dignity , and the economic limits established by the EU for any country that wants to become a member of the European family .
However , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the substance of my question was not answered .
I ask you , therefore : is the Declaration by the Fifteen of July 1996 valid ?
If it is , how long are you going to wait for Mrs Çiller to answer you whether she accepts it or not ?
And if she does not answer you , because eight months have passed , Mr President-in-Office , how does the Council intend to react ?
And a final question relating to recent statements by Mrs Çiller : what is the Council 's position on statements by Mrs Çiller that unless the European Union goes ahead with talks on Turkey 's accession to the EU , Turkey will never allow Cyprus to accede to the European Union ?
The declaration of 15 July 1996 was concerned not so much with Turkey 's accession to the European Union as with getting the customs union with Turkey operational and that is the point at issue .
To my mind not all the conditions have altogether been met and I think it is a matter of urgency that the Council should continue its dialogue with Turkey to reach total agreement on the conditions stated in this 1996 declaration so that the customs union can , as far as the Council is concerned , become operational as soon as possible .
In reply to the questions put by Mr Megahy and Mr Crowley , I will deal with them both together , as you have indicated .
The recruitment procedure for officials of the European Union is governed by the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities and thus solely by Community law .
This guarantees uniform treatment in all Member States .
The procedure for recruitment via an open compeition is set out in Article 29 and Annex III of the Staff Regulations .
According to Article 1 ( g ) of Annex III the notice of the open comeptition may if appropriate state an age limit imposed to take account of special situations .
Thus in practice the age limit is raised in certain cases , for example by five years to allow for the bringing up of children below school age or to allow for military service or handicap .
In this way the age limit can be adjusted to take account of certain sectors of the labour market .
For the last two years the Community institutions and organs , the Council included , have decided to streamline their recruitment methods and have pledged themselves to recruit officials by publishing notices covering several institutions , unless a specific institution has specific requirements .
They also decided , for budgetary reasons and reasons concerned with certain stated quality criteria - I refer you to Article 27 of the Staff Regulations here - to apply a general age limit of 35 for eligibility to take part in an open competition for the entry grades .
And the entry grades are D4 , D3 , C5 , B5 , A8 and A7 .
The budgetary reasons arise primarily from the fact that the contribution period for payment of a pension is 35 pensionable years .
I refer you to Article 77 ( 2 ) of the Staff Regulations .
As for the quality criteria required in Article 27 of the Staff Regulations , it has been established that the age limit of 35 enables officials to be recruited who do , as the Staff Regulations require , meet the most stringent requirements of ability and performance .
For entry to the interim grades , in particular grades D1 , C3 , C1 , B3 , B1 and A5 , the age limit is generally 50 . Lastly I should stress that under Article 27 ( 2 ) of the Staff Regulations officials are selected without reference to race , creed or sex .
I thank the President-in-Office for his very comprehensive answer on the general issues .
I might say that I am not at all convinced that he has made out any good argument for discriminating against older people by limiting their age to 35 .
I hope that when the IGC concludes - and the Dutch presidency will play a big part in this - there will be an anti-discrimination clause that makes this impossible in the future .
My specific question related to the situation that now seems to be arising in one Member State - and I congratulate Ireland for taking this step - which has banned advertisements that imply age discrimination .
What I want to know is this : if the Council is recruiting in Ireland - and it ought to be able to recruit in Ireland for jobs in the European institutions - has it considered how it is going to be able to recruit there if the Irish Government says that it will not allow age discrimination in advertisements in its papers ?
How then is the Council going to attract people from Ireland into these jobs ?
Does the President-in-Office not think that it would be better to take the Irish example as a lead and apply it throughout the Community , for then there would be no problem ?
I think it is premature to predict exactly what the Intergovernmental Conference will say on the subject of banning discrimination .
I take on board your question about Irish law and Irish recruitment practices .
I can only say that we are talking in this instance about Community law which has general application and that Irish law is applicable within the territory of the Irish Republic .
Irish law is not specifically applicable to the recruitment of European Union officials .
I also wish to thank the President-in-Office for his very comprehensive answer and also for his very comprehensive non-answer , because even though Mr Megahy and myself were tabling two different questions from maybe two different angles , the result we want to see is the same .
I am not sure that I agree with the President-in-Office when he says that it is premature to speak about what the result of the IGC will be , because this Parliament has already put down several proposals with regard to an antidiscrimination article for inclusion within the new Treaty .
In the draft Treaty prepared by the Irish presidency during its term of office last year , there was also a specific article relating to anti-discrimination , mentioning , in particular , age .
I wonder whether the President-in-Office is aware of the demographic survey which the Commission has carried out in the European Union , which shows that the population is getting older and that if we want to fill positions within the European Union institutions , then change is required with regard to the age limit .
I am happy to see that for the higher grades the age limit is 50 years , but maybe all grades should be able to recruit at an equal limit and we should look at that immediately .
I am grateful to the honourable member for his observation concerning the Irish presidency 's proposal for the IGC , but I stand by my reply that it is premature to speculate about what the IGC will decide on matters of non-discrimination .
I appreciate your demographic arguments , but I will answer them by saying that EC rules and laws are not cast in stone and that if the labour market and the demographic situation require it , we can look at this again .
At the moment I have no reason to ask the Union institutions to follow a recruitment policy different from the existing one .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for that comprehensive reply .
I agree with my colleague , Mr Megahy , that the rationale behind this is a bit difficult to follow .
For budgetary reasons he said , and that concerns pension entitlements .
Surely there must be the situation of someone who is over the age of 35 bringing a pension in with them and would that not count as well ?
Surely , you are not saying that no one over 35 can be sufficiently competent to take a position in one of the European Union institutions ?
I would like to ask the President-in-Office if he is not prepared to re-examine the situation in the light of the demographic developments Mr Crowley has talked about .
Perhaps he would be prepared to re-examine it , given that the rationale behind it , both on pensions and competence , are not sufficient and that it is worthy of reexamination purely on the grounds of discrimination .
To be honest , the staffing policy of the European institutions is not really my speciality .
I am not aware that the present basis of recruitment has meant any problems in recent years for the European institutions in maintaining a body of high-quality personnel .
So I see no reason at all to frame initiatives now to change the existing practice or change the rules .
In the interests of completeness I should say that this is a matter on which the European Commission has the right of initiative and that if the European Commission feels either that the labour market is no longer responding to the rules in force or that there are serious problems concerning this question of the principles of non-discrimination , I think the European Commission will not hesitate to use its right of initiative .
I am very glad to hear that these rules are not cast in stone and could be changed .
It is important to come back to the increased longevity of the citizens of the European Union .
Bearing in mind that people are living longer and need to work longer , the apparent need for more experienced people and the excellent decision that has been taken by the Irish Government , could the Council not now , without waiting for the IGC , examine the situation and bring forward proposals to abolish age discrimination throughout the whole of the European Union ?
I shall pass on the honourable member 's concern to the Commission and Council .
Question No 15 by Ioannis Theonas ( H-0007 / 97 )
Subject : Turkish threats over installation of missiles on Cyprus
23 years after the invasion of Cyprus and the continued occupation of 40 % of the island 's territory by Turkish troops , the USA and Member States of the EU - ignoring Turkey 's manifest arms superiority - are ordering the Republic of Cyprus not to buy a Russian missile defence system on the grounds that it will upset the ' balance of forces ' in one of the most militarized regions in the world .
Does the Council believe that it is the inalienable right of the Republic of Cyprus to strengthen its defence capability and , if so , what measures will it take in response to Turkish threats against Cyprus should it install the anti-aircraft defence system ?
Does the Council support the proposal to demilitarize the island under international guarantees with Turkey withdrawing its occupying troops and settlers in the context of a just and viable settlement of the situation in Cyprus on the basis of UN resolutions ?
Does that objective form part of the EU 's initiatives for the region ?
The question which Mr Theonas raises is an important one .
The Council calls on all those involved to exercise restraint and to avoid any action liable to hinder or complicate the talks to be held later this year under the auspices of the international community .
Recent events in Cyprus have shown once again the urgent need for work to be done , under United Nations guidance and in accordance with UN Security Council resolutions , to reach a comprehensive political settlement for Cyprus based on a bi-communal and bo-zonal federation .
The Council favours demilitarization of the island .
The Council reiterates its full support for the UN Secretary-General and his special representative on Cyprus .
On 25 February next the association council with Cyprus will be meeting .
One of the things to be discussed will be the political situation in the Eastern Mediterranean and of course in Cyprus itself .
The European Union has repeatedly urged Turkey to work towards a solution for Cyprus in line with the UN Security Council 's resolutions .
Ambassador Heaslip , the presidency 's spokesman on Cyprus , will be working closely with all the parties involved and will frame the necessary initiatives .
As regards the promotion of security through European Union initiatives for the region , the Council would point to the Euro-Mediterranean process under which confidence-building measures are being developed as one aspect of our political and security partnership .
Mr President , I want to thank the President-in-Office for his answer .
However , I also want to express my grave concern about the fact that the European Union has so far avoided condemning Turkey 's threats against Cyprus .
Of course , I support a political solution for the Cyprus problem .
In no case would I wish for any kind of military solution . Yet , I think that it is every country 's duty to strengthen its defenses , and of course , defensive armaments are of concern to anyone planning to attack .
Unless those missiles are not considered defensive .
But at any rate from what has been said , and from what I know , they are defensive weapons , while Cyprus repeatedly receives threats from Turkey even regarding its right , if you will , to accede to the European Union - a point concerning which the President-in-Office had nothing to say - threats that Turkey will block its accession unless and until its own demands are satisfied .
I appreciate the honourable member 's concern .
The Council will maintain regular contact with all the parties involved , including the Government of Turkey and the Government of Cyprus , and will do all it can to defuse the political tension as far as possible .
Although I worked for the Ministry of Defence for years I do not now want to start a debate on the strict need to procure rockets with a range of 150 km as a legitimate means of defence against threats on Cyprus .
Question No 16 by Alfred Lomas ( H-0008 / 97 )
Subject : Hostages in Kashmir
Bearing in mind the severe winter conditions in Kashmir , will the Council press the Indian Government to make fresh efforts to secure the release of the hostages ?
In reply to Mr Lomas I can say this .
Since the beginning of this hostage affair in Kashmir the European Union has made a number of approaches to the Indian and Pakistani authorities asking that no effort should be spared in bringing this crisis to a happy conclusion .
Unfortunately no progress has been made and reports reaching us about the hostages in recent months have been sparse and contradictory .
The presidency will leave no stone unturned in its search for news of the hostages and will continue to raise the matter with the authorities in the countries concerned .
I thank the Council for that reply and for the efforts it has made in the past .
But things do seem to have gone rather quiet of late , although people in Kashmir itself are extremely concerned and have been working - particularly the JKLF - to secure their release .
It really is the problem of the Indian Government .
After all , it controls Kashmir .
That is why my question asks for pressure to be put on the Indian Government .
As well as that , would the Council not agree that the real solution to stop all these sorts of acts - and there have been many deaths in Kashmir over the years - would be to grant the people their self-determination ?
To take the last question first , I think the solution to the Kashmir question has to be sought by direct talks between the governments concerned .
Whether or not that should result in self-determination or something else , the European Union is in no hurry to say .
I have taken due note of the honourable member 's concern about the hostage affair .
I shall think about whether a little more pressure might be appropriate .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his reply to Mr Lomas .
Despite the action that the Council has taken in the past , I would like to know what further action the Council proposes to take over the next few weeks to deal with the hostage situation which has now dragged on for some considerable time , causing a great deal of suffering to the families involved , and also what political action it will take to bring about a solution to the situation in Kashmir , which should be based on the principle of self-determination .
That is what the people themselves want , let alone the governments involved .
This is an issue of concern to millions of constituents in Great Britain and certainly to thousands of my own constituents who have links with Kashmir .
My thanks to the honourable member for the very pertinent way in which he has put his concern across .
I must once again give the lie to the idea that the Council is not interested in Kashmir .
The Kashmir question is discussed very regularly in the committee of political directors .
We are looking very carefully for suitable avenues of approach , either direct measures or perhaps in future the sending of a troika mission so that we can not only be au fait with the situation in Kashmir but also talk forcefully to the Indian and local authorities about matters like this hostage question raised in questions here .
Question No 17 by Sir Jack Stewart-Clark ( H-0015 / 97 ) :
Subject : Role of the EMCDDA in the Dutch presidency 's work programme
I note that the Dutch presidency in its presentation of action to be taken calls for a ' multi-annual programme for the exchange of knowledge by the Member States on research methods , public information campaigns and facilities for specific target groups ' .
It adds that ' close cooperation between health professionals , the judicial authorities and the police is of essence ' there .
I am surprised that the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) has not been mentioned as such .
Will the Council please confirm that EMCDDA will be used to the greatest possible extent to ensure that coordination among the various bodies takes place properly ?
I can answer Mr Stewart-Clark 's question as follows .
At the European summit in Dublin a progress report was given on the fight against drugs which named a number of specific focuses for action in 1997 .
One of these was that a greater role should be given to research in the combating of drugs .
Research features prominently in the recently adopted Community action programme on prevention of drug dependence which is part of Community action in the area of health .
One of the programme 's objectives is to improve knowledge about drugs , drug addiction and methods of prevention .
A central role will be played here by the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction , EMCDAA .
When approving measures under the Community action programme the Commission will take account of the work of the Monitoring Centre to ensure that there is no unnecessary duplication of work .
I hear what you say , but we have created this monitoring centre in Lisbon at great expense .
It is absolutely vital .
There are a series of what are called detox centres in each of the national countries which are linking in to the drugs monitoring centre .
It is absolutely vital that that monitoring centre is given support by the Council and by national governments .
The reason why I put down this question , Mr President-in-Office , was because you talked about the exchange of information on various subjects connected with drugs .
The monitoring centre was not actually mentioned at all .
So my question really is : firstly - and you partly answered this - is the Council completely behind the monitoring centre , and secondly , will the Council make certain that the retox centres in national countries are given full support and that the quality of information coming from them is as good as can possibly be ?
I can answer the first of the honourable member 's pertinent questions with an unreserved yes .
We believe that the Monitoring Centre merits our wholehearted support , given the scale and seriousness of the problem we face in Western Europe with drug addiction and trafficking .
There is another reason too and that is to some extent a factor given the Dutch approach to the problem of drugs .
We think that paying more attention to prevention and stopping people from coming into contact with the world of drugs and addiction is , together with crime control , one of the key ways in which we can get on top of this terrible problem more effectively . It is a problem we have been grappling with for years and shall be grappling with well into the future .
I share the honourable member 's underlying belief that if you have to get a complex problem under control you have to monitor it , you have to know , you have to measure and above all you have to have reliable and comparable data on the various forms in which this problem may manifest itself and how it manifests itself in the different Member States .
I am thus totally in favour of the approach the honourable member advocates .
I shall certainly bring it to the attention of the Dutch Health Minister who is , incidentally , an expert on the control of drugs .
Question No 18 by Niels Sindal ( H-0018 / 97 )
Subject : Ratification of Europe Agreements
Two years have passed since the Europe Agreements with Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania were signed .
However , a number of countries ( Belgium , Greece , France , Italy , Portugal and the UK ) have still not ratified them .
What steps will the Council Presidency take to ensure that these countries ratify the agreements ?

In answer to Mr Sindal , the Europe agreements of association with Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania were signed on 12 June 1995 , that is to say just over a year and a half ago .
Since then the ratification procedure has been under way and at present the procedures have been completed in nine Member States .
As the honourable member knows , each country follows its own procedures and practices .
It is not my place to go into those further or comment on them .
But one should not have the impression that the procedures to ratify the Europe agreements with the three Baltic states are not progressing satisfactorily .
Ratification of the Europe agreements with other countries in Central and Eastern Europe have also taken a while , two years .
The procedures for other important agreements such as those with Russia and the Ukraine , signed in June 1994 , are still in progress as well .
I should point out that the presidency loses no opportunity of reminding Member States of the need to speed up the procedures for ratifying the various agreements which have not yet been completed , including those with the Baltic states .
So the presidency is confident that those Member States which have not yet completed the ratification procedure for the agreements with the Baltic states will take the necessary steps to do so speedily .
Thank you for that response .
I am pleased to hear that the Council does not see any problems , but the Council must understand that certain countries applying for membership , namely Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania , have been concerned by the fact that there has not been the same enthusiasm as that shown by the Union to other applicants , e.g. Poland , Hungary and the Czech Republic .
We have decided that all are equal in their application for membership .
My question , therefore , is : can the Council confirm that the Commission has no favourites in its readiness to accept new countries ?
I must say that this is the impression I was given as the former Chairman of the Delegation for Relations with Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania .
I hope you can answer this .
I can confirm that the Council has no favourites among the eleven countries seeking to join the European Union .
Membership will as far as possible be based on objective application of the criteria set by the 1992 European Council in Copenhagen .
The point which makes these ratifications so urgent is the situation in which we find ourselves in other areas .
I am referring to the fact that government discussions are underway , and six months after they are concluded , we must commence membership negotiations with the Baltic States .
It is clear that there is concern that we are not giving these issues enough thought .
Now you have stated , Minister , that it is your intention to stress these issues continuously .
I have to assume that you will do this in the Council of Ministers and that you will encourage your government colleagues , in those countries which have so far not ratified , to request their governments to tackle the issues as soon as possible .
If this happens then I do not believe there is any cause for concern in the Baltics or in this House .
My feeling is that there is no reason for disquiet in the Baltic states , nor for them to be worried about the process of defining the whole accession strategy which will start later this year once the European Commission has produced its opinion on the proposed form of negotiation .
If you as members of the European Parliament are worried by the slow pace of the ratification procedure followed by some Member States , I suggest that everyone who knows national members of parliament who do not push those procedures forward adequately should get in touch with them and keep them on their toes !
Question No 19 by Jan Andersson ( H-0020 / 97 )
Subject : Initiatives to curb demand for drugs
Drug abuse is widespread in Europe .
The trafficking and use of synthetic drugs is on the increase .
Member States ' views on how to combat drugs differ , but it is high time that the EU formulated a strategy to deal with the increase in abuse , which must include measures to curb both the supply of and the demand for drugs .
The Netherlands Presidency 's programme contains a number of general ideas for action on drugs , such as measures to combat drug trafficking and exchanges of experience of various preventive measures .
Whilst this is commendable , no mention is made of measures to curb demand .
What practical measures will the Netherlands Presidency take in order to reduce demand for drugs ?
I should point out to the honourable member that under a decision of the European Parliament and Council on 16 December 1996 a Community action programme on the prevention of drug addiction was approved as part of measures in the field of health .
This programme includes a whole range of incentives and support measures aimed at achieving this objective .
The programme in question is geared broadly to two areas of action .
Firstly , action to obtain and evaluate data , the objective being to improve knowledge about drugs , drug addiction and their consequences , together with knowledge of methods and means of preventing drug addiction and its attendant risks .
This will be done in particular using information held by the European Drugs Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction , which was mentioned just now , and the resources available under existing Community programmes .
The second area of action is information , education and training , where the aim is to help improve information , education and training on drug addiction with a view to preventing drug addiction and its attendant risks .
This will target young people in their own environment , at home , school , university , in their leisure pursuits , and it will target particularly vulnerable groups including former drug users .
The Commission will be working on the finer detail of an action programme .
As the honourable member rightly supposes , the Dutch presidency will also concentrate on the sharing of experience gained in the prevention of drug use .
We shall also look at which elements of the collective strategy against drugs , adopted by the Council in December 1996 , merit implementation in the area of preventing drug addiction .
For the benefit of honourable members , not only Mr Andersson but others too who like myself are very much exercised by this subject , I should say that the Dutch presidency will be giving very high priority to the whole question of studying and eliminating the drugs problem , together with its control and its treatment by the judicial system .
I would like to thank the Council for their answer .
The reason for my question is that there are generally speaking two ways of fighting drug abuse , by tackling both supply and demand .
We must use both these methods .
We all agree with this as far as supply , i.e. trade in and manufacture of synthetic drugs , is concerned .
But at the same time we know that , no matter how many producers and wholesalers we bring to book , there will always be drug abuse as long as there is a demand .
This is why I think that demand is the most important issue , and most important of all is to ensure that young people do not begin using drugs at all .
I have two questions one concerned with this issue and another concerning the response given to Mr StewartClark .
Firstly : do you also think that the most important initiative in tackling drugs is to prevent young people from even trying them ?
Secondly : amphetamines and other synthetic drugs are now being produced in Eastern Europe .
Should not we in the EU be ' cleaning up our own backyard ' now that we are in contact with Eastern European countries ?
I agree with Mr Andersson 's analysis , which draws a clear distinction between supply and demand .
I think there is a large measure of consensus and policy agreement within the European Union about how to control supply .
The main objective is to suppress drugs , to counter international organized crime and in this respect Mr Andersson rightly calls for relations with third countries to be borne in mind .
We know that the rapid processes of social change in some Eastern European countries have led to special risks in the transportation and manufacture of hard drugs and I can assure you that account is taken of this fact in the Council 's work .
I said just now that the Dublin summit resolved to set up a group of senior representatives who will shortly come up with suggestions to counter organized crime ; they will of course be examining large- and medium-scale drug trafficking and will make a point of looking closely at relations with third countries .
As for controlling demand , because we are talking here about great cultural differences between countries and widely differing approaches , I think we need in future to acquaint ourselves a lot better with each others ' experience , and I touched on that partly in my reply to Mr Stewart-Clark .
There is plenty of room for closer cooperation between Member States , between specialists in the Member States , coordinated by the Monitoring Centre .
We believe that in the Netherlands , prevention has been a key factor in analysing keenly and controlling the consequences for society and the whole of our youth , and I can assure you that this presidency will not relax its endeavours in this area .
Question No 20 by Nuala Ahern ( H-0022 / 97 ) :
Subject : Prior notice of radioactive shipments to en-route countries
In the light of the fact that in signing the Barcelona Convention the French Government has clearly accepted its responsibility , in regard to shipments of radioactive and toxic materials from French ports , that prior notice should be given to countries en route , does the Council believe that France and the UK have similar responsibility in informing en-route countries in respect of nuclear cargoes sent by sea from their reprocessing facilities at The Hague and Sellafield respectively ?
A number of rules are relevant to Mrs Ahern 's question concerning the movement of radioactive materials .
There is firstly Community legislation , namely Directive 92 / 2 / Euratom of 3 February 1992 on the supervision and control of movements of radioactive waste between Member States and into and out of the Community .
Secondly there are the rules on the movement of nuclear materials , drawn up by the International Atomic Energy Agency and , thirdly , there are the rules governing maritime transport , the IMO code on the carriage of dangerous goods by sea .
This body of legal and administrative regulations also applies to movements of radioactive waste originating in the reprocessing plants which the honourable member mentions , namely La Hague and Sellafield .
Regarding the applicability of the Barcelona Treaty , which the honourable member mentions in her question , I have to say that this is not pertinent here .
This Treaty concerns carriage through the Mediterranean , whilst these reprocessed wastes from La Hague take a totally different route ; they are destined for Japan and do not go through the Mediterranean .
At the same time I should point out to the honourable member that it is not the business of the Council to guarantee compliance with international treaties which the Member States have signed in contexts other than that of the European Union .
This is an individual responsibility incumbent on Member States , at least to the extent that Community law is not involved .
Currently there is a nuclear shipment from La Hague in France wandering around the planet between France and Japan .
Can the Council confirm that notification has been given to states en route ?
You say it is not for the Council to monitor but who is monitoring it ?
Is it Euratom ?
Is the Member State itself responsible for informing other states ?
Have the other states been informed ?
Who has informed who and who wants to be informed ?
And is prior consent given by states en route .
I know that the Australian Government has been informed .
It has made a public acknowledgement but we are not too sure what actually happens within the Union and in the space between leaving European waters and entering Australian ones .
Have states en route also the right to be informed and by whom ?
Who does this informing apart from France and the UK ?
I understand Mrs Ahern 's concern for these sensitive matters , but I must make the point that this is a debate between the Council of the European Union and the Parliament of the European Union , so I can only really talk here about the obligations imposed by the laws of the European Union , in this instance the Community legislation of Euratom , but these have specific requirements which are monitored too by the European Commission . You mention the question of notifications to third countries .
These are not governed by the Community 's laws and regulations , the organs of the European Union play no part in them , and if you want to know what the obligations covering movements of this kind are I must refer you to the obligations undertaken under the International Atomic Energy Agency and the IMO , the International Maritime Organization . Within these bodies individual EU Member States - I cannot recall off the top of my head which they are , I hope they will forgive me - are required to meet their own treaty obligations vis à vis third countries .
This is not an area in which the European Union has any powers .
I am sorry , Mrs Ahern , but you are not entitled to come back .
I would love to let you , but I cannot give you the floor .
Mr President , we have reached the end of Question Time , and I should like to protest against the reply given to me by the President-in-Office when I asked about controls and security at the external border of the EU , a reply which implies a violation of the Treaty . Citing subsidiarity , he suggested that I address my question to Bonn .
He did not tell me , however , how that position could be reconciled with the third pillar of Maastricht , with the principle of a European Union without internal frontiers , nor did he tell me how Bonn is supposed to control the eastern border of the EU from Finland down to Greece .
Mr Posselt , you know that we have not yet completed Question Time and that you are out of order .
As the author is not present , Question No 21 lapses .
Question No 22 by Alex Smith ( H-0028 / 97 ) :
Subject : Nuclear reprocessing plants and leukaemia

The 11 January 1997 issue of the British Medical Journal ( Volume 314 , pages 101-106 ) published a detailed article on the measured occurrence of leukaemia in young people living close to the nuclear reprocessing plant operated by COGEMA at La Hague on the Cotentin Peninsula in Normandy .
Considering earlier studies of cancers around the Sellafield reprocessing complex in Cumbria by Professor Gardner and high levels of leukaemia near the Dounreay nuclear plant in Scotland , will the Council now investigate ( and review ) the health and environmental implications for the citizens of Europe arising from the continued operation of those reprocessing plants in the European Union ?
Mr Smith asks about reprocessing facilities .
I will echo my predecessor in his reply to an earlier question from the honourable member and say again that the Council attaches great importance to ensuring that a high level of safety and health is guaranteed in nuclear activities within the European Union .
In this context I would remind the House that the Council recently adopted Directive 96 / 29 / Euratom , laying down the basic standards for the health protection of the general public and workers against the hazards of ionizing radiation .
This Directive tightens up the existing standards to take account of the latest scientific and technical information .
If the Commission sees fit to put forward new proposals with an eye to the possible adaptation of Community legislation in line with new internationally recognized scientific facts , then the Council will certainly address these .
It is for the Commission to monitor the developing situation in that field and to check whether the research to which the honourable member refers has universally recognized scientific validity .
I am not , of course , denigrating this research which , as I understand it , is the work of eminent specialists .
It is for the European Commission to take further action here .
I thank the President-in-Office , who I am standing behind once again , for his reply .
This week we have debated a report by a temporary committee of inquiry , which criticised not only the Commission but the Council for not acting quickly enough on a public health matter .
Here we have another potential public health danger , and given the reply that the President-in-Office has just provided , could I say that things should be taken more seriously .
I would ask him whether he will undertake to ask the Commission to review the credibility of this study which was done in the Channel Islands and see if it warrants some further examination or adjustment of the regulations which cover it at the moment , particularly in the light of the public health concerns ?
In response to Mr Smith 's further question , I shall bring this research directly to the European Commission 's attention .
I would like to thank you for your various answers here tonight .
You referred to the Euratom regulations and directives a number of times , but the Euratom Treaty might as well be on the planet Zorg for all the democratic control that we have on it in this Union .
It should have been reviewed well before now and incorporated into the Maastricht Treaty or gotten rid of totally .
Would you confirm that the Dutch presidency has amendments to the Euratom Treaty on the table at the moment , during the IGC process and that it will look at those amendments and / or institute a review of the Euratom Treaty itself during the IGC negotiations ?
I am not quite sure I grasped the humorous allusion which the honourable member made .
If the allegation is that those responsible for implementing the Euratom Treaty are fast asleep , I must refute it .
Secondly , there are currently no proposals on the table at the Intergovernmental Conference to amend the Euratom Treaty .
Consumer credit
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0345 / 96 by Mrs Mosiek-Urbahn , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directive 87 / 102 / EEC ( as amended by Directive 90 / 88 / EEC ) relating to the approximation of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning consumer credit ( COM ( 96 ) 0079 - C4-0243 / 96-96 / 0055 ( COD ) ) ; -A4-0010 / 97 by Mr Caccavale , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the Commission report on the operation of Directive 87 / 102 / EEC for the approximation of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning consumer credit ( COM ( 95 ) 0117 - C4-0185 / 95 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the draft directive amending the consumer credit directive is a small but significant step in the direction of more consumer protection .
The main thrust of the amendments concerns the definition , which is binding upon all Member States of the European Union , of a uniform method of calculating the annual percentage rate of charge .
This will have a particularly advantageous effect for consumers , because it makes it easier for them to compare financial services products on a cross-border basis .
Furthermore , the Commission 's proposal carries out a certain degree of harmonization of bases for assessment , inasmuch as the annual percentage rate of charge will now be calculated for the year on the basis of 365 or 366 days .
However , in my report I propose that the standardized calculation for the year should be made only on the basis of 365 days .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has given its support to this proposal , as have the votes of my group .
This clarification is necessary because the Commission 's version is liable to be misunderstood and it also allows the calculation to be made on a basis that is equal to the number of days .
Calculation on such a basis , however , would involve disadvantages for the consumer .
It would mean that the actual value and the actual period of time would have to be used in each case , with the result that in February , for example , we would have only 28 days , whereas in January we would have 31 .
That would mean that the actual interest would change in months of different lengths , despite the nominally uniform rate of charge .
The comparability of interest rates would thus be restricted .
Since this draft directive does not undertake a complete harmonization of the bases for assessment , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights is also opposed to the Commission 's proposal to introduce a symbol when quoting the actual interest rate .
The Commission would like to make it clear , by means of this symbol , that the actual rate of interest quoted has been calculated on the basis of the consumer credit directive and is comparable with the equivalent rate of interest in the other Member States .
However , since the cost elements that have to be taken into consideration in the calculation still vary considerably from one Member State to another , for example the discount , which is taken into consideration in one country but not in another , there is no genuine comparability of the actual interest rates .
Such a symbol , therefore , could be misused in order to deceive the consumer , and would be contrary to the aim of the proposal .
As far as the Caccavale report is concerned , I should like to make the following comments . Naturally the citizens of Europe are first and foremost consumers .
Therefore the Commission 's reports on the incorporation , into national law , of the provisions governing consumers , and their application in the Member States , are of particular importance .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , in its report , did not merely make a critical evaluation of the Commission 's report ; it also attempted to offer practical solutions to the questions raised by the Commission .
I should like to highlight two points in particular .
The Commission would like to extend the consumer credit directive to include loans for the purpose of renovating or modernizing a building which are not secured by a mortgage .
In its report , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights states that it is against such an extension , and in my view it is right to do so , because to include such loans within the scope of the consumer credit directive would involve a disadvantage to the consumer .
It would no longer be possible to provide such loans , which are tied to a specific purpose , at the favourable mortgage interest rates , but they would have to be provided only at the higher , consumer-credit interest rates , to the disadvantage of the consumer .
My second point is that the Commission has raised the question of the appropriateness of a European directive on mortgage credit .
The Committee and my group take the view that such a European directive at the present time is something that they cannot agree to .
Mortgage credit is inseparably connected with security and application procedures , which differ greatly between different countries .
European-level regulation of mortgage credit would therefore mean approximating the security and application rules at the same time , hence ultimately the EU-wide harmonization of national property law provisions .
This , however , would not be compatible with the principle of subsidiarity .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the market in consumer credit has expanded very rapidly in recent years and will experience exponential growth in the years to come .
It is , however , the case that we have today a situation in which one contracting party is in fact the privileged party .
This is not just a matter of the legislation or , to put it better , though legislation too has its impact , it is clear that we are today living in an economy based on the supply-side .
The fact is that the financial institutions are in a position to impose their own choices , their own products and their own contracts - including those containing barely comprehensible clauses - because the supply-side is very frequently limited and inflexible .
That is why we believe it is necessary to have European legislation that extends , in some way , the 1987 directive because , within the meaning of Article 100a ( 3 ) , as well as Article 129a , first sentence : ' The Community shall contribute to a high level of consumer protection ' .
But if we are to protect consumers we do not require legislation that is merely protective .
We do not believe that protective legislation is needed .
As the Commissioner , Mrs Bonino , frequently says , the consumer is not a species under threat of extinction ; but we do need to speed up a process that encourages consumers to take an active role , that protects their right to seek and obtain useful information , that secures respect for their rights and interests and their wishes , as freely exercised and expressed .
That , then , is why we are thinking in terms of legislation that provides horizontal and parallel regulation , that does not form a superstructure over the legislations of the Member States and that is able to regulate the rights of consumers and users and relations between their associations and the public authorities . It has also to provide possibilities for less time-consuming protection by the courts and the conciliation procedure now needed to guarantee the kind of uniformity throughout the Community - not cumbersome but stable - necessary for the proper operation of the internal market .
We believe that , in order to protect consumers , we have basically to apply the principles of free competition , and that means offering consumers genuine choices and according them both the right to choose between different products and the right to change without incurring a penalty .
We therefore see the consumer as an informed and mobile player , in line with clear rules and with due respect for the commitments entered into .
We see the consumer as having a real power of choice , and that can and will act as an incentive and a steer to producers themselves , who will need to make an effort , including at an economic level , to innovate and be creative .
A broader range of supply and greater competition will mean that consumers are given real freedom of choice between several products and therefore the possibility of exerting an influence on the supply-side and on the development of the market .
Currently , it is quite apparent that citizens who enter into contact with the banks and financial institutions have difficulty in evaluating the various services on offer .
That is why consumers must ask for and obtain all sorts of information ; they must learn to make comparisons , choose , avoid excesses and plan their own commitments .
Transparent behaviour and clear statements of conditions are , in the final analysis , needed to secure both the protection of the more vulnerable consumers and , above all , market efficiency .
That is why we are drawing attention to a number of crucial points in our report .
A new concept of the consumer , for instance , broader than that contained in the corpus of European law and that is able to cover all - including small businessmen - who find themselves at a disadvantage in relation to the financial institutions , at the very same disadvantage as Community consumers find themselves in relation to the financial institutions .
Of course , we do not wish to revolutionize the concept of consumer as such , but we believe that this is an important and substantial point which may properly be related to the specific sector of consumer credit .
And that is why we have recently tabled an amendment which we would ask honourable Members to support so that this new concept of the consumer is able to stimulate market opening and variety of supply and generate more competitiveness and greater competition .
We also believe that lack of openness in the market in consumer credit is most apparent from the usury that exists and the transfer to the black market of a whole range of possible and potential consumers who do not find in the banks and financial institutes the variety of offer they need .
We also believe that - in relation to mortgage credit , for example - evaluation is needed .
We are not against the idea of extending the 1987 directive to mortgage credit also .
We have tabled an amendment on this that leaves the question open and would ask our colleagues in the other groups to support it .
We are asking them to support the Commission 's idea .
Mr President , I wish to end by making a couple of important points .
We would ask that the House support the amendments concerning the standardization of contracts with a view to a self-regulating code of conduct ; we ask the House to back the extended concept of consumer as well as the possibility of making a close assessment of the concept of mortgage credit ; we ask the House to support the new concept of opening up the market and opening up competition .
Mr President , I should like to state my position regarding the Caccavale report , not the MosiekUrbahn report .
The timetable of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights forced us to issue an opinion as early as the end of April last year .
We as a Committee are asking the Commission to amend the 1986 directive .
Why should credit for the initial financing of a professional activity not fall within the scope of this directive ?
Why , when consumer credit is advertised , should there not be minimum requirements that are , for the person seeking the credit , informative , comprehensible and truthful ?
Why should new forms of credit , e.g. credit-card loans , not be covered by an amended directive , or by a directive of their own ?
Why should there not be a cooling-off period in all Member States ?
How can we reduce usury and overindebtedness for an increasing number of citizens of the European Union ?
Can this perhaps be traced back to the fact that many credit providers do not possess the necessary training and probity ?
Do we not need a European provision on this subject ?
Our Committee believes that we do .
The 1986 directive was intended to help to harmonize national provisions .
It was adopted before the Single European Act came into force .
It required a unanimous vote in the Council , which means that everybody agreed on the lowest common denominator .
But when it came to implementing the directive in national law , things turned out very differently .
In some cases substantially better protective regulations were introduced , but there was no sign of any harmonization , and this makes things difficult when it comes to cross-border activities .
I should like to point one thing out to Mr Caccavale .
Paragraph 16 of the resolution says there should be no Community rules for credit secured by mortgage .
In the explanatory statement , however , it says that Community rules are appropriate .
This is , at the very least , a contradiction .
Our Committee is asking for a directive .
It is precisely here , in this grey area , that there plenty of negative examples involving the treatment of French citizens by German banks .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I want to congratulate Mr Caccavale on his determination in getting his report through , because I must say that his zeal to find consensus on the numerous amendments to his report has produced a debate more like a diplomatic negotiation than a parliamentary vote .
The internal market is going through an essential stage . After the great fanfare of 1992 , we are immersed in the application stage , the final objective of which is to bring Europe closer to the daily lives of the citizens .
They will be more aware of the value of the Union when they can effectively use instruments to defend their rights or carry out financial operations solely for consumption , outside its territory .
Consumer protection at European level as regards credit is becoming increasingly complex , as a result , amongst other things , of the free play of supply and demand and the imminent entry into force of the third stage of monetary union , which presents a crucial legal problem around the principle of continuity of contracts .
As mentioned in points K and L of the report , credit policy is still a matter for the Member States , although they must respect Community law .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , will the day ever come when consumer credit is a Community matter and has ceased to be a state matter ?
Would it not be an important , impressive achievement for the citizens ?
As we said this afternoon on the Whitehead report , one of the great difficulties about credit is settling disputes .
I will not dwell on that because we must prioritize simplicity , as I said this afternoon , because transfrontier situations are involved and the cost of credit must not rise to the point that it becomes impossible or only possible on paper .
Mr Caccavale 's report takes up a series of basic principles of civil law which give me great satisfaction as a lawyer : the reciprocal obligation to give correct and complete information ( principle of good faith ) , capacity of the parties , agreement on the essential elements of the contract , the cause , the object and the purpose .
There is just one point I would like to express a difference about , point 10 of the report , because it establishes absolute unilateral cancellation .
Surely there is a contradiction here with the principle of continuity of the contract ?
The application of the contract , according to the time-honoured theory of civil law , must never be at the whim of one of the contractors .
To conclude , Mr President , I want to say that the law represents or should represent the golden mean .
That is why I have enthusiastically supported the report , particularly the point on usury .
But the law must be neither interventionist nor dirigiste .
It is enough for it to create an appropriate and balanced environment .
Mr President , Commissioner , we have all admired your conduct both today and yesterday .
The report by Mr Mosiek-Urbahn is also welcomed in my native country , Finland , which is one of the countries which will be affected by the amendment .
Consumers welcome it : we will gain a better effective rate of interest and a uniform European system .
That is all I wish to say about the Mosiek-Urbahn report .
There are many points in the Caccavale report which point to the need for further analysis .
This will be necessary when we finally achieve a uniform capital market through the third phase of EMU .
The experience we have of deregulation of the capital market has already shown that there are huge differences between Member States .
In Scandinavia we currently have an over supply of capital which has definitely improved the position of our people .
The biggest problem , as I see it is for the marginal groups , those who basically cannot get any form of credit , those on low incomes , those with a poor credit rating and those who were left with debts when the economy overheated .
We must have regulations in the future which protect this group 's legitimate interests .
I think that the problems we are discussing today are middle class problems , which is a fairly typical occurrence in the current political climate .
Caccavale 's report also shows quite clearly the problems which face us if we wish to standardise regulations for the capital market .
We are hampered by the fact that standardisation of regulations concerning civil rights is not easy .
The term mortgage used in one part of Europe means something totally different elsewhere .
I think that Caccavale 's attitude , that we should approach this with an open mind , is something which my group would be able to support .
This will be necessary if we really want common rules for both bankruptcy and for credit .
I also welcome point 9 of the proposal which concerns stricter regulations governing advertising .
Point 9 in the Caccavale report has a totally different meaning to the proposal on business communication which we will be discussing at some point in the future .
I hope that we will study point 9 and revert to it when we do discuss business communication .
Mr President , in both the report and the draft amendments to Directive 87 / 102 , we are dealing with an important aspect of the provision of financial services in the context of the European Union , and we are doing so in a situation in which all the relevant considerations are influenced by our preparations for taking decisive steps towards monetary union .
I should like to express my respect , and my gratitude , to all those involved at the Commission and to the rapporteur , for their evident circumspection and attention to detail .
In view of the importance of the issue , I should like to thank Mr Caccavale in particular , for raising the question of an expanded definition of a consumer , i.e. a consumer in the sense of a free citizen .
In that respect I am definitely in favour of Amendments Nos 1 to 5 , and I support them .

Unfortunately , Mr Caccavale , I cannot say the same for Amendment No 6 ; in this case I believe that your original version was more precise than what you are now proposing .
There is no denying that I have the impression that the final horizontal regulation of these difficult matters requires the completion of monetary union .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate both the rapporteurs , Mr Caccavale and Mrs MosiekUrbahn , for their reports .
But I would like to use this opportunity to highlight the difficulties that people on low or no earned incomes have in the European Union and the fact that credit must not become a source of financial assistance simply for those who are well-off .
People without security or assets have great difficulty obtaining credit .
In Britain many people have to rely on consumer catalogues because that is the best way that people on low or no earned income can obtain credit .
I would also like to raise the issue of people who are very mobile and their credit ratings .
In Britain , for reasons not really understood by myself , people who move a lot do not have such a good credit rating as people who are very stable .
This is taken as a measure of whether people should be allowed credit .
I also think that it is unfair - and this has been highlighted as a problem recently - that people living at the same address as someone with a bad credit rating also have difficulty getting credit .
Indeed , if you were to go to a high street and make multiple applications for shop credit cards on the same day , that could lower your credit-worthiness .
I think the Commission must look at the way that organizations measure credit ratings and the ability of consumers to correct not only their own credit ratings , but perhaps those of members of the family .
I also think that the Commission should do whatever it can to encourage credit unions because these are very useful for people on low incomes and encourage self-help .
Finally , I would like to draw the Commission 's attention to the micro-credit conference that was held between 1 and 4 February in Washington , which tried to highlight the usefulness of micro-credit to people who cannot traditionally get credit from normal credit organizations .
This is also applicable to industrialized nations .
I would like the Commission to take it very seriously indeed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are indeed having a day brimful of debate , proposals and initiatives on financial services .
I congratulate the House because , just two years ago , when I took on this portfolio , I thought the financial services and consumer sector was a field that was not exactly taboo but very sensitive - the kind of thing that places those on opposite sides particularly on edge .
This shows that the approach we opted for - and which seemed the most time-consuming - drafting the Green Paper on financial services and thus inviting everyone to a dialogue and to make proposals , proved in the end to be perhaps the most effective approach .
I in fact believe that now , in the light of the responses to the Green Paper , not even the producers of financial services can claim that the problems do not exist because they have actually been documented .
But I think that all of that was discussed this afternoon , in connection with the Marinucci report , with my colleague , Commissioner Monti .
To deal more specifically with the two proposals on the table - more precisely the proposal concerning the first report and your comments on the proposal for a single mathematical formula - I do not need to remind you just how long-standing a dossier this is , debated by the House on several occasions .
At any rate , it seems to me to be important that we have somehow reached the final stage .
In that connection , I wish to clear up three specific issues .
As far as the symbol is concerned , the Commission takes note of Parliament 's view .
I wish simply to say that it was introduced and backed by a number of Member States ; if then there is a change of view , the Commission can only note it .
As regards the period of time used as the basis for calculation : the standardized or the actual calendar year are clearly both possible criteria , and they both have a certain logic behind them .
The Commission wishes only to stress that the criterion of the actual calendar year is more precise than the standardized year - which you are proposing - which would perhaps be easier but , from the point of view of the consumer , simply less precise in terms of the calculation .
In addition , rounding-off the result of the calculation , as the House is proposing , seems to me to be counterproductive because while it may be a simplified formula , for the purposes of informing the consumer , it is important that the statement of the actual annual rate should be as accurate as possible .
Finally , since the Commission has frequently wished to see a deadline of one year set for the transposition of directives , it must welcome the fact that Parliament 's amendment gives a deadline approaching that , albeit a little longer than the one proposed by the Commission : at any rate , we are moving in the same direction .
One last comment concerning what we might describe as the positive list , or the negative list of the elements to be included or left out of the calculation .
As you will be aware , the Commission 's initial proposal contained the idea of a positive list which , as you will remember , was rejected .
We now therefore have the negative list of elements to be excluded from the calculation .
I have , however , to say that the research conducted by the Commission in preparation for this directive showed that the final outcome is in fact practically the same whichever method is used : the Commission has put forward the negative list because the earlier approach was rejected .
At any event , the Commission is certainly prepared to study along with the House means of achieving greater harmonization , including by inviting the Member States to submit data to show that these problems exist .
I have to tell the House that the material the Commission has received from the Member State which created the most problems in relation to the negative list , namely France , frankly revealed no evidence to back any of those concerns .
In conclusion , it seems to me that we should all welcome the fact that this directive is now on the way to completion and that , therefore , as far as consumers are concerned , the adoption of a single mathematical formula for calculating the actual annual rate , although still limited in some respects , represents a major step forward as compared with the legislation of ten years ago .
Turning to the report on consumer credit , I wish to make just a few points , perhaps to clear up some misunderstandings that may have arisen and that I am anxious to sort out .
It is clear that the Commission agrees with Parliament 's perception that the market in consumer credit has expanded rapidly over the past ten years .
We have only to remember that at the time of the current directive , 87 / 102 , hire-purchase was still more or less the only form of transaction .
Today , however , from credit cards to other means of payment , things have changed greatly and will change still further as the processes become more internationalized with the introduction of the single currency and the euro .
For all of those reasons , the Commission - and I think that Commissioner Monti announced this today - intends putting forward a directive amending the old directive on consumer credit , in the light also of the Green Paper on financial services . And it will also be providing a package of initiatives - on which it will be presenting a legislative proposal - on intermediaries , not only in the insurance sector but in the credit sector also , specifically in order to respond to and resolve a series of problems that you have raised .
Let me describe to you , by way of information , some of the features of this new amended directive : first of all , the increase in the ECU 20 , 000 ceiling as currently set ; extension of the scope of the directive which could cover loans for renovation work not secured by mortgage - and I shall return to this because it seems to me that there continues to be a degree of misunderstanding here ; extending it , for example , to cover , misleading promotional sales ; the ban on promissory notes and a whole range of other elements that you have mentioned .
All in all , a directive the substance of which has been genuinely amended .
Let me now consider , simply in order to prevent misunderstandings , paragraph 4 in which the House rejects the Commission proposal to include in the scope of the directive loans for renovation and modernization work not guaranteed by mortgage .
Your rejection of this seems to me to be based on a misunderstanding because any extension of the scope of the directive to cover renovation and modernization work does not , in our view , seem to pose a threat to the market in loans for renovation guaranteed by mortgage , clearly bearing in mind the particular features of the latter type of loan .
It seems to me , then , that on this point , greater clarity could perhaps help us each achieve a better understanding of what the other is trying to do .
As regards paragraph 16 , which rejects the idea of Community rules to harmonize mortgage credit , here again what we have is a misunderstanding because it is not the Commission intention to align the national laws in force or the provisions of civil law - that would not in fact be possible - but simply to set under way a process of reflection on the possibilities and ways of extending to cover that form of credit also the rules on information , transparency and protection provided for in the current directive .
Moving on then to my third point : as far as paragraph 10 is concerned , and this limits to consumer goods only the right to early payment which the Commission is in fact proposing as a general principle applicable to all forms of credit , Parliament 's position appears generally to be too restrictive .
I believe that it is possible to be more flexible and not restrict ourselves to a position of the kind that emerges from the report .
Finally , paragraph 12 also seems to the Commission to be too restrictive .
Our view is that it is necessary to fix a uniform cooling-off period of longer duration and of more general application than envisaged in the amendment which , for reasons not clear to me , seeks to limit this possibility to consumer goods only .
In my view , the Commission approach is more broadly-based and more beneficial to consumers , and I would ask the House to consider this in the light of what I have said .
Finally , I have to say that I have some reservations of an institutional nature when it comes basically to equating the rights of consumers and small and medium-sized undertakings .
Clearly , I support these views at a political level but , I repeat , I do have some reservations of an institutional nature in the current circumstances - in relation to consumer policy , competence and the Treaty itself .
However , I take the view that this is the purpose of the institutional dialectic and that we need institutions that stimulate new approaches - including from the cultural point of view - and new forms of assimilation . Consequently , although the current institutional position prevents me from accepting those paragraphs , I do consider this an important step in opening up a debate - that is currently cultural rather than institutional - on the approach we should be taking and , more generally , our philosophy of the consumer and citizen , interpreted , of course , as encompassing small and medium-sized businesses also .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon tomorrow .
Recognition of qualifications
The next item is the report ( A4-0003 / 97 ) by Mrs Gebhardt , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive establishing a mechanism for the recognition of qualifications in respect of the professional activities covered by the Directives on liberalization and transitional measures and supplementing the general systems for the recognition of qualifications ( COM ( 96 ) 0022 - C4-0123 / 96-96 / 0031 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are , admittedly , not too many people present at the plenary session at this time of night , but we should still take this debate seriously .
The groups within this Parliament , having undertaken serious preparation , have something to say about the simplification of the recognition of professional qualifications in the European Union .
We are not talking about peanuts here ; we are talking about fundamental citizens ' rights which are repeatedly allowed to go to the wall , in contrast to the economic interests of the internal market .
What is at issue here is the recognition of equal abilities in commerce , crafts and industry , which the citizens of the fifteen Member States can understand , and which will make it easier for them to live together within this Community .
If one looks at this recognition directive in simple terms , one might imagine that somebody had got hold of the legislative procedure broom and swept together the crumbs of thirty-five individual regulations .
But it is not as simple as that .
This directive has another dimension .
It creates clarity with regard to professional development opportunities in the European Union , and it strives for equality , which is a fundamental citizens ' right .
I was not able to take part in the French revolution , but where would we be in Europe now without the objective of égalité ?
Translated into present-day terms , égalité means equality of opportunity .
In Europe , that means that an equivalent qualification must be valid everywhere .
This is how we create freedom of movement for our citizens .
This is no great discovery .
We are simply creating a situation of normality .
In earlier times , craftsmen in particular had their journeyman years , before finally settling down permanently somewhere .
But let us go back to the idea of qualifications as a prerequisite for carrying out an activity or setting oneself up in business in commerce , crafts and industry .
This does not mean that they have to be acquired in the same form everywhere in the European Union .
It means that we must mutually recognize knowledge of equal value , without a lot of bureaucracy .
Let me give you an example : it was rather ridiculous that the German Federal Land of Bavaria , following the fall of the Iron Curtain , did not want to recognize the DDR Abitur .
In East Germany , the Abitur , or school-leaving examination , was obtained after twelve years of schooling , whereas in Bavaria , children obtained their Abitur after thirteen years .
Yet there is no reason to suppose that Bavaria has produced more great scientists than the eastern part of Germany .
It is the same throughout the professional world of Europe .
Anyone who is master of his craft , who knows his job , is just as good in Rovaniemi , in the Arctic Circle , as he is in Paris , Athens or some little town in Southern Germany .
This is what the directive is intended to emphasize , and it also creates more clarity than the previous regulations .
For this reason , the Commission 's proposal is very much to be welcomed .
From the citizens ' point of view , however , it still contains too many ifs and buts .
As a Parliament , it is not so easy for us to get rid of them , but we can do something to improve the proposal .
With this in mind , a number of amendments have been tabled .
We shall be discussing these amendments and taking decisions on them , and we expect the Commission to go along with Parliament .
But this is not going to be so easy .
What the Commission has placed before us is something that has been drafted without any great enthusiasm , it will be extremely difficult to make it comprehensible to the general public , and it has various shortcomings .
This is demonstrated by the number of amendments that have been tabled .
These amendments show that once again the European Parliament is having to do the work of the administration .
That is not what we were elected for .
We were elected in order to ensure , by means of policy decisions , that 370 million people can live happily together in both the present and the future .
And what have we got in front of us ?
A document that was intended to simplify and make more transparent the opportunities for professional development in Europe .
Regrettably , the Commission has not only shifted its own responsibilities onto the European Parliament : it is now making our work even more difficult by ensuring that we do not receive sufficient information .
Even greater simplicity would have been desirable , as would even more clarity , but these things cannot be achieved without the necessary information .
Therefore I invite the Commission - and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights is with me on this - to provide Parliament with this information without delay , so that we can rapidly improve this half-hearted directive and really give people , in commerce , crafts and industry , freedom of movement and freedom to establish themselves in the Member States of the European Union .
We are now taking a pitifully small step in that direction , but we , as a Parliament , owe even these small steps to our citizens .
In future , the Commission must not prevent us from taking bigger steps .
Perhaps I could just add one more thing . It would have been nice if we had been able to carry out these simplifications in Article 4 , but this was not possible because there were , quite simply , no reports available on the experience gained from the thirty-five earlier , individual directives .
I am not a member of the Legal Affairs Committee , Mr President , but as an MEP I do take an interest in citizens ' rights .
I am thus especially happy with Mrs Gebhardt 's report , happy because I now have something positive to tell our young visitors here in Strasbourg and Brussels and especially happy now that in 1997 , the year in which the Maastricht Treaty is to be revised , we have an instrument with which to counter the creeping Euroscepticism apparent amongst our people .
This is of course a theoretical thing which brings a welcome degree of simplification and clarification to our Community law and in practical terms broadens people 's opportunities for exercising their profession and promotes occupational mobility as well .
And that is important , because almost daily we talk in Parliament about jobs , and this is good for jobs .
Mrs Gebhardt says that there is now greater equality of opportunity from the North Pole to Southern Germany .
I think , for example , that doctors in the Netherlands will now have more chance of finding work in a neighbouring country like Germany , for example .
That is fantastic .
She thinks it is still too little .
I say , better this little step than nothing .
I think it provides excellent mortar for the bricks of this European home we are building , and my Group is very pleased with this report .
I compliment Mrs Gebhardt on it and I think we shall be voting in favour tomorrow .
Mr President , the development of the system for recognising diplomas is fundamentally linked to citizens ' basic rights to move freely and exercise their profession , as well as to the attainment of equal treatment .
This Directive seeks to simplify Community law and render it more open from citizens ' point of view .
Unfortunately , progress in this direction is still inadequate .
There is still a considerable need for further development in the years ahead .
As far as matters of principle are concerned , an important change was introduced in the late 1980s when the socalled euro-professions objective was abandoned - in other words , the attempt to harmonize professions - and instead a start was made on recognition of diplomas and other documentary qualifications .
This system must now be made to work openly and without discrimination against anybody .
The flood of complaints demonstrates that much still remains to be done at Member State level to eliminate obstacles .
From the point of view of members of the public , it is important that the so-called procedural guarantee should operate in practice in all situations .
Member States should compare applicants ' qualifications with those required in the host country , and if equivalence is established , an application for recognition should be granted .
The applicant should also always be given the opportunity to show that he has acquired in some other way a skill which was lacking , if he has no diploma in evidence of it .
In my view this is a very important gain in flexibility .
The rapporteur rightly expresses surprise at the fact that it is not possible to obtain up-to-date statistics on a matter which affects citizens ' rights to such an extent .
It is high time that the Member States were required to forward to the Commission information particularly about those problems which people still encounter if they wish to exercise their profession in another Member State .
Only on this basis will it be possible to determine what changes need to be made and to introduce them .
Mr President , this report appears to be of a technical nature but is in fact of huge political importance because it concerns citizens .
On behalf of the Commission , I congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Gebhardt , on this very clear and cogent report presented on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
This was certainly no easy task , given that the proposed directive is very complicated , involving the codification of 35 directives and the introduction of machinery for the recognition of diplomas for a large number of different professional activities .
Fortunately , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights approved this report , thereby avoiding prolonged debate on the technical complexity of the proposal .
It has thus backed the work of the Commission in simplifying Community law and has confirmed the assessment of this proposal for a directive made by the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment which considered it to be a contribution to the fight against unemployment .
For the most part - I am happy to tell you - the Commission is able to accept all of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Legal Affairs .
While I say that the Commission is happy to accept all of the amendments , I have to say categorically that I reject one thing Mrs Gebhardt said when she used the expression ' without enthusiasm ' .
Even though the House is not perhaps packed at the moment , I would like it to understand what is being done with its support , with your support , to construct the Europe of citizens .
The Commission approach is to give priority to the citizen .
The citizen is something more than the consumer - to whom my colleague , Mrs Bonino , referred a short time ago - more than the saver or worker : the citizen is the entity for whom we are all working .
The approach of this Commission is to work for the Europe of citizens even in relation to what may appear to be the most economic-based aspect : the single market .
And this proposal , on which we have this evening Mrs Gebhardt 's excellent report , reflects the approach of the Commission : priority for the citizen , simplification , transparency and information .
Far from ' lacking enthusiasm ' !
We are very enthusiastic , thanks also to Parliament 's support in the construction of this single market for citizens , this Europe for its citizens .
Let me now draw your attention to the measures that have been taken recently to give real substance to what could otherwise be the flimsiest form of European construction : we have the Simone Weil Group mandated to consider the real problems of freedom of movement ; the package of proposals I have put forward for the abolition of frontier controls within a framework of security ; the ever-increasing number of actions for infringement we are bringing against the Member States , in particular for breaches of directives concerning the free movement of citizens and the recognition of diplomas .
But in addition to that , and as Mrs Zimmermann rightly said , it is not enough to construct Europe for citizens : we need to develop information for citizens , we need to ensure that citizens are aware of the possibilities Europe is creating for them .
Within that context , and again with the support of the House , but with the enthusiasm of first the Commission and then Parliament , we launched the programme Citizens First - Burger Europas , specifically designed to provide the outside world in this area also with detailed and accurate information which will finally enable citizens to understand what Europe is really doing for them and will allow us , via extensive telephone feedback , through the Internet etc , to understand the real obstacles citizens encounter in exercising their rights of European citizenship .
And so , I am certain , that at this point , Mrs Gebhardt will agree with me that we are taking this measure enthusiastically , not with any lack of enthusiasm , and we know that the European Parliament is backing this difficult but very important Commission initiative .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 12 noon tomorrow .
Staff Regulations of Officials of the Communities ( Equal treatment of men and women )
The next item is the report ( A4-0046 / 97 ) by Mrs Lindholm , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the amended proposal for a Council Regulation ( Euratom , ECSC , EEC ) amending the Staff Regulations of Officials and Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Communities in respect of equal treatment of men and women ( COM ( 96 ) 0077 - C4-0565 / 96-00 / 0904 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to congratulate Mrs Lindholm on her report , for which I was appointed draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights .
With the approval of the amendments tabled to the final report , the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities will represent a good model in terms of equality of treatment .
It is vitally important to provide a progressive legal model in this matter for several reasons , two of which I would like to consider .
First , because it explains the principle of equality of treatment clearly and fully in one administration , when the practical and legal application of that principle is turning out to be so difficult and problematic .
Secondly , because it is willing to adapt , unlike most sets of rules , to current social circumstances , recognizing the existence of and increase in de facto partnerships - both heterosexual and homosexual - in our society , and according them the same rights as others .
It is a priority to introduce these corrective measures because they are crucial to reversing discrimination against women by which , with equal training and ability , it is men who gain the higher positions .
In addition to seeking to correct this process , the measures and amendments are positive because they are transitional measures and do not adversely affect formal equality , since they are only intended to correct inequalities in the sphere of appointment , promotion and development , and the preference is of a temporary nature .
Finally , I want to say that the principle of equality of treatment for women - for which we have worked and continue to work so hard - and the principle of equality of treatment for homosexuals , which was dealt with in a parliamentary resolution in February 1994 , are regularly flouted and the battle to apply them has to be waged day after day , so they must be included in the regulations , as they are in this one , and I trust we will approve it .
Mr President , this evening we are talking about the status of officials and the employment of officials in the institutions of the European Community .
I believe that the European Community in particular must set an example by implementing what we are always discussing here concerning the equal treatment of men and women in all areas of our Community .
Regardless of whether this is in the area of employment or in other areas , the important thing is that we should set a good example , and that we should be the ones to show what we in the European Union want .
On behalf of my group , I should just like to comment in detail on one or two points .
Mrs Lindholm has already made it very clear that people who live in a permanent relationship should not continue to be discriminated against by being given different treatment .
We cannot have a situation in which I receive equal treatment only when I have acquired a certain status , namely by landing safe in the haven of matrimony .
Nearly twenty years ago I entered into a marriage because I knew that if I did so I would be taxed differently and would gain certain advantages .
We cannot have a situation in which we acquire our marriage certificates for that reason alone , and I believe that it ought to be possible for me to have equal rights without having to get a piece of paper from the state .
There are many people who live for years in a permanent relationship and who are disadvantaged purely because they have not taken a trip to the Register Office .
This applies not only to salaries , but also to social insurance , in cases of sickness and in many other areas .
I believe that in our open society it is time we put an end to this .
The second point that I should like to raise is the question of the age limit .
I should like to add something to what Mrs Lindholm has already said .
The fact that women have a different career pattern because they take time off to have children and then go back to their jobs later is not the only issue at stake .
Last year , we had what was known as the Year of Lifelong Learning , and we talked about the fact that going back into education for a second time provides people with new opportunities and / or a new career .
Is it not possible that the age limit would be an obstacle here ?
Many people do not take their A Level equivalents until the age of 30 , and only then do they go into further education or to university , and these people then have no chance at all if there is an age limit .
The age limit must be removed .
Mr President , I have five points to make .
First of all , my group fully supports all aspects of the report concerning equal treatment for men and women .
In fact , we consider that equality to be an achievement of the historical process , the final act more or less , after the freeing , at least in theory , of the slaves , blacks , children , foreigners and people of different race .
We welcome a completely new and far-reaching approach to equality in relations between men and women also .
My second point , however , is that we have some reservations concerning Amendments Nos 3 , 8 , 10 and 11 which we shall be voting against because they introduce , unintentionally , I believe , an element of discrimination by equating the family , based on heterosexual marriage , with de facto partners and homosexual couples .
Well now , there is , in my view , an obvious and clear difference between entering into a public and specific commitment vis-àvis the state and society in order to form what our international charters and our constitutions describe as ' the fundamental group unit of society and the state ' - and I am quoting by heart Article 16 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights - which should be recognized and protected by the state , and , in contrast , not entering into that public commitment which , in the case of homosexual couples at any rate , cannot be linked to the ability to procreate . That , after all , is why the family is the fundamental unit , because it is in the interest of both society and the state that there should be children and they should be brought up within the family .
Not only that , those who enter into marriage subject themselves to a range of rules laid down by public law because this is in the public interest , and that does not happen in the other examples .
We have only to think about the reasons for annulling a marriage and for divorce and the conditions of marriage and divorce .
Moving on to my third point , I want to make it absolutely clear that in relation to individuals of different sexuality also , in particular homosexuals of all kinds , we have to uphold the principle of equality .
That needs to be stated categorically and backed by the force of the Christian democratic ethic also .
All human beings are equal and that has to be clearly stated .
But the fact of enjoying equal dignity does not mean that institutions that are per se different may be treated as equivalent .
And now to my fourth point .
Why is the family described in our international charters , including the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , as a ' fundamental unit ' ?
Is it a public asset or a private asset to be protected ?
What is a matter of public interest , and I have already said this , is the possibility of producing children , otherwise the principle of freedom applies : everyone should do as they please and the state should guarantee only freedom but should neither encourage nor protect .
It may be said that companionship also , the fact of being together is something that needs in some way to be protected .
I am prepared to accept that line of argument but it then needs to be developed fully and not applied exclusively to companionship of a sexual nature .
Companionship that is based on culture , psychology , science , friendship or distant kinship may also deserve protection - why not !
My last point : I do not deny that there are special situations ; I am receptive to those who say : but what about when there are children ?
What about when there is a whole life lived together and based on mutual support ?
I am receptive to this !
But I believe we need to undertake a process of reflection and to make certain distinctions .
Not in every case then , but in some specific cases .
It is one thing to encourage and quite another to take circumstances into account .
All in all , I believe that we need to embark on a process of reflection , but this should not take place behind closed doors but in the open , with wide-ranging discussion of this particular issue : the problem of companionship and de facto partners .
There is no need to try to sneak in an issue which is in fact hugely important but that cannot be dealt with in the context of a regulation of this nature .
Mr President , Commissioner , I must say that when the committee discussed the proposal for this report from this good and tenacious rapporteur , it presented a sorry spectacle for a relatively new member from the Scandinavian countries .
But I am glad that we have been able to unite across many groups in trying to correct the situation described by the rapporteur , the ' collapse ' of this report , and that we have now presented amendment proposals which we believe have a good chance of being accepted .
I do not want to speak on behalf of Scandinavia but I would still like to say that there are those watching what we do and how we vote here tomorrow , as some of the Union 's credibility as a defender of women and of equality will be decided through the vote taken by us tomorrow .
For this reason I hope that the group 's common proposal will be accepted .
I am also pleased that we will be able to carry out useful goal driven work on equality as a result of the proposals presented , and that there will be legal support for the intentions which both the current Commission and the Commissioner present have stated , i.e. that we are striving for a more equal representation of both sexes in the Union 's institutions .
We must continuously have this at the back of our minds , otherwise hidden forces will be working in other directions and we need a plan to guarantee success .
We are also talking about age discrimination .
I support the proposals that have been presented .
As for equal status for various forms of relationship , I cannot see that this poses a threat to marriage or the family in any of the Member States .
It is more of an opportunity .
Those proposals which have been put forward to recognise registered partnerships of varying sorts , other than traditional marriages , do not encroach on the law of any country .
Mr President , of the amendments passed in Parliament 's part-session of November 1993 and put forward for incorporation into the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities , the Commission has only adopted the one expressly prohibiting direct or indirect discrimination based on sexuality .
The fact that the Commission did adopt that amendment is of course a step forward which we must appreciate .
But there are other amendments geared to drawing up measures to convert the prohibition of direct or indirect discrimination into practical reality , measures such as the creation of a committee responsible for promoting and monitoring the application of the principle of equality , bringing forward appropriate programmes of positive measures , and proposing a system of promotion for officials based on a preference clause , and the Commission has ignored them .
Its lack of sensitivity cloaks a basic problem : the institutions have limited autonomy to deepen and broaden the principle of equality of treatment . And this is because the progression from formal legal principle to reality raises a certain number of issues which affect different social spheres : from state administration of social services and social security to changes in family and domestic roles , and none of these issues can be dealt with individually , because they go beyond politics and administration deep into usage and custom in society .

But in terms of rights - particularly individual rights - European legislation has been intended to be a model , and has sometimes succeeded in establishing a legal , and also a moral , point of reference .
And now is the time for legislators to shoulder this responsibility .
It is not just a case of legislating for the Staff Regulations of the Officials of the Community ; it is also a matter of constructing a working model for economic and social rights and for promoting systems which constitute an expression of equality of treatment , and the end of all legal forms of discrimination based on sexuality .
So we need to adopt the amendments if we want the European Union to become a model in promotion of equality of treatment .
Some may say these regulations had more limited aims , and that they were amply fulfilled by general rules on the principle of equality in the system applying to officials , without going into detail .
But the elimination of discrimination based on sexuality obliges us to go into detail : legal guarantees of equality of treatment cannot disregard details like the under-representation of women , their vertical segregation in management spheres , their horizontal concentration in certain activities and , in the case of European officials , in certain categories .
Not to deal with these issues would leave the principle of equality of treatment devoid of content , the opposite of what is sought by these amendments , which have my support , on behalf of my group .
Furthermore , equality of treatment as a means of deepening democracy must extend to all Community citizens , in matters of labour , civil , contract and commercial law , regardless of their sexuality and their chosen lifestyles .
Otherwise individuals would be penalized for their behaviour and their freedom of choice would be limited .
So it is necessary to recognize the right of de facto partners , heterosexual or homosexual , to benefit from social provision .
Finally , taking on these commitments means making progress towards not only a more democratic society but also a freer society .
I think the Commission has a duty to pursue that aim .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the present case we are dealing not only with equal treatment between men and women in the staff regulations of officials of the European Communities , but also , as Mr Casini has just explained so impressively , with the removal of discrimination of any kind on grounds of sexual , religious or philosophical orientation , in other words , exactly as set out in Amendments Nos 3 , 8 and 11 .

The European Parliament has a double obligation here .
It cannot fall below the standards adopted by other transnational institutions such as the United Nations , the World Bank or the European Monetary Institute , and neither can it forget the decision on equal treatment for persons of the same sex living in a permanent relationship , which was taken by this House in February 1994 .
There are no legal or theological arguments against such a decision : no theological arguments , because neither in the Old Testament nor the New Testament tradition is there anything to indicate a preference for one specific family structure , and no legal arguments , because the exercise of personal freedoms cannot be limited to a specific religious , sexual or philosophical orientation , particularly in regulations governing public services .
It would be contrary to the liberal basic principles of the European Union if any restrictions of any kind were to remain in the staff regulations for its officials .
Mr President , the European Radical Alliance group fully supports the aims of the draft regulations submitted to us .
If the European institutions wish to continue playing an active role in the fight against sex discrimination , they should start by giving an example in the treatment reserved to their officials and agents .
This is why my group also approved of the general inspiration behind Mrs Lindholm 's report ; in fact we co-signed most of the amendments which take up this inspiration to improve the Commission 's draft .
Speaking on my own behalf , and aware of the fact that I am going against the current of current trends , I must nevertheless say that I do not feel it possible to support amendments 5 , 12 , 13 and 14 , which pose a true problem of political philosophy , as they establish an inequality of right in the recruitment and promotion of Community officials .
In the case in question , it is not only equality between the sexes , but a different vision of society .
The main currents of thought latched onto these problems a long time ago .
The ideologies which , to sum up , I will call ' collectivist ' , tend towards an ' equality of situation ' , with the known consequences on freedoms and individual responsibilities .
As regards liberal ideologies , they continue to rest on that which I will call the ' principle of charity ' : one relies on individual initiative to correct the inequalities of situation .
For my part , I am radical and I refer to the principle of justice whereby discriminations based on objective criteria ( race , sex , language or origin ) must be condemned and the equality of rights and chances must be ensured .
This is why , with the men-women problem , I prefer qualitative equality to quantitative equality .
This is why , more generally , I think that an inequality of fact is not corrected by creating an inequality of right , unless we move towards an ' ideal ' society where each man and each woman occupies a place assigned to them by arithmetic calculations .
In so far as I am concerned , I do not want such a society .
Mr President , Commissioner , my dear colleagues , the Council 's draft regulations submitted to us have received the approval of our group , but I am led to make two comments , one on procedure , and the other on substance .
As regards procedure , Mrs Lindholm 's first report was rejected after discussion of the amendments , on the 27th January , in a meeting of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
What happened ?
Non-consensual amendments had only just been passed , often with a majority of only one , as mentioned by this report .
At the time of the final vote , the conversion of a positive vote into an abstention , by a member of the Commission who found that the report did not go far enough , led to equal votes , and so to the rejection of the report .
In the same stride , the motion for a legislative resolution , submitted to the vote rather rapidly , suffered the same fate .
I would like to say that I am happy to point out that on the 6th February , the Committee on Legal Affairs accepted as its own a draft I had made in accordance with the letter of the regulations and the logic of the procedure , which aimed to invite it to issue an opinion on the Commission 's initial draft .
The text thus adopted permits our discussion of this evening .
It does not prevent the debate and it also permits the filing of amendments in a plenary session .
Having said that , I would like make a comment on substance .
The situation of inequality of treatment of men and women has led to the adoption of measures which raise serious legal problems , calling into question the very basis of our republican regimes .
To sum up , we have moved from a system of quotas in the positions offered to a system of positions reserved by the famous positive discriminations .
I agree with what my colleauge , Mr Hory , has just said .
He could have quoted the famous phrase of a Communist minister of public office : ' In an inegalitarian society , one must be inegalitarian in order to re-establish equality ' .
This actually raises two problems .
The first is of a legal nature .
The constitutional Council in France , the constitutional Court in Italy , the constitutional Court in Germany and the European Court of Justice in the Kalanke judgement , have condemned the measures which systematically favour , in an equal situation , the recruitment of women in the name of the famous principle of equality .
But this also poses a philosophical problem relating to the nature of these positive discriminations and to the fact that they call into question the very basis of our democracies , as it is the very concept of citizenship that is in question .
What should we do ?
We must naturally plan some equality measures .
We should also proceed with instigations , as sometimes happens in the political parties .
We must not make a mistake in the debate .
I am not sure that the amendments proposed there are eighteen which come from the same signatories will permit advancement .
In proposing measures as contestable as the amendments which have been mentioned , or amendment no .
3 , or amendment no .
10 on non-marital community , or amendment no .
11 on the partnership registered as statutorily equivalent to marriage , the authors of these amendments shift the debate .
They take the risk of seeing the Commission 's draft rejected .
For the excellent reasons just expounded by Mr Casini , we will not vote in favour of these amendments .
After all , if they were approved and if then the Commission 's draft were rejected , the situation of women would not be improved .
This is why we wish to keep to the Commission 's text .
Mr President , I welcome the rapporteur 's report .
It goes a great way to removing the inequality that exists not only for women , but also for men and women who are victimized because of their sexual orientation .
The amendments put forward by my colleague , Mrs Zimmermann , and others also go a long way to try and remove this particular form of discrimination .
In answer to the last speaker and also to Mr Hory , you cannot remove centuries of inequality by just turning around and saying that we are going to rely on the same men to give women justice .
That is just not going to happen .
Thank God women are beginning to catch up with that .
In the past 50 years we have seen women striding forward and pushing themselves forward to make sure these inequalities are removed .
When Mr Hory first spoke , I thought that given the generous statements he made to Mrs Lindholm , he was going to come out very strongly in favour of removing these discriminatory barriers and going a certain way towards equal representation of women .
But he turned around and struck at the very core of the report by saying that he could not support Amendments Nos 5 , 12 and 14 .
Amendments Nos 5 , 12 and 14 are those amendments which actually say to the Commission : ' You will ensure that there is genuine equality in your ranks when you are recruiting personnel ' .
My own particular concern with this report is on Amendment No 18 .
I believe that you have to go further than the courts to deter inequalities .
I also agree that we have to struggle within the places where people work .
Therefore it is important that we actually give shop stewards and workers ' representatives these tools to sort out the problems prior to them going to court .
That is why I believe that Amendment No 18 , which we have tabled in the name of the Socialist Group , should be supported by the House as a whole .
It would allow those workers ' representatives to obtain the records of various officials in order to compare them with the records of others who are standing for positions .
I must stress that what we are talking about here is the work experience .
I look at the German translation and its says ' Laufbahnen ' .
From my German colleagues I understand this refers to curriculum vitae .
The correct interpretation , as I understand it is ' Arbeitserfahrung ' , which is work experience .
Can we ensure , Mr President , that you and others , including the staff secretariat check out the amendments as they are tabled to make sure they reflect the wishes of the Members that tabled them ?
That particular amendment is tabled wrongly .
The translation is wrong .
I trust and hope this House will correct it .
Mr President , I speak for the Dutch section , a small section , of the Christian-Democratic Party which hopes to have some reinforcements tomorrow .
I have been busy for two and a half years with petitions from European officials calling for equal rights ; these were homosexual couples .
Sadly I have got nowhere .
I constantly had to prod the then Commission to dig this dossier out and dust it off .
I am grateful to the rapporteur and those honourable members who have put down amendments for giving this subject another chance today .
Employers , good ones at least , know that a happy home life is good for people 's work .
It is good for people 's work if there is someone at home who cares about the worker .
That does not apply in the European institutions .
Janet marries John , we push the boat out , and no one worries about the financial consequences .
If twenty years later John dies , Janet is taken care of for the rest of her life , no problem .
It is very different in the case of Robert and Arthur , and even more so for Jill and Jean , because women get an even worse deal here .
This difference , Mr President , is called discrimination .
A term reviled in this House , except when applied to homosexual couples .
Dutch bosses employing a staff policy like this would find themselves in jail .
Not here .
Here the employer sits at his desk and pontificates about discrimination everywhere else in the world , but not amongst his own staff .
I have two clear questions for the Commissioner .
If Parliament adopts the resolution and the amendments tomorrow , what will the European Commission then do about the Staff Regulations ?
How long does it have to take before this discrimination is in fact removed ?
Why is there no respect for the laws and constitutions of the Member States which handle these matters rather well ?
Why does the European Commission not have the courage to help people like Arthur , who cannot get a residence permit for Belgium , and use its influence with the Belgian Government so that these people do not have to flee to the Netherlands to live and commute to Brussels to work ?
The European Commission does nothing about it .
Self-respecting politicians want a society which survives , amongst other things , by loving its neighbour .
An employer can do his bit here .
Two people who care for one another have a far better chance in society than if each is alone .
Everyone accepts that , except the employer , the European institutions , when it comes to officials who cannot or do not wish to marry .
Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity of informing everyone in the House that I come from Stockholm .
In Stockholm , the majority of ' families ' consist of one person .
As for the logic which says that children are a necessity for a family , I think that homosexuals should also have the right to adopt children , and that would be that problem solved .
I welcome the work by Mrs Lindholm to get EU institutions to take European Parliament resolutions seriously , resolutions where we speak in favour of equality and non discrimination , resolutions which have been repeated many times here in the House and accepted with considerable agreement .
Maintaining an age limit when recruiting and refusing homosexuals living in a partnership or living together their rights , those rights enjoyed by their heterosexual colleagues , is not just active discrimination but also repudiates national legislation , including Swedish national legislation .
We have the capacity to speak with great dignity and with very fine words .
Now , during the forthcoming vote on the Lindholm report we have the opportunity to turn these fine and proud words into reality by voting in favour of the amendment proposals presented .
I hope now that , not only the majority of members will vote for these amendment proposals , but all members will do so , even if the discussions in committee may suggest the opposite .
I hope this so that we can give substance and credibility to words such as competence , equality , equal rights and rights for all , regardless of age , sex and sexual preference .
If we vote against these amendment proposals we will be actively contributing to discrimination and also actively contradicting ourselves .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the arrogance of many men - and I would like to make it clear that I mean many , and not all - is quite unmistakable , even in this House .
To say that equality is possible if we simply make everything absolutely equal in legal terms is really so arrogant that one can hardly comprehend it .
All the things we are discussing here - curriculum vitae , employment structure , the world of work , the conditions governing appointment and promotion - all these things are based on the lives and experiences of men .
And they say to us , in all seriousness , ' Yes ladies , all you have to do is to become like us men , and then you too will have equal opportunities ' . Do they seriously believe that that is what we want , that we do not want to carry on being ourselves ?
Surely that is not true !
Really that cannot be true !
The family is a valuable thing , it is true , but it is not everything .
We should not forget that the family is not , in fact , the norm , or the universally applicable way of life in our society .
It is becoming less and less so .
And a family does not mean having a marriage certificate .
Family means people with children , and what does a marriage certificate have to do with that ?
It is a question of living together , of being together , and that is what has to be taken into consideration , regardless of whether the people who are living together are of different sexes or the same sex .
There is no reason why these people should be disadvantaged merely because they say quite openly , ' I live as I am , and I would like to have the same opportunities and the same options as other people ' .
There is no reason why we should deviate from the basic principles that we have already adopted here in the European Parliament .
We adopted these , as Mr Ullmann has just said , as long ago as February 1994 .
Mr President , the Commission proposal on which Parliament is now being consulted has a long history behind it .
The Commission first forwarded a proposal for consideration by Parliament four years ago , in March 1993 .
The proposal has two objectives . It seeks firstly to incorporate in the Staff Regulations the principle of equality between men and women , and secondly to make it possible to adopt special positive measures to improve the position of women if conditions are discriminatory from women 's point of view .
Parliament delivered its first report in November 1993 .
On the basis of it , the Commission altered its proposal and incorporated in it the principle of non-discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation .
It was only in March 1996 that I was able to forward the Commission 's modified proposal to the Council , because before the Staff Regulations can be amended , extensive consultations are required , particularly with staff representatives .
As it was a very long time since the Commission had made and altered its proposal , Parliament asked the Council for a further opportunity to state its views , and this request was granted in October 1996 .
Now the committee has tabled numerous amendments .
They relate both to equality between men and women and to the principle of nondiscrimination on grounds of sexual orientation .
I should like to stress that the Commission proposal now under consideration is only a small and partial reform , and not a complete administrative reform .
The objective should be to adopt this small and partial reform , now that four years have elapsed , so that we can concentrate on the need for bigger changes .
The debate has mainly focused on two issues , on which I should like to make a few comments .
One concerns the age limit and the other the position of cohabiting couples .
The proposal suggests that age limits for competitions to recruit staff to the Community institutions be abolished .
This idea has been debated over a very long period , and the arguments for and against are well-known .
I should like to stress that the Staff Regulations permit the use of an age limit but do not require it .
Thus there is no requirement to operate age limits under the existing rules .
It would be justified to reflect about when the use of an age limit is justified and when it is not , and to consider the matter separately from case to case .
One practical problem about which I should be happy to speak to the committee at greater length is the organization of competitions .
Most recently in 1993 , when a competition for young A-grade officials was held in twelve Member States , there were 50 000 applicants from the twelve countries with nine languages .
Ultimately , 600 were placed on the reserve list - that is , just over 1 % .
It was an enormous administrative task and tied up huge amounts of administrative resources .
If a similar competition were to be held now , as it shortly will be , the number of applicants from all 15 Member States would no doubt be substantially larger , yet at the same time the number of new jobs will be significantly smaller , because of budgetary constraints .
The age limit has been used as one method of controlling the number of applicants .
How justified it is is debatable .
On the other hand , I should like to stress that age limits have not always been applied as a recruitment condition .
Many temporary staff have been recruited by the Commission without any age limit being applied , and many of them have gone on to become permanent officials through internal competitions .
Last year , at my proposal , the Commission approved a new policy on temporary staff , which is as follows : in future , two types of competition are to be held - one type for young generalists and one type for older staff who already have work experience .
The intention is that all competitions should be open and public , both those for younger applicants and those for mature candidates , but the mature ones would be required to have specialist knowledge .
This procedure has already been used when recruiting in the new Member States .
For the more junior A-grades , young people with little or no work experience were recruited .
Separate competitions were held for more mature staff to be employed as A-4s or A-5s , higher up in the hierarchy .
I have just compared the results of these competitions , when recruitment began .
Of the young applicants from the new Member States who were placed on the A-grade reserve lists , 51 % were women .
In the more mature age group , only just over 30 % of the applicants placed on the reserve lists were women .
This undoubtedly reflects social development .
The position of young women is already a good deal stronger now than it was 10 or 20 years ago .
But this is a matter which should be considered case by case .
I am not sure whether it is essential to abolish all the rules concerning age limits .
Each case can be considered on its merits .
But as I have said , the Commission is now also opening competitions to more mature applicants .
I shall now turn to the principle of non-discrimination on sexual grounds . The Commission is aware of the problems of cohabiting couples and the unequal position in which they find themselves , and it has sought solutions to the problem .
Last summer , the Commission approved an administrative reform guaranteeing homosexual and heterosexual cohabiting couples all the entitlements enjoyed by married couples which it was possible to grant without amending the Staff Regulations , that is , on the basis of the Regulations as they now stand .
I have heard that the European Parliament and the Council are preparing similar reforms .
I would encourage Members to keep abreast of these developments .
Parliament now proposes that the Staff Regulations should also be amended so as to entitle unmarried couples to the same social and financial benefits as married couples .
This is quite justified from the point of view of equality .
But before the Commission submits a proposal to this effect , we need to make a political judgment . What I mean is this : the Council 's attitude towards the entitlements of officials has , to put it mildly , been hostile , and it has on a number of occasions proposed substantial cuts .
If we propose that cohabiting couples should be placed on a footing of equality with married couples , there is a risk that the Council may respond by abolishing those entitlements enjoyed by married couples which do not exist in many countries .
One should reflect carefully on whether to take this risk , because we shall also have to discuss the matter with staff representatives .
I do not personally have anything against the idea .
I entirely agree that married couples and cohabiting couples should be treated equally .
The danger is simply that the Council may take the view that equality should be achieved by abolishing married couples ' privileges , thereby securing a position of equality for cohabiting couples .
All in all , I should like to say that , on many points , I agree with Parliament 's amendments .
But what needs to be decided now is whether to proceed with this small , partial reform , which has already been in the pipeline for four years , or whether to reopen the debate and the consideration of the proposal .
One alternative is to take a decision on this small reform now and then go on to prepare a complete revision of the Staff Regulations , which in many respects needs to be undertaken before enlargement .
Unfortunately , the timetable for dealing with such matters is enormously protracted .
This proposal has taken four years : how long will it take if we embark upon a complete reform ?
It might be a good idea to discuss this with the committee .
Even just internal negotiations and consultations with staff organizations take a huge amount of time .
The procedures are lengthy .
If something is to be done , it should be done in such a way as to be completed within the lifetime of the present Parliament and Commission .
May I thank the committee for the interest it has taken in the issue ; I shall be happy to continue the discussions on this and related matters later .
Mr President , I put three clear questions to the Commissioner and I have not had answers to them .
After two and a half years I think I am entitled to some .
The Commissioner says he agrees with the amendments , but he does nothing further .
The Commission has the right of initiative .
Let us now see the Commissioner doing something , and let him at least give me an answer to my questions .
I will repeat them : one , what will the Commission do if Parliament adopts the amendments tomorrow ? Two , how long will it take for the Staff Regulations to be amended and , three , why are the laws and constitutions of those countries which do have equal rights not respected by the European institutions , by the European Commission ?
Please , Mr President , will you see to it that Parliament receives answers to these three specific questions .
Mr President , I have just said that we ought to reflect on whether or not to move towards a decision on this partial reform at all .
If there is a desire to do so , a decision should be taken on the proposal as it stands .
If we want to reopen the whole subject , we shall probably have to go through a procedure which will take a couple of years longer to complete .
In compliance with the principle of cooperation with staff , we shall have to enter into fresh consultations on this whole subject .
The Commission needs to think about this .
Personally I would be inclined - although this is a matter for the Commission to decide - to take a decision today to approve this small reform ; the views stated by Parliament could then be taken into account when considering the Staff Regulations as a whole .
Another point which is legally problematic is this : can the Staff Regulations of the European Communities treat nationals of different Member States differently ?
So far , legal experts have held that the Staff Regulations must treat all officials equally .
They do not provide any legal scope for discriminating among officials on the basis of their nationality .
This is what the experts say , and since this is the legal interpretation , it is difficult for the Commission to deviate from it .
As Member States ' views change - we do now have a couple of countries which have granted rights , and made arrangements for registration , for cohabiting couples and particularly for homosexual couples - this of course improves the chances of getting changes through the Council .
I should be very happy if the Member States ' views developed in such a way that things could be put in order in this respect .
The third point to which I have drawn attention is the unavoidable need for a political judgment as to whether we should propose equality for married and unmarried couples .
Is the Commission ready to run the risk that , as a result , married couples ' existing privileges , particularly those of a financial nature , may be abolished and equality may be secured in this way ?
Many people may regard this as a simple matter , but I can assure you that from the point of view of the staff organizations the issue is a very delicate one .
Thank you , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at noon tomorrow .
( The sitting was suspended at 11 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
: - The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I have a comment on the Minutes .
On page 18 of the German version , Item 16 ( ' Union policy towards Algeria ' ) the motion for a resolution tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists mentions my name .
I am not supporting this motion .
Furthermore , I informed the services that I was withdrawing my signature .
Mr Sakellariou , that will be pointed out at voting time .
The correction will be carried out .
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved )
Mr President , the House will recall that I , along with other Members , have raised on a number of occasions , the incarceration of Roisín McAliskey , who is seven months pregnant , in a category A jail .
The Foreign Minister in Ireland has clarified with the British Ambassador to Ireland and the German Ambassador to London , that there is no objection by the German Government to her release from jail .
I would now call on you , Mr President , to ask the British Government to release this woman from jail as a matter of urgency .
Mr President , I just wanted to point out that we had a full debate on this matter yesterday and that it is not in order to return to urgent resolutions which were not adopted .
Thank you very much , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
We have taken note of your remarks .
ONP and universal telecommunication service
The next item is the report ( A4-0049 / 97 ) by Mrs Read , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive ( COM ( 96 ) 0419 - C4-0581 / 96-96 / 0226 ( COD ) ) on the application of open network provision ( ONP ) to voice telephony and on universal service for telecommunications in a competitive environment ( replacing European Parliament and Council Directive 95 / 62 / EC ) .
Mr President , colleagues on the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy will know that this is the third attempt on the voice telephony proposals , even before the deadline for liberalization on 1 January 1998 .
I want to place on record that the committee , and indeed this Parliament , have worked at considerable speed to facilitate these proposals going through their various stages for the telecommunications Council early in March .
This was not an ideal way to work but I think we have done remarkably well in the circumstances .
This , as you know , is the proposal under the telecommunications dossier which has the most direct consequences for the citizens of the European Union .
It is for that reason that the committee has concentrated on certain consumer aspects of these proposals .
The fear is , of course , that operators will concentrate on the most profitable segments of this market and that is , very often , not the ordinary domestic consumer .
We have tabled amendments on universal service - so central to these proposals - on consumer protection , and a number of my colleagues have tabled most helpful amendments which strengthen the Commission 's proposals , particularly on the rights of consumers ' organizations to be consulted about changes .
There are amendments to protect low-income consumers and I welcome the Commission 's own ideas on flexible payment schemes .
I have tabled amendments supported by the committee and retabled many on behalf of my group about protecting disabled consumers .
It is not often widely appreciated , but some of the developments in the field of telecommunications technology can disadvantage certain disabled consumers .
For example , text telephones are of almost no use to blind or partially-sighted consumers .
We have put down amendments about the quality of service and about the protection of consumers in rural areas - isolated areas or less populated areas .
I would be particularly interested in Commissioner Bangeman 's comments on the question of to what extent these proposals should cover mobile telephones .
I know this has been controversial and not necessarily supported by all political groups in this House .
I would ask them to listen carefully to what the Commissioner has to say and perhaps consider their vote accordingly .
It is true that the mobile telephone market is developing at very different rates in the different Member States .
But I think it is very clear that this will sooner or later be one market .
It seemed to me , and the committee supported me , that we should make some moves towards this now .
The field we have chosen is in the field of funding of universal service and that of consumer protection : fairly small but significant moves and for me the most coherent and logical place to start .
It is not without interest this week , when we are debating this report on voice telephony , that the record-breaking World Trade Organization agreement has finally been concluded .
It was interesting that both the Commission and the WTO itself took credit for that agreement - I am sure both were due that credit .
It highlighted what an immensely lucrative , important industry this is - in its own right and as an adjunct to so many industries .
We welcome the agreement and recognize particularly the marker that has been set down and hope that the European Union will move towards the pricing levels consumers in the USA enjoy .
At the same time we realize that this is an industry which I am sure will want , and which certainly can afford , the basic consumer protection measures I am sure that this House will support .
That is all the comments I have to make .
I commend the proposal to you and assure the Commissioner and the Council that the Parliament will do all it can to make sure that this measure proceeds at a suitable pace to meet the deadline of 1 January 1998 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the impending liberalization of the telecommunications market offers the European economy a wealth of possibilities and areas of activity with important repercussions for employment policy .
But , despite the inconspicuous and purely technical impression it gives , it also represents an important social challenge .
In the existing economic and social circumstances , general access to the network -which really means the affordability of the services - is a sine qua non for equality of opportunity and non-discrimination .
So the nature and extent of the liberalization of the market in this sector must always take due account of the consumer 's interests .
Today , a certain minimal service has already become an economic and social necessity of life . Liberalization must ensure that those with special needs - the elderly , the handicapped , people on low incomes and those living in geographically remote areas - receive that minimum service at an acceptable price .

That is the essential thing - a rule of communication , especially for the lower strata of society , the less well-off , and indeed , this also shows that voice telephony is an important instrument for social integration - and , if negligently handled , can become a substantial factor in disintegration .
That is why there has to be a fair social dialogue , in which consumers and consumer protection organizations have a binding say in the decision processes regarding general controls to ensure fair competition and the necessary price transparency , the setting-up of various discount schemes for private and business users , investigations into suppliers holding a dominant position in the market , and also the continuing development of new systems .
This will create much greater transparency , and that is what we need .
This is merely a just complement to liberalization , as I see it , a complement that is necessary in the interests of the market economy and of democracy .
But the key to this particular directive , or so I believe , is that the consumer must benefit to the full from technological advances in voice telephony .
From my angle , the angle of consumer protection , there are five essential points here .
One is that prices must be affordable and fair .
The second is that the services offered must be of a high quality .
The third is transparency of prices and services , the fourth is access to the law and assistance with certain kinds of arbitration procedure , with disputes , and the fifth is the involvement of consumers in technological changes .
But if everything fails to work properly , there is something we must think about even at this stage .
If free competition and suppliers ' sense of responsibility fails to result in an appropriate standard , we must give thought even now to minimum standards at European level and to the consequences for suppliers who fail to meet those standards .
If , then , at the end of the day , it proves possible to supplement and enrich the proposed directive in a practical way with Mrs Read 's report , then we shall be able to say that we have achieved an advance in terms of consumer policy , and I hope that that is what will happen .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank Mrs Read on the exceptional work she has done .
She has produced a report of high quality under great pressure of time and the Council on Telecommunications has every reason to be extremely grateful to Parliament for its rapid work .
It is now up to the Council on Telecommunications to follow this same example for the Parliament does not intend to hold up this business and impede liberalisation on 1 January 1998 .
The interest of universal service lies of course in a liberalised market as does also consumer protection .
This immediately raises two important questions of policy - firstly : what does universal service cover , and secondly : who is paying for it ?
With regard to what universal service covers , with the development of a liberalised market with European telecom firms which must be able to develop as fully competitive parties on the international market , means on the one hand that very close attention must be paid to the new responsibilities they will have to assume .
On the other hand you cannot ignore the question of consumer interest .
There is a tension between these two elements which must be carefully balanced .
Another important aspect is that what is technically possible in one country may not yet be possible in another .
So you cannot afford to ignore the differences which unfortunately exist within the European Union .
And finally it is important to take account of the convergence between fixed and mobile telephone networks and the fact that there are going to be major technological changes in the coming years .
That means that the definition of universal services which we are now discussing is limited in time and must apply to the whole of the European Union .
An EU-wide definition of universal services is very important to ensure that only services for telecom firms which are covered by the EU definition need to be paid and to prevent them being hit with yet another universal services charge imposed on market parties .
That is why Amendment No 10 is so important .
My group is of the opinion that for the time being mobile telephones should not be included in the universal services because of the major differences between the EU countries , but we must keep that door open because of convergence .
That is why we kept the door open in Amendment No 7 .
That brings us , Mr President , to the second political question : who pays , who contributes to the costs of the universal service ?
My group believes it should be clear at this time that only providers of voice telephony services via the fixed net , in other words not the providers via the mobile net , should be expected to contribute towards the costs ; but we must examine in due course the extent to which they should also be expected to contribute .
Hence Amendment No 15 in which that is proposed .
What we want to avoid at all costs is that new service providers are already obliged to contribute now to the universal service .
That would be most undesirable , it would hamper the creation of the information society .
Mr President , I wish to draw attention to the problem of the disabled .
There is a tendency to provide them with as much as possible for free .
But I do not think that is wise , for not every disabled person is the same .
Some are economically very independent and I think they themselves would take it as an insult and a blow to their emancipation if they were to receive special treatment .
So do not try to settle that now on an EU-wide scale , but do it at a more local level .
The same holds good for the socially weak .
A measured , de-centralised approach is to be preferred .
I am totally in favour of helping the socially weaker to avoid social exclusion , but that should be done specifically at the lowest level , namely in the region , city or country , and not on an EU-wide scale .
Mr President , time passes quickly , January 1 , when the free market for telecommunications services will be introduced , is fast approaching .
Generally speaking , I could say that we in Scandinavia ; Sweden and Finland , have had a free market since 1992 .
Our experience of the free market has been good ; any problems , for example problems connected with providing a service to sparsely populated areas , have been relatively trivial .
Our experience shows that the best way to achieve a free market is to establish basic legislation which gives a framework for the regulation of the market .
The market then needs to be supervised by us as elected representatives .
We can ensure that any anomalies which we do not want are put to rights .
What we mean by this is that we must be ready with legislation for a liberalised market , but we must not introduce more regulations and laws than are required to enable the market to function properly .
This is our experience in Scandinavia .
The most important areas to regulate are consumer safety and protection and the right for everyone in the information society to benefit from new technology .
Our group would also like to emphasise that this issue is not just one of technology , but it is equally a matter of democracy and equal rights for those living in peripheral and sparsely populated regions and of equal opportunities for all , for the old , the young , the handicapped and those who , perhaps , do not normally work with this form of communication .
Mrs Read 's report is basically a sound report .
Our task as elected representatives is to supervise the market and ensure that we meet public and civic needs .
All suppliers must be obliged to provide finance for public services .
It is important to ensure from the beginning that civic interests are represented .
We would prefer not to include mobile telephones in this report and we will vote for such proposals in the House when voting takes place .
For the most part we are in favour of the committee 's amendment proposals and will lend our support to them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we must follow Mrs Read 's example in relating this report to the WTO agreement , though that agreement is even more ambiguous than has previously been pointed out .
There is still the intention , instead of a transition to a new development model which will be viable in the future , to overcome the present difficulties of capital accumulation by opening up what had previously been public sectors to the private markets and private competition , and that does involve problems .
I believe we can perfectly well debate this matter here in connection with the question of the mobile telephone service , because it is true , as Mrs Read said , that this is going to become one market , and the Commission 's strategy and tactics of splitting it up into smaller and smaller sectors for technical reasons and regulating them in different ways carry less and less conviction .
In this connection I would like to thank Mrs Read very specifically for having repeatedly stressed the cohesion of this whole voice telephony sector , as compared with the Commission 's piecemeal strategy . Perhaps , too , this may have enabled the other side of the House , which is not with us at present , to grasp that flexibilization or liberalization can only be regarded as advances if we really take our regulatory function seriously , if we really succeed in providing the necessary government-backed guarantee for all , particularly including those population groups and regions which have to face up to handicaps , obstacles and problems .
This includes the universal service , and universal service in a more dynamic form .
It includes the need for the consumer associations to play their part .
It includes specific guarantees for the disabled , in this sector more than others , and I can only stress that point .
Communication is a public asset .
Part of it can be supplied privately .
It can be opened up to the private sector , but it must be regulated so as to retain government control over it .
I wish to begin by congratulating Imelda Read , who worked very quickly , and very painstakingly and clearly set out her case , which I support .
Mobile phones should be included , unlike what the previous speaker said .
This is a growing market .
I know that it is not growing at the same rate in all the Member States but , nevertheless , it is a developing market and will , I imagine , become more and more commonplace everywhere in the EU .
So mobile phones should be included .
This must also be a universal service .
I have a certain interest here because I represent perhaps one of the remotest parts of the European Union - the Highlands and Islands of Scotland - 90 islands .
The people in my islands have the right to expect the same access as anybody else , whether they come from a very populous country like the Netherlands or a big city .
I am concerned to ensure that it is a universal service , and I start off by saying that that would be essential to my support for this proposal .
We have talked a bit about people with special needs .
I was distressed to hear the speaker from the Group of the European People 's Party say that we would demean disabled people by offering them special tariffs .
I do not see that at all .
These people have a disadvantage and are entitled to our support and should get a special tariff for the service .
The mobile phone companies or organizations are very profitable .
This is indeed a profitable segment of the industry and I do not see why we should not oblige it , before it is too late , to make this a universal service , with special conditions to help disabled , handicapped and blind people .
People with a mobile phone should have the right to have an entry in a directory if they wish , with the same right not to be in the directory if they do not wish .
So I hope that this House will support the principle that Imelda Read has so well explained of having a universal service .
Mr President , a more liberal market for telecommunications will create about 1.3 million jobs in the year 2005 , according to a French research agency , but not in the telecommunications sector which will see a drop in employment .
But improved telecommunications technology will stimulate employment in other sectors .
It strikes me that private telecommunications firms are in favour of liberalisation and state firms are against this process .
They apparently have a lot of hidden unemployment they want to conceal .
That is why we must produce regulations which work to the benefit of nationalised firms .
The European Parliament should not be misled by the short-sightedness of trades unions who are only interested in the effects on jobs in big nationalised companies .
This debate is about the progress of the liberalisation process : will we meet the deadline of 1 January 1988 ?
We hope that we shall not see a repetition of the post dossier where France , Germany and the southern Member States apparently want to see liberalisation postponed until 2003 .
The European Commission is apparently going along with this .
But does the Commission not realise that the longer one waits the sorrier the state of the post sector and the telecommunications industry in Europe will become .
To stand still is to backslide .
Either that or the Commission is running the risk of a parliamentary inquiry in the future into they way it is dealing with the telecommunications and post sector .
Liberalisation is fine , but not at any price .
That is why we developed the idea of the universal service .
I think that this concept is feasible if it is not defined too broadly , for then we would be keeping monopolies in position whereas the aim is to liberalise the market .
Universal service forces companies to serve the whole market and not hive off the best bits .
But the more refined the requirements for the universal service the higher the costs of the basic services .
Too much regulation harms the weaker groups , which are precisely the ones we want to protect .
We must try to find the best solution here .
With this in mind I support Amendment 10 to Article 3 , but Amendment 19 to Article 7 ( 1 ) is clearly a case of over-regulation .
The seriously speech-impaired opt for a private text telephone .
This service is included in the universal service .
A public variant is therefore unnecessary .
On the question of tariff I think we should abandon the concept of a fixed maximum tariff .
Competition is not served by establishing a uniform fixed price based on costs , nor are consumer interests .
Costs are not an appropriate yardstick ; they may be much higher in one Member State because of an inefficient nationalised company there .
Mr President , in general , we support the rapporteur 's proposals and , in particular , those concerning consumer protection by quality of service , information contracts and settlement of disputes , and we are also in favour of the introduction of families as a special category of users .
We support the rapporteur 's proposal to extend application of the regulations concerning consumer protection to users of mobile telephones , though it is obvious that the directive should not govern mobile telephones , since the fixed telephony and mobile telephony markets are still separate .
Another aspect involving consumer protection is the social aspect .
The introduction of flexible payment schemes to prevent disconnections when more vulnerable users , and especially low-income families and / or disabled people , find themselves in difficulty , must be supported without question .
As regards the options concerning the universal service , I wonder whether the Commission 's proposals are not somewhat more realistic , in the short term , than those put forward by Parliament .
For the moment , any overly broad definition of the universal service would involve unacceptably high costs that would stifle competition .
In the long term , we need to arrive at the proposed solutions but , in the meantime , it would be useful if the Commission could develop some costing forecasts for the various levels of the universal service .
It would also be helpful if the Commission could instigate research on internal relations within the Member States concerning the free market and competition in this sector , respect of the regulations and any illicit profit-making or illegal use of sources .
The liberalization of telecommunications markets will be a highly significant event ; if it is to be achieved in full , it is important that the directive we are discussing here , like the others included in the package , be adopted as soon as possible .
Mr President , Commissioner , there are many here who have stated that this sector currently under discussion is a sector which is fast developing and a sector which indeed needs to be allowed to develop quickly in order to bring about a competitive market and a competitive industry in Europe .
We know that huge investment is needed in order to have real access to information in all parts of Europe .
Bearing in mind what has gone before , I also think it better that we do not regulate .
I am a little concerned that both the report and the Commission 's proposal suggest that we should .
We know what services were available , but it is more difficult for us to predict what will be required in the future .
There are no ' free lunches ' and what we are concentrating on at the moment is guaranteeing old levels of service .
There is a risk that we will take resources away from necessary future developments .
Such development could bring about fantastic opportunities for the handicapped , for example , to participate in society in a totally new manner .
As my colleague Mr Lindqvist has already said , in the Scandinavian countries we have had fantastic results following liberalisation .
For instance , the cost of a long distance call in my native country Finland has gone down by seventy percent and the number of telephone boxes has increased by a quarter since liberalisation was introduced .
Consumers have benefited from this liberalisation .
We currently have a situation in which different Member States are at different stages of development .
For this reason Member States need the freedom to decide how they will support the handicapped and the freedom to decide which rules they will apply . They may support the handicapped through social support for example .
I have expressed a certain amount of concern in my statement from the Legal Committee which has not been included by the Economic Committee .
We would like to see restrictions on when national regulatory authorities can intervene .
We know that national regulatory authorities are not always totally free from a monopoly situation .
There is a risk , therefore , that they will intervene in a way which is discriminatory .
In conclusion , I would like to support what Mr Lindqvist said , that mobile telephones should not be included , as they will stand in the way of the future developments which we need .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in view of what is happening worldwide , the WTO negotiations show that Europe did the right thing in aligning itself with the mainstream of events .
So we must pay tribute here to the Commission and to Parliament , because without them the telephone market would never have been liberalized .
It must be said that we achieved the relatively satisfactory results we can see today by going against the wishes of the Member States and utilizing the resources provided by the Treaty .
We must never forget : if there had been no Commission , if there had been no Parliament , we should still be dealing with fifteen totally partitioned telecommunications markets , fifteen monopolies or virtual monopolies .
That is the situation , and it was right that the House should be reminded of it .
In essence , we in this Parliament are agreed - and I congratulate Mrs Read - on the problems of competition and price transparency , the need to set reasonable prices , and the fact that there must be a universal service to protect the consumer .
So where do we still disagree ?
Our intentions are the same , but we disagree about ways and means .
We share the same objective : we want as many citizens as possible to have access to as many quality services as possible at prices which are as low as possible .
But how are we to achieve that ?
The question which greatly divides us today is whether we should , as of now , make the mobile telephone subject to the same regulation as that envisaged for the fixed telephone .
This is where opinions differ .
They differ because we , for our part , believe that the important growth of the mobile telephone is due to the effects of competition , and will achieve the objective I have just stated much more efficiently than it can be achieved by any other means .
If we try at this stage to impose on operators the burdens of the universal service , it will result in a fatal price increase .
Mrs Ewing and Mrs Read have to understand that there is no such thing as a free service .
It takes a certain kind of mentality - which I shall not call socialist - to believe that things can be easily distributed and that one can be very generous on behalf of the community as a whole .
But there is always a cost , and if you ask those operators to bear additional costs today you are going to slow down the distribution of the product ; people who cannot afford to pay for a mobile phone today will never be able to afford it .
Look at what happened in Sweden , in Finland , in the United States .
Mrs Read said , ' I hope that European citizens will very soon be able to enjoy the same services at the same price as the citizens of the United States . '
But if the United States had followed Mrs Read 's policy , it would never have arrived where it is .
It arrived there by following the opposite line .
It imposed universal service conditions once the results of competition had become established , at a time when a vast majority of the population already had access to quality services at very attractive prices .
This is a mistake we must not make .
We must wait until mobile telephony has acquired a market share in the region of 30 or 40 % - and then impose universal service charges .
It happens very quickly .
It is easier to impose a directive than to create a network , not to mention the fact that it is also much cheaper .
Mr President , I can follow on from what my friend Fernand Herman has just said .
I think , though , that he does Mrs Read an injustice in believing that , in the report she has presented today , she proposes a policy which would be the precise opposite of what has been done in the USA .
That , at any rate , is not the impression her work makes on me , even though I agree with Fernand Herman in principle .
So I should like to start by thanking Mrs Read .
We owe a debt of gratitude to her , and to the whole Parliament , especially because she had to work so quickly .
I regret that , but , as you all know , the deadline of 1 January next year is putting pressure on us all .
I am sorry to have to tell you that I cannot promise that this will be the last time we discuss ONP and all the other subjects we have talked about in past years , because convergence - both technological and economic - will bring together all of these previously separate markets , and of course that will compel us to adopt new approaches .
However , that is not our subject today .
Our subject today is first , if you like , the fundamental question of the various policies and secondly a subject involving very practical conclusions .
But since the practical conclusions are themselves inevitably somewhat dependent on what is regarded as being right in principle , a valuable first step is to verify once again , by reference to what Mrs Read and others , and Fernand Herman too , have said whether our fundamental approach is right .
First , I should like to refer once again to the fact that we now have a liberalized market - this is no longer in any way disputable , even by unreconstructed Marxists like Mr Wolf .
This situation is perceived as an improvement on a public sector monopoly .
That is a very substantial step forward , because I can well remember that when this debate began there were still people advancing the argument that Mrs Ewing has just touched on once again today : communication is a public asset , and so we need a public sector organization and preferably a monopoly to ensure a better service for all .
I can remember back to the beginning of the liberalization debate .
What Mr Fernand Herman has said is right : Parliament and the Commission have achieved something substantial here , and we are not at the back of the queue but - as the WTO negotiations clearly showed - the concepts we have developed make us leaders in the field , technologically and politically , so that we have no reason to fear whatever comes next from the WTO .
But - because I myself was a target for the attacks and because it always amuses me , so I remember it clearly - in the early debates the issue really was : are deregulation and liberalization even possible at all , or are they just fantasies conjured up by these ultra-liberals ?
And now , thank God , and I say that not with the arrogance of someone who was right all along but simply because the result is a good one , everyone can see that the ultimate result of liberalization , when you draw the bottom line and add up the pros and cons , brings major advantages for the consumer , in particular , and that gives me great satisfaction .
Because the fact that we can now operate with lower tariffs , not only for data transmission but also , especially , for the telephone service , has become obvious .
And that should be our starting point .
Here , as elsewhere , competition means that prices fall and quality rises .
That is not to say - nor has the Commission ever said - that we should now leave competition to run itself ; of course there is a need to regulate certain matters which do not automatically arise from competition .
The great question that always confronts us is : what arises automatically from competition and what has to be regulated ?
And , if it has to be regulated , then how ?
This is very difficult to predict , because technological development goes hand in hand with competition here , and many things are quite different from what they usually are in industry .
I have always made that point .
Now let us go back to the question of the ' universal service ' .
The nature of the product range and the nature of the costs arising compel every supplier to offer as wide a range as possible .
The argument that one regularly hears to the effect that people will concentrate only on the things that pay - either on major population centres or on the well-to-do and on companies which can afford the telephone and are going to have to afford it - is wrong .
Of course , it will happen in some cases .
That goes without saying .
There will be suppliers - there already are - who initially concentrate on large companies and , indeed , are forced to do so because in the first instance they do not have an extensive network .
But having an extensive network is always more profitable , because the more customers you can reach the more convincing the service you can offer .
And then you can reduce costs as well .
There are companies today - and if I 'd said this a few years ago no doubt you would have laughed at me - giving away handsets , for example , free of charge , because they are not interested in the apparatus or the profit it can bring but in the service .
Fine , you may say , OK , that 's just another way of passing on the costs , their charges are higher as a result .
No , because this is another area where there is competition now - I see Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf staring at me in amazement , because as an agricultural expert he has absolutely no experience of competition and this is all something completely new to him .
There are companies today who provide free phone calls if the user accepts that he will occasionally be interrupted by advertisements .
That may not be very pleasant , of course , especially in the case of certain personal phone calls .
To be suddenly interrupted by advertisements is something that would certainly upset Mrs Lulling and me .
But that isn 't what matters .
What matters is that if someone wants to make free phone calls , he can make them - he has no need to pay anything at all .
My argument is precisely this : let 's just wait and see what competition produces in the way of universal access , which is no longer any kind of financial or other problem for anyone , including the disabled .
Of course there are certain kinds of disablement that require technological solutions , that is true enough .
But even there , I believe , technological progress will make many things possible that we today still regard as impossible .
That is the first point .
What I mean , then , is that you should not regard the problem of universal access as being mainly one to be solved through social policy .
It is mainly one to be solved by technological advances and the development of the market .
What problems remain , is the question that arises next , and how are we to solve them ?
I am convinced that there certainly is a continuing need for regulation , especially in the case of positions of market dominance .
And the question that arises here is : should mobile telephone suppliers not be treated differently ?
Do we not need to adopt an asymmetrical procedure , penalizing the supplier who has a fixed network , a de facto monopoly , and making things easier for the mobile phone operators , the newcomers to the market ?
Originally we thought this was the right approach .
Now we are wondering whether we may not be able to restrict it .
For example , both should be treated equally when it comes to entries in the telephone directory .
So that motion for an amendment can be accepted .
And there are other things we should regulate here today , which must certainly be the same for both .
But it is right , of course , that anyone who has this kind of permanent network still has an enormous competitive advantage at present .
We are trying to regulate that , by regulating access to the network .
It is not true to say that we are simply leaving it unregulated .
And , here again , there will in future be competition between networks , and we will still have to deal with Mr Hoppenstedt 's report .
For example , personal satellite communications will also enable us to overcome this bottleneck situation whereby some people today are still owners and users of fixed networks .
Once there is competition between networks , the situation will look completely different .
Those are just a few ideas .
I hope we will succeed in coming up with a regulation here which makes allowance for justified interests but does not result in the situation against which Mr Van Velzen rightly warns us : we may make the development of such things so difficult from the very start that not even this success , achieved through competition and technology , for disabled persons or other socially disadvantaged groups , is achieved .
If we fail to allow such a network to develop at all , then , even retroactively , we shall not be able to enjoy the benefits of this utilization .
The big question here , going far beyond the confines of this sector , is : to whom should the costs of social policy be passed on - who should bear them ?
And I believe the simplistic principle once again put forward here by Mrs Ewing - they earn so much money , so they can afford to pay for it - is wrong .
Just ask the mobile telephone operators , who have to make a substantial investment at the outset and do not yet earn as much income as the older companies , what they have to finance in the way of start-up costs and how difficult the situation is for some of them .
And even if they did a very great deal of money , it would still be open to doubt whether that really is a sound principle .
We talk about unemployment in the European Union .
Our unemployment is much higher , frighteningly so , than it is in the USA .
Why ?
Because we constantly penalize the labour factor .
No one can be naive enough to believe , after all , that that kind of cost burden on a company is not passed on .
Of course the company has to pass it on in its costs .
But the transmission of data , in general terms , has become the most important production factor of all today .
If we require it to bear the additional burden of the social policy , we will be hounding more and more jobs out of Europe .
So we must finance the social policy from the earnings of business .
We must have the courage , when we want to do something , not just to lose it in the financing but to finance it openly from the budget .
That 's where the money has to come from - from taxation - and then we can think about what we want to do for whom .
That would be the right way of creating jobs , too .
A final word on the WTO question .
The enormous step forwards that this represents is widely underestimated .
This market today is worth six hundred billion dollars worldwide - and the percentage growth rate is in double figures !
That means that if we can succeed in maintaining and improving the position we have in this sector today , that is one of the very few hopes we have of creating new jobs .
That is why this WTO resolution was so extremely important for us , and it is a very good thing that other resolutions have followed , so that we have finished up with a sensible regulation .
I should also say something briefly about which amendments we are accepting and which we are not .
But , as this is the first reading , I may then give a full report to the rapporteur .
First , as I have already said , we are entirely receptive and willing to accept the principle rightly stated by Mrs Read , that we must now give consideration to consumers , and to particular groups of consumers .
For that reason we are accepting Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 10 , 13 , 14 and 41 .
There are some amendments we prefer not to accept , for the reason clearly stated by Mrs Thors : there are certain social entitlements which can be handled better at regional and national level , where people have a better idea of what is what .
For that reason we are not accepting Amendments Nos 11 , 15 , 21 , 34 , 36 , 44 , 46 and 49 .
As far as the inclusion of mobile telephony is concerned , the point mentioned by Mr Van Velzen and others , we are willing to accept Amendments Nos 5 , 7 , 9 , 16 , 23 , 26 and 42 , in whole or in part .
That is how things stand today .
Once again , ladies and gentlemen , I cannot promise you that we will not have to return to this topic again , and again , in future years .
Mr President , I want to raise a point of order about the order of voting .
But I cannot resist saying to Mr Bangemann that operators want to offer free telephone calls to some subscribers for the same reason as banks sometimes offer free banking facilities to students : they see this as a lucrative and profitable sector in due course .
We can see here in this industry what will be the global Klondike gold rush of the next millennium .
It really is an immensely profitable industry .
But I want to ask you , Mr President , and the services whether you would consider the order of voting at 12 noon ?
This is the first reading , but a codecision procedure with some complicated amendments and some split voting and at least one important vote of principle on the inclusion of mobiles .
It is unthinkable that we should not get to this by 12 o 'clock .
I ask you to take it early in the order of voting so that we can give it proper consideration .
Mrs Read , I shall forward your remarks to the services responsible , who will put the problem to whichever of my colleagues will be in the Chair .
It will be for him or her to decide .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Telecommunications - satellite personal communications services
The next item is the joint debate on :
the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0051 / 97 ) on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive ( C4-0633 / 96-95 / 0282 ( COD ) ) on a common framework for general authorizations and individual licences in the field of telecommunications services ( rapporteur : Mr Van Velzen ) ; -the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0050 / 97 ) on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Decision ( C4-0634 / 96-95 / 0274 ( COD ) ) on a coordinated authorization approach in the field of satellite personal communication services in the Community ( rapporteur : Mr Hoppenstedt ) .
Mr President , today we celebrate a very important triumph - namely the words of the Director General of the WTO , Renato Rugiero , after the conclusion of a WTO agreement on opening up the telecommunications market world-wide .
The Commissioner has already referred to this .
If the European Parliament approves today the amendments we have tabled , then we shall also be celebrating a victory for at long last , after many years of messing around with directives on licences , the European Union will have a framework for telecommunications licences in the Member States .
The new WTO agreement stipulates specifically that the signatories will set up regulatory bodies , guarantee interconnection rights at reasonable prices , but above all the signatories of the agreement guarantee transparency and non-discrimination in licence decisions .
The EU directive before us today will therefore serve as an important link for the Union itself and the Member States of the Union to fulfil their international WTO obligations .
What does the transparency in the EU licence decisions consist of ?
First of all the telecom companies must announce well in advance the conditions and form of the licences , whether an individual licence or general authorization .
The system of general licences based on specific legislation is of course preferable to a bureaucratic system of individual licences .
That was precisely why this directive came up against so many problems in the Council .
The amendment I have laid before the House today will therefore help to emphasise the general licences more in the future and not so much the individual licences .
Secondly , the going price for a licence may not be set exceptionally high .
This is also where telecom companies in the European Union have problems .
Some Member States are planning to demand high prices for licences and thus create an unfair advantage for sitting telecom firms since they never needed to pay for a licence .
That is why I am also pleased that this directive sets out clearly that it is only the administrative costs of granting licences that can be recouped .
Thirdly , the aim of transparency is served by making the licensing conditions basically the same throughout the Union and by not making the procedures for granting licences too complicated or too diverse .
Different procedures with obscure requirements are currently thwarting Europe 's telecommunications industry at the moment .
That is why harmonisation is highly desirable .
Fourthly this kind of licensing system must offer scope for the service providers .
But even with all these welcome developments there are still some serious predicaments in the path of this directive .
That is why we must be aware of the enormous pressure of time that Parliament is under if we want to have a liberalised market by 1 January 1998 .
After we have completed our work the national parliaments still have to pass this legislation .
But I must say that the cooperation procedure with the Council and Commission has not been satisfactory in my eyes .
Last May we voted in the first reading on this licence directive in the expectation that the Council would determine its view on this directive very quickly .
That expectation was misplaced , however , because it was only at the end of December that we received its common position , and many compromises were agreed on in the dark chambers of the Telecommunications Council and Member States with Member States making guesses about the practical feasibility of matters .
This process took place in silence , without any public debate , without any democratic accountability and without any information about why Member States took the views that they did .
Furthermore the Commission changed its original favourable position on some of the EP 's amendments in the first reading during Council discussions .
It would be to the Commissioner 's credit if he were to explain to the House here today his reasons for the change of heart , for example why the Commissioner welcomed the amendment on mutual recognition but later changed tack .
If we do not yet have complete harmonisation then mutual recognition is still an effective instrument for creating an internal telecommunications market ; agreements have also been made in the WTO on mutual recognition while the European Union itself is unable to reach agreement on this issue .
The European Parliament has shown itself very willing to cooperate .
It preferred to start with a restricted directive rather than dragging its feet or running the risk of this directive being blocked in the Council in the second reading .
Liberalisation is a higher good .
I wish specifically to address the President-in-Office of Council , Mrs Jorritsma , to ask here that if the European Parliament approves this report today will she accept the specific responsibility of acting on this legislation with speed .
And by that I mean that I expect that the Council Presidency will pass this directive in the Telecommunications Council on 6 March without any problems .
There are of course other points of concern in this directive .
I shall mention a few .
The Member States still have too broad a margin to introduce restrictive licensing conditions .
We still do not know if the one-stop shopping procedure will be passed .
We have now become dependent on an international club of telecom regulators , the CEPT and the ECTRA where the Commission 's position is far too restricted .
There are still too many opportunities for national regulatory bodies to put through their own desiderata .
It would be highly desirable if we could set up one single large committee .
The Commission would be doing the sector a great service if it were to set up a kind of telecom legislation help desk in the near future where the national regulatory bodies could come with their questions on European telecom legislation , for this is how you could start the groundwork for setting up a European regulatory authority .
The Commission now has the important job of ensuring the strict compliance with the contents of the directive .
It must pay close attention to the prices being asked for licences , the Member States ' compliance with deadlines and the conditions attached to the licences .
I think that these will be the most important issues in the immediate future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to preface my actual report with a few comments on matters of principle , to make the significance of the report clear .
The commercial use of space satellite systems for global communications is a subject which , only a few years ago , would still have been regarded as something from the realms of science fiction .
Today , times have changed .
Technological progress , deregulation and the convergence between broadcasting and telecommunications are currently contributing to the creation of a global satellite infrastructure which in turn opens the way to new commercial applications .
The SPCS systems - personal communications satellites - under discussion here are only one of many possible examples of new satellite services .
The step from space travel research projects to the commercial use of satellite communications is of the greatest economic and political importance to Europe .
Satellite communications offer new markets for European industry and so , of course , also create jobs for the future .
At the same time , the new satellite systems , especially because of their geographical range , advance the process of economic and social cohesion in Europe and , most of all , the cohesion between Europe and the rest of the world , and thus the development of the global information society .
Regrettably , however , Europeans have long underestimated this enormous economic and social potential of satellite communications , and so failed to formulate a common policy .
Exceptions confirm the rule , and I turn to Commissioner Bangemann and point out that encouragement was given here at a very early stage .
I should like to mention , once again , the WTO Conference in Geneva in November 1995 , at which , as far as new systems of frequency distribution and occupation were concerned , the Americans pipped the Europeans at the post .
The Americans are far ahead of us in the commercial utilization of the new satellite systems , because of Europe 's lack of foresight , enterprise and co-ordination .
American companies are already launching the first satellites - well , the experiments failed because of the carrier system , but they are going to keep on trying .
I am more than happy that Europe , in general , now seems to be awakening from its slumbers .
The European Commission 's communication on space travel of December 1996 clearly illustrates how important the promotion of applications and markets in satellite communications is for the purposes of improving Europe 's competitiveness .
I therefore welcome , too , the proposed action plan on satellite communications , which will certainly also include the SPCS services , and I hope that it will encourage European industry to take action and invest .
The most important prerequisites for future investment include legal certainty and agreed procedures for the awarding of frequencies and licences .
We have already heard about this elsewhere .
Only a harmonized European policy on approval can prevent fragmentation and allow the satellite services to be introduced quickly .
Which brings me to my report .
For Parliament , it is a source of extreme satisfaction that the Council has largely accepted the compromise proposed on the basis of the first reading .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy thus approved the common position unanimously , except for a small , logical change in timing .
From the institutional standpoint , we have here an excellent example of constructive and pragmatic cooperation between the Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
I can only hope that this example is followed , and in this context of course , as the rapporteur , I must refer to the laborious procedure with telecom .
My colleague Mr Glante is one of the most long-suffering Members of Parliament sitting on these committees , and I must say that it is simply unacceptable for so much time to be wasted before the joint procedure with the Council and Commission eventually produces a result on a subject of this kind .
As proposed by Parliament , the aim now , instead of a selection procedure at EU level , is harmonization in the utilization of frequencies and the approval conditions for satellite services by CEPT .
However , the mandate for CEPT is tied to a clear schedule .
Should the Commission or any Member State form the impression , which is entirely conceivable , that work within CEPT is proceeding too slowly , the Commission can take action at EU level .
It remains to be seen whether CEPT can fulfil its mandate efficiently and effectively and justify the confidence placed in it .
The co-ordination procedure proposed here is an experimental move .
If it fails to come off , we shall have to try a different approach .
The WTO Conference has been mentioned several times previously .
I need not repeat everything , or the content of the discussions , but the expectation is that about 1700 satellites will be launched into earth orbit in the next few years .
This number may be slightly too high , but there will be a large number of satellites together , of course , with the preceding valorization of the carrier systems and all the other derived benefits .
The satellites , of course , will also take the information society a step further along its road , not just terrestrially , in other words with the existing networks , but via satellite to Africa , the island states and the whole world .
How much added value can be expected from this has also been stated earlier .
I should like to quote one parameter from a newspaper , which says that the agreement is good news for companies , and of course for consumers too , who now spend more on telecommunications than they do on oil .
In other words , there are gigantic sums at stake here , and I believe that the regulation we are proposing here will do a great service to the European Union as it moves forward to satellite communication , satellite networking and the networking of the telecommunications sector as a whole , and will thus represent an enormous step forward .
Thank you for your attention , and I have no doubt that we in this House will adopt a unanimous resolution on this subject .
Mr President , I want to start by congratulating my colleagues Mr Van Velzen and Mr Hoppenstedt as is customary on these occasions .
It is a small and select band of us who are involved in this very specialized area .
I had thought that we should make a giant Advent calendar both for Parliament and the Commission and we could tear off the days as we near the day of liberalization .
Perhaps fairly soon in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy we will take the opportunity of asking the Commission what will be the consequences in these various respects if we do not meet this self-imposed deadline .
It is true that these two proposals are key building blocks in meeting that target and I want to say that the Socialist Members of this House will be supporting both these reports .
Mr Van Velzen has rightly pointed out the long history of the attempts to come up with a position on licensing , and I am very pleased that the emphasis of his work and of the Commission 's was that there should be a presumption in favour of general authorizations rather than individual licences .
We all know that the granting of licences and the conditions attached by some Member States to the granting of licences have been unduly restrictive and protectionist and there are cases before the European Court in this respect .
Mr Van Velzen is absolutely right that we need to create a clear and predictable licensing environment and of course he is right to say that there should be clear time limits .
If ever there was a case that ' justice delayed is justice denied ' it is in the field of licensing and interconnections currently going through the conciliation process .
If those who want to enter this market cannot get a licence on clear and fair terms and within a reasonable timescale , that will be a major obstacle to achieving the goal .
So , we have no hesitation in supporting both Mr Van Velzen and Mr Hoppenstedt .
In his comments , Mr Hoppensted rightly said that the question of the convergence of the technology and the limitless possibilities of the technology were a guiding factor in the drawing up of his report .
He is absolutely right .
He also talked about big money .
Many people not used to dealing with high finance find that when you start adding on the zeros and the billions it is very difficult to imagine just how all-encompassing this industry is .
But it is true that many of our hopes , for example , in the field of employment and of life-enhancing technical progress , centre on this particular field .
I congratulate my colleagues .
They will have our support when it comes to the vote and we look forward to seeing the Commissioner to discuss both the possibilities and the problems should we fail to meet that target in some respect .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must start by thanking both rapporteurs most sincerely for their efforts and congratulating them on the results .
This is an intensely political subject , and one of fundamental interest , too , because the issue here really is the creation of new systems , new market incentives .
On the one hand we must meet the needs of an open market , and on the other we know that there is a very special need of regulation here .
I believe , though , that the Commission has been able to find satisfactory answers to most of these questions .
The situation is that market access can be structured on an objective , non-discriminatory and transparent basis .
Commissioner Bangemann deserves our sincere thanks for that .
Starting out with the idea that the issue at present is to bring something to the table that is politically feasible , I expressly welcome the Commission 's proposal .
I would like to add , though , that , in my view , it would have been more desirable , politically and economically , to grant more powers to the European Union institutions in this sector generally , and also in the licensing procedure and in the area of international co-ordination in particular , to enable a more efficient system to be obtained at European and global level .
I only hope that this failing will not have a seriously disadvantageous effect on Europe in the global race for access to satellite communications services .
At any rate , the Commission will need to play its part effectively in its role of observation and co-ordination .
Bearing in mind that the liberalization of the telecommunications sector is scheduled for January 1998 , the adoption of a resolution is of course a matter of great urgency .
I am glad that we have succeeded in taking an important first step in the right direction , even under such heavy time pressure .
It will be important , though , not to lose sight of further technological developments but to continue adjusting the general conditions to suit developments in this field .
Once again , many thanks for everything that has been achieved .
I believe a good start has been made .
Mr President , I should like to remind Commissioner Bangemann of his days as a social liberal , and to remind him too that social policy can look forward , and not just backward .
Economics is not a natural process .
It has to be constituted on the basis of social policy - the not particularly unreconstructed Marxist Polanyi called it ' embedding ' - otherwise there is no way in which we can avoid certain destructive tendencies from the outset .
Now to the reports .
We too support both reports and congratulate our colleagues .
The harmonization of licences in the internal market certainly makes sense , though we regard the proposed six-week period as too short .
My answer to Mr Hoppenstedt is , of course , we would have to have a debate on space travel .
But that is not what we are doing .
As I see it , we must think back once again to Parliament 's original position , because in this very House we have the problem of the worldwide monopoly which Mr Bangemann has rightly referred to here - I think the issue in question was on-line services .
That is the task in store for us .
Unless Europe is given a stronger role , unless the Commission has more opportunities to act , this trial run of the co-ordination procedure will prove something of a lame duck .
That is what I fear .
Even so , that is how we are going to have to do it , given the time pressure that has been put on us .
And I would like to say another word of criticism about that .
We are once again in a position where we have to decide on individual questions without really having time for a broad strategic debate .
That is annoying .
We really ought to be proceeding together , and the Commission 's action programme clearly offers a framework for that .
But we also need to relate this to the detailed debates - the technical debates .
Unless we succeed in doing that , we shall constantly find ourselves in this kind of rushed situation , and that is a bad thing .
Even so , we are going to vote in favour now .
But I would like to make one more point : we must tackle the problem of the global monopoly .
We must tackle the problem of active , constructive involvement of the European Union within the World Trade Organization , and that will probably require more extensive rules than are to be found in this lame compromise .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Hoppenstedt , it really is very reassuring and helpful to pat one another on the back as far as the TEN telecom consolidation is concerned .
I think many procedures go very smoothly , very quickly , as this report has shown .
Some start very quickly and then slow down .
TEN telecom consolidation got off to a rather laborious start , but I hope we shall be reaching a compromise very shortly .
Some of my hopes here rest on the Dutch presidency .
I should like to concentrate on the Hoppenstedt report .
As the rapporteur very correctly says , Europe is lagging behind the USA , the leaders in matters of satellite communications .
This is all the more painful in that these satellite communications are a logical complement to the existing high-speed infrastructures , or indeed make them possible in the first place .
This makes it all the more amazing that the Member States have reacted so negatively to the Commission 's proposal and have been unable to agree on a procedure to be implemented by the Commission .
This reaction is particularly amazing when you consider that it is those same Member States that are constantly calling for a global reaction to global challenges , which certainly include satellite communications .
It is simply amazing that Europe can reach agreement on a common monetary policy and a common economic policy , and even implement them , but cannot agree on something like leaving the awarding of satellite frequencies to a European institution .
The compromise proposed by the rapporteur has our support , and is likely to provide an adequate solution to the problem we face .
I hope that the co-ordination of the selection of service providers and the harmonized use of frequencies , to which the Member States have committed themselves , really will function in practice and will not result in constant , tedious negotiations that will leave Europe even further behind in this area .
I believe in giving praise where praise is due , so a word of praise for the Council .
Regarding the conformity of the licensing procedure with the ONP text , there is an unusual degree of unanimity between Council and Parliament , and I welcome that .
In conclusion , may I thank both rapporteurs and express the hope that Honourable Members will give unrestricted support to this compromise when we come to the vote .
Mr President , Mrs Read came up with one attractive proposal : the Members of this House - and , I believe , I myself - who have been working for so long on this question of the creation of a functional , efficient telecommunications market should devise a kind of advent calendar on which we can tick off the progress of the final stages between now and 1 January .
I think this is an excellent idea .
We must see whether we can make it universally accessible , in which case we shall be able to finance it with charges imposed on mobile telephone operators .
I could make an alternative suggestion : we can make ourselves a kind of board game and roll some dice . Anyone whose piece lands on a Parliament square is allowed to move two spaces forwards , and the same for the Commission .
If you land on a Council square you have to wait at least three months or move two spaces back .
At least the various parts played are evened out a little .
Coming first to Mr Van Velzen 's report , I thank him for it .
We , like Parliament , believe that we need more Europewide regulations and institutions , as you know , and you asked why we changed this standpoint in the Council 's discussions .
The only explanation for that is the Council 's continuing attitude .
If not a single Member State - not even Mrs Jorritsma , who is certainly one of the more liberal members of the Telecommunications Council and now , thank God , its president - is willing , for example , to set up a European body - not in the institutional , technical , legal sense - to which applications can be made for certain kinds of licence , so that the conditions , the scope of the licence and all other associated questions are regulated in a similar way or the same way throughout Europe - then we are still in a situation which is not ready for this kind of regulation .
We considered whether we should go on waiting for the Directive , which is impossible in view of the date and the legal basis we are creating for national regulations , or whether we should accept a compromise .
It may be that the compromise is lame or lazy .
I think Mr Frischenschlager used the world ' lame ' - that may well be .
But at present , probably , nothing more is possible .
Even so , I will see what view the Council takes of the six amendments which you have tabled and which we all support .
We support the six amendments without exception - incidentally , please add that fact to the credit account you opened for the Commission up until November .
We scored a point here , even if not directly with BSE , but we will accept all six amendments .
In other words , we can check out once again what the Council 's attitude is .
Basically , the problem can be described in simple terms : we certainly need more Europe-wide regulations .
How that can be achieved is something on which opinions still differ .
Part of the reason for this is that the Member States have not yet overcome their mistrust of such Europe-wide regulations .
But the fact that they will be necessary , even from a purely technological standpoint and for the purposes of international competition , as Mr Wolf has said - rightly , on this occasion - is completely obvious .
So what we need is a kind of confidence-building process , and perhaps we may be able to persuade the Council that we need to set up a kind of informal group , an informal committee , bringing together the various national regulatory authorities , so that the national decisions can be discussed there , and perhaps their negative effects can be discussed too , and then , with luck , a kind of mutual confidence will develop .
We went through a similar process with the London agency for licensing medicinal products throughout Europe .
In that case , again , the national experts are incorporated into the decision process , and they quickly acquired confidence both as regards the soundness of the agency 's decisions and as regards its impartiality .
We hope - and I have already discussed this idea with Mrs Jorritsma - that we might succeed in persuading the Council to embark on this kind of informal co-operation , so that this confidence can develop .
The question remains : will this Directive allow fragmentation into 15 different approval systems ?
We hope not , because after all we have set up numerous common conditions to which all European licensing procedures must conform .
So this Directive offers operators , wherever they apply for a licence , guarantees in such areas as the imposing of deadlines , the provision of appeal procedures , which is a particularly important point , the establishment of principles and restrictions for the levying of charges - another important point .
Mrs Read pointed out that if unacceptably high fees are demanded for such licences , then of course the market is not being opened up to competition , and in fact we do already have a few cases of that kind which we are looking into at present .
The global procedure envisaged by the Directive , which is intended to make it easier to obtain general and individual licences in certain Member States , and the mechanism for the further harmonization of general licences are examples of moves towards greater convergence .
I admit that we need more , and we proposed in this House that the effects of the Directive should be reviewed no later than 1999 and new proposals made .
It may be that we need not wait so long .
Mr Wolf has constantly pointed out from the beginning , in other words ever since we have been talking about these matters , that we are pursuing what he calls a piecemeal strategy .
He implied that the Commission was doing this deliberately , pulling the wool over the eyes of those involved , as it were .
That was not our intention , it was just that we simply have to solve certain problems before the calendar moves round to 1 January 1998 .
Mr Wolf is right , however , in saying that a more general framework legislation is needed for two reasons .
First for reasons of convergence , to which I have already referred .
As with the satellites - and I shall be coming to Mr Hoppenstedt 's report in due course - all I can do is make the same point : we are already in a situation in which , from the technological standpoint , all the areas of communications and telecommunications , including the media , which had previously been developed in a non-uniform manner , can coalesce .
That is technically possible today .
The use of the digital process will break down all the frontiers , and the question of the extent to which standards are required for this has also been answered - everything is available .
In economic terms , this is not happening , because this is a market and has to ascertain what the consumer really wants and what he is prepared to pay for it .
That is why we have few economically successful capabilities , as yet , to exploit a convergence that is technologically possible .
But this will very soon change , because there will be a number of economic opportunities , and those opportunities will increase simply because by doing so they will become cheaper and more attractive .
One example is electronic commerce : as you know , we made this capability a focal point of our action programme , and I feel sure that it will not just be used for buying and selling goods and services at long range but that the capability it offers will solve other problems too .
In any case , perhaps , there may be a particular kind of news service , and then the question arises : is that television or not ?
The Land media institutions in the Federal Republic are going to have to wrap up warmly , and so too are the public service broadcasters .
Not that I have anything against them , I want to stress that again , so as not to give Mr Wolf the impression that I have completely forgotten my social liberal past .
But it is completely clear : the grounds always trotted out by the Federal Constitutional Court for the special position of public radio and television - shortage of resources and an entitlement to a basic service - have ceased to exist !
With digital technology and broad-band fibres and other transmission facilities , which will include satellites , a shortage of resources is a thing of the past !
As far as the basic services are concerned , you can already obtain anything you want , obtain it from private suppliers if you want to , and obtain it - if you turn to the news stations or other stations - in absolutely the same quality as is provided by public service broadcasters .
In other words , we need to talk again about what television and radio are and what their relationship is to the available on-line services , etc .
The upshot of all this will be that we will have to produce a framework law , which we can perhaps refer to as the telecommunications law but will actually cover many other things too , to get to grips with all these questions .
We must at least define the place where individual regulations are going to have to follow .
We did originally intend , then , that this would have a stronger impact , but I think the review clause provides us with the possibility of coming back to these questions shortly .
This applies to the committees , too .
Obviously it would be better to have a single committee for all these matters , but we really haven 't reached that stage yet , and so we should start to make a stealthy approach !
Now I come to the report by my friend Karsten Hoppenstedt .
I think , Mr President , that I can once again take the opportunity to talk until we come to the vote , unless you want to have a break .
This is an unfair advantage for the Commission , admittedly , and I don 't want to overdo it .
Mr Hoppenstedt has already made all the important points .
First , it really was important to draw attention to the problem generally .
All the developments taking place in this sector are so new that they are often beyond the compass of those who deal with them , and they think to themselves , well , let it happen , and when it has happened , then we 'll see what we have to do .
And that is completely wrong !
Not only that , but this is a fine illustration of a principle of modern industrial policy .
Unless political authorities intervene at a very early stage in these processes of technological development and economic exploitation , not always in a regulatory sense but with a view to developing these possibilities , then the process loses its dynamism .
It is completely clear , and very easy to see from the ITU decision , that the Europeans - our Member States - had simply failed to recognize as yet what the significance of personal satellite communications would be .
I see a frown from the Council - it really is nice that the Council is represented here , for once , and we are glad to see it .
Of course you are free to frown , Madam , but you have no reason to .
Because when I first spoke about this problem at the Telecommunications Council , not all Ministers were acquainted with the fact that this decision had been made .
Of course , one can and must have a frequency .
We could just as well have been in a position to apply for a frequency for ourselves as well , but we hadn 't got that far and our industry sees the only way out as being to acquire holdings in these American companies .
Well , nothing wrong with that !
I am no protectionist , I am no chauvinist , and of course American companies must have the same opportunity to compete as any other companies .
But if European companies are not represented at all , if they are simply absent , then that should arouse the interest of the politicians and they should do something .
So I welcome the position Mr Hoppenstedt has adopted .
I hope we will succeed in convincing the Council further , and there are some signs of that .
We had a conference in Paris , at which the Member States and the industry were represented , and there was a major opening-up of the debate there .
I would like to make that point now , in justice to the Council and the Member States .
Something has changed , the climate is different .
We have to be quick now .
Because what Karsten Hoppenstedt said was right : if that booster rocket hadn 't come a cropper , the first satellites would already be in place .
Not only that , but we have a unique opportunity , in terms of technical developments , to bring about a combination of stationary satellites with the new Leos , something which in turn would give us a certain edge .
So we should work energetically on that .
I should also like to thank Parliament expressly for the conciliation we have achieved so far .
Thank heavens , we have been able to achieve initial positions in the TEN telecom question which could also help to advance satellite communications , in particular .
I hope that the Council will also be able to adopt this position , which has now developed in consultation with the Parliament , because then we could encourage and promote - partly by deploying funds which , though inadequate , will at least act as an incentive - implementation and further development work on these systems .
That , Mr President , is what needs saying about Mr Hoppenstedt 's report .
I am of course willing to adopt the points he has made , and especially the point that we should endeavour to co-operate intelligently with the existing organizations , in other words with CEPT .
We have no intention of circumventing existing organizations that are doing a good job , but it also makes sense to set a deadline , because that makes it clear that we can also act independently if need be .
I could continue for another 20 minutes , but I think that would be overdoing it .
And a coffee break does seem like a good idea .
Thank you very much .
Thank you , Commissioner Bangemann .
Since we still have a few minutes left , I can invite the two rapporteurs to speak again , if they so wish .
Mr President , you will not be surprised to hear that I am very pleased with the Commissioner 's reply .
I have noted that six airmails are booked in with Mr Böge , the chairman of the BSE Committee of Inquiry .
I shall personally ensure via the interconnection that it also happens .
The second point I wish to make is the following : I agree with the Commissioner that working towards a European Regulatory Authority will be heavy weather .
I welcome your start with an informal working group in the Council .
But I also urge that the Commission should perhaps make a start on a kind of help desk which can contribute towards creating a relationship of confidence with the national regulatory authorities .
I believe that could become a confidenceinspiring move .
Finally I would like to ask this : you have just received , as I understand it , a very voluminous study on the added value of a European Regulatory Authority and I wonder if you are prepared to forward a copy of it to Parliament , or at least to those people who are on your advent calendar .
Thank you , Mr Van Velzen .
Commissioner Bangemann , would you like to respond ?
I didn 't actually want to continue the debate .
But I am glad that the Commissioner has offered to make it available via the worldwide web .
We probably know what you 're offering us ; otherwise I might have to give the exact number .
But that can probably be obtained easily enough .
I am very grateful that we can now opt for this form of access .
Perhaps we should run a test and make it available only over the worldwide web , to find out how many Honourable Members really are connected to it .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.50 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )

Mr Gollnisch , as you were speaking , I was wondering which of the Rules of Procedure your intervention was based on , but in any case we are not going to debate the matter .
Votes
Mr President , since this is an unusual procedure , we need to be absolutely clear about what we are voting on .
The question is whether mobile telephony should be included in this Directive or not .
That is a very fundamental matter , and so we will be voting yes or no on this question .
I believe that the voting procedure should be made absolutely clear , so that all of us really are certain about what point we are voting on .
Mr von Wogau , the chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy is right .
It is a crucial amendment and I hope colleagues here will vote for it .
But to be absolutely clear , it does not ask for mobile phones to be included in every aspect of this proposal , only in certain key aspects covering the funding of universal service and consumer protection .
Then people really will be clear what they are being asked to vote on .
( Parliament adopted the draft legislative resolution )
Mr President , this vote was on the agenda yesterday , but it was postponed in order that the procedure could be clarified .
This relates to maximum residue limits in veterinary medical products of animal origin .
The proposal is in two parts .
One changes the timetable so that instead of the original directive expiring in 1996 as it did , it would expire much later because the Commission needs the extra time in order to assess the substances .
The second part relates to the substances themselves and frankly , it is not possible for Parliament to assess that part in the time we have available .
We were asked for urgency on one article , and one article only .
This created some difficulty .
Between yesterday and now I have taken further advice from Parliament 's services .
We have consulted with Mr Bangemann 's cabinet and also with the Commission 's legal advisor .
We are all agreed that the present urgency procedure , as requested by the Council on 11 February , applies only to the extension of the time limit for setting MRLs for certain old substances .
We all recognize - Mr Bangemann and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection - that this time-limit has to be prolonged .
We are also therefore agreed that as long as Parliament votes only on that issue , it cannot be regarded as having given its opinion on the whole original proposal .
Mr Bangemann , in effect , said this yesterday .
He also said yesterday that if , by any chance , the Council tried to adopt legislation based on the original proposal , he would simply withdraw it .
I would be grateful if the Commissioner would reiterate that for the benefit of Members who were not present at yesterday 's debate , because a great many people were coming into the Chamber when Mr Bangemann had us in thrall with his speech .
He made a speech in English , French and German yesterday .
He is to be congratulated on his linguistic skill .
However , what we have done is this . I have asked Parliament 's services to produce a revised draft legislative resolution as a kind of ad hoc way out of this difficulty .
That ad hoc resolution has been discussed with the political groups this morning and they have , so far as I am aware , all accepted it .
The revised text is available but unfortunately only in English because of the time constraints .
It may be that you would want it to be read aloud .
I am happy to do that .
In conclusion , subject to whether you want me to read it out or not , I recommend to the House that it votes , first of all , only on the Environment Committee amendment to Article 14 of the Commission proposal and on the revised draft legislative resolution in respect of which no amendments at all have been tabled .
The relevant amendment - if I remember rightly - is Amendment No 8 , originally tabled by Mrs Jensen , and there is an all-party agreement on that .
If the House will agree to that then it can make both Mr Bangemann and myself happy at the same time .
This is a coincidence which has not always been achieved .
Mr President , I am glad that yesterday 's efforts have produced a result .
It was probably an avoidable misunderstanding , but such misunderstandings often have more serious consequences than the unavoidable kind .
To make things completely clear , let me place the following on record : the Council requested the urgency procedure only for Article 14 , the provision which is intended to extend the time limit for the evaluation of substances already on the market , in order to fill a legal vacuum that exists .
Parliament 's opinion , therefore , can logically and with complete legal propriety only relate to Article 14 .
This means that Parliament has not yet been consulted on the actual substance of the proposal , but only on Article 14 .
The Council , meaning the presidency , has again stated in a letter to Mr Collins and myself , and to others , that the Council does not decide on matters of substance until Parliament has expressed its opinion on them .
So the Council will not be taking any final decision .
The Council has confirmed that in writing .
But since Parliament still has doubts - I don 't know whether distrust is the right word - there are certain doubts about the Council , not about the Commission , on this occasion , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , you trust the Commission blindly ...
( Noise , heckling ) ... all right , let 's say certain Members of the Commission , let 's limit it to that .
Obviously I cannot speak for the Council ; I myself do not share these doubts , in view of the letter , but if the Council , contrary to all expectation , should take or wanted to take a general decision , the Commission will withdraw its proposal so as to make that impossible .
( Parliament adopted the draft legislative resolution )
The Green Group has pointed out that in the Dutch translation of this report , the expression ' sexuele geaardheid ' should be considered replaced by the expression ' sexuele voorkeur ' .
Mr President , back-door attempts are being made to replace the normal term in Dutch ' seksuele geaardheid ' ( sexual orientation ) with a term which is not usual in Dutch , namely ' seksuele voorkeur ' ( sexual preference ) .
The translation of the English ' sexual orientation ' is ' seksuele geaardheid ' ; I object to the back-door way in which an attempt is being made to change the content of the Dutch text .
Mr President , this kind of problem is far from simple , it is all connected with so-called political correctness and we must be careful here in this House ; ' seksuele geaardheid ' ( sexual orientation ) is a very correct term , also politically correct term , in Dutch society and that is the one that should be used in this report .
Mr President , I have been speaking Dutch for 53 years and Mr Blokland is absolutely right .
Before the final vote on the report
Mr President , before we proceed to the final vote and pursuant to Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure , I should like to propose that the report be referred back to committee .
I would remind the House that the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights rejected Mrs Lindholm 's report and that , at the end of a long debate , we unanimously agreed to submit the Commission 's proposal to Parliament unamended .
Amendments have been tabled by some political groups .
Those who had tabled other amendments in the Legal Affairs Committee have refrained from doing so , in line with the spirit of that committee 's decision .
But I believe it is out of order for amendments to have been proposed and voted upon , and I think that respect for the powers of the Legal Affairs Committee requires that the text should be referred back to it for a decision , in any case , in the light of the decisions taken in this House .
Mr President , I agree with the proposal made by my colleague , Mr Fabre-Ausprey , for reasons I do not need to repeat here ; I know I am one of the people to whom he has alluded .
I , too , believe that this document should be referred back to the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , which could then resubmit it to this House .
Mr President , what I was going to say has in fact already been said , which is that we agreed in committee to proceed in this way .
In addition , unless I have totally misunderstood the order of proceedings , Parliament can put forward their proposals in the part session .
I am therefore in favour of voting here and not reverting to the committee .
( Parliament rejected the proposal to refer the report back to committee )
( Parliament adopted the draft legislative resolution )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to express the recognition and appreciation of those of us who have signed up to this solution , to the Members who have worked so hard on the draft resolution on Algeria . At the same time I want to remember what we all know : that Algeria is experiencing a terrible tragedy .
Parliament passed a resolution on Algeria in December .
Yesterday we listened to a statement from the President of the Council which struck me as extremely cautious .
I believe - and the Members who signed with me believe - we should think again before approving a resolution which contains certain statements many of us do not agree with .
There is no urgency because we passed a resolution in December , and the matter needs further thought , so we think it is better to adjourn the debate for two months .
Besides , haste is always inadvisable .
And I will give you the proof , Mr President : I have before me various language versions of the document we are supposed to be voting on , which contains only one amendment - Amendment No 1 .
In every text , in the different languages , Amendment No 1 , which seeks to add a new paragraph 7 , refers to the situation in Sarajevo and Mostar .
You will have realised already that this has very little to do with Algeria .
It is a material error , but it reflects the haste with which we sometimes deal with such delicate matters .
So I request this adjournment under Rule 131 of our Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , I agree with Mr Cohn-Bendit , that goes without saying .
( Parliament rejected the request to postpone the vote ) Joint motion for a resolution , on behalf of the ELDR Group , the PSE Group , the ARE Group , the V Group , the GUE / NGL Group , and the PPE Group , to replace the following motions for resolutions : B4-0061 / 97 , B4-0067 / 97 , B4-0086 / 97 , B4-0097 / 97 , B4-0145 / 97 and B4-0146 / 97 , concerning the situation in Algeria
( Parliament rejected the joint motion for a resolution )
I put it to Parliament that the sitting should be extended for a few minutes , so that we may vote on the Caccavale report .
( Parliament rejected the proposal )
I voted for the Van Velzen report with some reservations .
Licences issued for mobile telephone networks need to be creative of user-friendly systems .
They should not be allowed to create monopolistic arrangements for air-time providers .
Experience shows that they issued ' locked in ' contracts and are guilty of overcharging for their services .
I would like to see greater real competition which would result in realistic charging and higher standards of consumer service .
Gebhardt report ( A4-0003 / 97 )
The general system for the recognition of diplomas and other educational qualifications was adopted in 1989 ( between 1991 and 1994 , 11 , 000 people obtained recognition of their diplomas ) .
It was supplemented in 1992 in respect of courses involving less than three years ' higher education .
However , this system does not cover every situation .
Professions which have been the subject of specific mutual recognition directives ( six medical professions and architecture ) and those in the fields of trade , industry and crafts are excluded from the scope of application of the general system .
Today 's proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive relates exclusively to professions in the fields of trade , industry and craft .
For some years , these professions have been the subject of 35 directives of two types : liberalizing directives to eliminate the various obstacles ( such as the nationality condition ) to freedom of establishment and the provision of services ; and transitional directives to guarantee recognition of acquired experience in the absence of mutual recognition of diplomas .
The proposal is that a single directive should be adopted to confirm the regulatory provisions of the 35 existing directives and introduce procedural guarantees for applicants with a view to simplifying Community legislation and increasing its transparency .
This is very important !
The Member States are obliged to grant the application for recognition when the applicant 's qualifications are equivalent to those of a citizen of the host country .
If these qualifications cannot be attested , the applicant must produce proof ( with information relating to good repute , financial standing and proof of the existence of insurance ) that he possesses the requisite qualifications .
The State 's decision , then , has to be taken within a brief period ( within four months from the making of the application ) and must be supported by a statement of reasons .
This underpins the rights of the citizens and helps to promote mobility and the implementation of freedom of movement and , consequently , the reduction of unemployment within the European Union .
The European Parliament wishes the Commission to inform it , and the Council , of the application of the directive in the Member States .
It also wishes to reserve the right to participate in any decision on an amendment to the directive .
I am fighting for a civic Europe - a Europe of citizens .
The proposal and the Gebhardt report are moves in that direction .
That is why I support them , and I congratulate the rapporteur .
Articles 52 and 57 of the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community make provision for freedom of establishment and the free provision of services .
These articles are of direct application , as established by the decisions of the Court of Justice .
This means that professionals - doctors , lawyers , architects , engineers , etc - are entitled to provide their services and pursue their activities in another Member State .
They are , in any event , required to join the professional register in the country in which they intend to pursue their activities and to respect its ethical rules .
The professional association of the host Member State is required to recognize the qualification issued by the authorities in the Member State of origin .
But certain problems have arisen , with some national governing authorities pointing to major differences between training / specialization courses or even between university courses .
By so doing , they have denied or severely obstructed recognition of the qualification concerned .
To get round these problems , the EC adopted a set of harmonization directives concerning particular professions ( vertical directives ) .
In 1989 , Directive 89 / 48 / EEC introduced a new horizontal system applicable to all qualifications and diplomas .
This system was subsequently complemented by Directive 92 / 51 / EEC , for qualifications acquired on completion of courses lasting less than three years .
The general system so set up for the mutual recognition of diplomas and qualifications means that liberal professionals may exercise their activities in any Member State .
The obligations with which they must comply are as follows :
they must have a valid diploma or qualification that gives them access to the profession in a Member State ; -they must be in legal possession of the appropriate professional qualification and be a member of the appropriate national association ; -they must join the professional register in the country in which they intend to pursue their activities.The governing authorities of the Member State cannot refuse to recognize valid qualifications and diplomas issued by the country of origin .
They can only , on justified grounds , require awareness of the ethical rules of the profession .
The report produced by Mrs Gebhardt concerns a proposal for a directive which would include professions originally governed by sectoral directives in the general system for the mutual recognition of diplomas and qualifications .
This would complete the general system for the mutual recognition of diplomas and qualifications and , for this reason , our group will be voting in favour of the report .
Mr President , I am especially keen to support this report today as , like many of my colleagues , I have been angry to learn of well-qualified people from my own constituency who have been denied jobs in other Member States .
In my view there can be no excuse for further delay from national governments in this area .
One of the great attractions of the EU for many skilled people should be that they have the option to follow their careers in other parts of Europe if they so wish .
I particularly welcome the idea that , in cases where the authorities refuse to recognize someone 's qualifications , they should be obliged to allow that person to submit evidence of their knowledge or experience .
It is also important that these new proposals from the Commission allow for a right to take cases to the courts .
By all means let the Commission report back on how well governments implement these measures within five years - but I urge all my colleagues with similar cases to bring them to the Commission 's attention as I have done this week .
Five years is too long to ask our constituents to wait for their skills to be valued across the European Union .
Read report ( A4-0049 / 97 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are a few months away from completing the liberalization of the European telecommunications market , and we already have a number of directives on the subject .
They complement each other , sometimes overlap each other and even contradict each other , and here we are today amending a directive before it is even applicable .
I know how technical the issue is , and what is at stake , but I do regret the fact that the procedures are so cumbersome and the texts so unreadable , just ten months away from what will be nothing short of an economic and psychological revolution .
Nevertheless , I do have the opportunity today to restate our commitment to the universal telecommunications service in a competitive market .
This concept is quite a novel one , and it is the result of a grim struggle by a majority in the European Parliament .
It enables our concerns to be refocused on the consumer , even if not as completely as we would like , and that in itself is very important .
If , as one might expect , liberalization has beneficial effects for the telecommunications market , there are also some who say that competition will bring positive benefits for the consumer , and we can hope that it will .
But it must also be said that the market is never aware of the imperatives of planning , of equal access to the service for all , and of social justice for underprivileged groups or areas .
So although , like the rapporteur , I commend the efforts made by the Commission to take due account of these factors , I also say that we must be vigilant in supporting anything that contributes to social cohesion and the installation of a genuine universal service .
What is more , at this stage of the procedure , and with the benefit of hindsight , I mistrust the amendments which the Commission , and especially the Council , will make to this text .
That is why I believe that Parliament must send out a very strong signal along these lines .
The undersigned have voted for those points in the Read report which we consider of most benefit to the consumer .
At the same time we are , in principle , against commercialisation and so called market making for the basic infrastructure .
This process has led to the destruction and fragmentation of the infrastructure to the detriment of system distribution . It has produced a lower level of openness and increased differences in standards between regions and consumer groups .
Coordination between national , state telecommunications companies would have provided greater and fairer technical development and rationalisation .
The Swedish example before liberalisation is an illustration of this .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the report on the ONP conditions for the voice telephone service and provision of the necessary supply services in the area of telecommunications .
The Danish Social Democrats are very satisfied with the report and welcome it in the campaign for a general deregulation of the telecommunications market .
The Danish Social Democrats agree that consumers must , as a general rule , be offered services such as connections and reasonable prices , but we do not believe that the only possible way of ensuring this service is a situation in which Member States are required to introduce arrangements for the financing of these necessary services .
The Danish Social Democrats agree that it must be possible to make emergency calls from public pay-phones free of charge , but taking account of the prospect of disproportionately high costs , we are not in favour of the idea that there should be pay-phones for the transmission of written texts to the same , or to a similar , extent as there are ordinary publicly accessible pay-phones .
The Danish Social Democrats agree that services based on telephone transmission should be available to consumers at a reasonable price , either free of charge or for a nominal sum , but we do not feel Member States should have to cover any difference that might arise between the actual cost of the service and the reasonable price paid by the consumer .
The Danish Social Democrats agree that a subscriber should be protected against having his telephone disconnected in cases where , for instance , there is a dispute between the subscriber and his telephone company over the validity of a telephone bill ; on the other hand , we would make it clear that it is generally a reasonable contractual consequence for a telephone to be disconnected if the bill is not paid .
Lindholm report ( A4-0046 / 97 )
Mr President , I believe this report contains a number of highly dubious provisions .
First , it appears to legitimize positive discrimination in favour of women .
The distinction which the rapporteur makes between formal freedoms and real freedoms is worryingly reminiscent , to me , of the distinction made by the Marxists in this context , and we know that where there were no formal freedoms there were no real freedoms either .
I am inclined to say that ' where there is no formal equality , there is no real equality either ' .
The second point I would like to challenge relates to the implicit recognition of homosexual marriage .
It is not up to me , any more than it is up to anyone in this House , to pass judgement on what takes place between consenting adults .
The problem is whether the community should be required to acknowledge forms of union which are not geared to procreation .
Procreation is the only reason for the social protection enjoyed by marriage , and it is the reason why I still believe it is undesirable , in our society as in any other society , for the law to give special protection to other forms of union .
The principle of equality of opportunity and treatment between men and women is one of the philosophical foundations of our European Parliament .
It is right that the Community institutions should echo that , and the proposal for a regulation which is before us is along the right lines .
Our rapporteur has made various proposals regarding that regulation which we can only endorse .
One of these is the establishment of an equal opportunities committee within each institution .
Furthermore , and in the context of the benefits and rights granted to married officials , the rapporteur would like to extend those provisions to unmarried couples , whether heterosexual or homosexual .
Parliament would do itself credit if it were to draw up identical rules for all individuals , whatever may be their sexual orientation or their attitude to marriage .
The problem is , quite simply , one of justice .
We are very pleased today to learn that Parliament has voted in favour of abolishing discrimination against homosexuals and increasing equality between men and women employees in the EU institutions by proposing concrete changes to the rules of service which are approximately 50 years old .
As the amendment proposals are totally in line with the Commission 's proposal and are a tangible version of this , we urge the Commission to act in accordance with Parliament 's decision as soon as possible .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the European Parliament 's report on the Commission 's proposal to change the regulations governing civil servants in EU institutions .
The purpose of this , on the one hand , is to promote equality of treatment for both men and women in terms of employment conditions .
On the other hand it is aimed at extending the ban on discrimination , so that this will also include sexual orientation .
The Danish Social Democrats have a positive attitude to promoting equality between men and women .
We therefore support the report in as much as it simultaneously provides opportunity for promoting the rights of homosexual men and women in EU institutions and , in the longer term , provides a good starting point for promoting opportunities open to them in the Member States .
Whitehead report ( A4-0317 / 96 )
Mr President , the protection and defence of consumers , that is , all of us , is one of the cornerstones in the construction and development of the single market and the Treaty on Union .
But the third Consumer Policy Programme ( 1996-1998 ) is inexplicably lacking in many of the advantages and positive measures of the previous programme .
Basically , the third programme is a wish-list for European consumers , without clear and specific commitments .
The programme 's ' priorities for action ' cover a wide variety of spheres involving consumers ' interests , but , I repeat , they are vague and imprecise , like almost everything else the Commission has presented recently .
Once again , it must be stressed that if we want to make progress properly and effectively , the Commission 's first priority must be to complete outstanding activities and consolidate and evaluate the work done in the period 19931995 , so that this new programme can be set up on the basis of experience .
None of this has been done , and besides , the programme lacks a coherent strategy , a timetable of specific commitments , an action plan , and so on , to progress consumer policy in line with consumers ' interests .
The amendments tabled battle to improve it , but if these serious gaps are not filled it will be difficult for the Union to boast that the citizen , as consumer , is one of its priorities .
These points will determine my vote .
We have voted in favour of the Whitehead report as we are very anxious to improve consumer protection in the Union .
There are currently considerable shortcomings in this area and we support many of the proposals which have been put forward in the report .
But we think that the main problem , that the free movement of goods is considered more important under EU law than environmental and consumer considerations , is not sufficiently highlighted .
We are totally opposed to point 19 in the report which expresses its support for the EU propaganda campaign for a single currency .
It is a good thing that the position of consumers is to be strengthened on the internal market through increased consumer information , better labelling of food , and better access to resources and raw materials etc .
This section of the report is good .
The long term goal must be to improve the standing of environmental and consumer demands on the market .
But we cannot support the EU 's minutely detailed regulation which is proposed through the introduction of common rules for distance selling of financial services , for interest on late payment by creditors , for sanctions for non payment and the harmonisation of collection procedures .
We are also against point 19 in the report which expresses support for the publicity campaign for the Euro .
Marinucci report ( A4-0048 / 97 )
It is sensible to strengthen consumer rights and interests in the area of financial services , banks and insurance services for example .
But there is no reason to regulate all this at EU level for example by regulating distance selling of financial services .
This is why I have voted against this report .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.25 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Mr Caccavale has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , I asked the previous chairman , Mr Anastassopoulos , if my report could be voted on this morning .
Now , quite unexpectedly , the agenda for this morning 's vote has been changed and I have not had the opportunity to put my report to the vote .
There are now two possibilities : either we put the report to the vote this afternoon , immediately after the motion for censure , or - and this is the option both I and my group would prefer - we postpone it until the next part-session in March , since , obviously , this evening 's vote would not have the same significance .
Thank you very much , Mr Caccavale .
You have already detected the ' enthusiasm ' aroused by the possibility of having to vote on your report after the vote on the motion of censure .
I think it is preferable , for your own report and for the agenda , if we take it in March .
Thank you for giving us that opportunity .
Mr President , I refer to the decision you have just made at the request of the rapporteur to put this off until March .
Presumably he cannot be here this afternoon .
Before you make that decision , could you check with the Council programme to see whether or not this might be on a Council agenda .
If it is , that decision is quite unacceptable .
I will check and try to make sure the Council is present .
Thank you very much for your advice , Mr Collins .
Mr President , I do not think the point is whether the Council should be here .
The point is that there is still a voting session tonight and tomorrow morning .
If the rapporteur is here , are we to understand that he is not going to be here for the voting session ?
He could be here and his report could be voted then as anybody else 's would be if it could not be dealt with earlier .
Mrs Green , I did not refer to some personal reason of the rapporteur 's .
I said voting on this report immediately afterwards could delay our business .
And as the rapporteur offered two options I welcomed the second , which presents no problem : voting on the report next month .
I think the Council will be present , if it feels that is appropriate , and we will do everything we can to make sure that it is , but as the decision has been taken and no problem has been raised at this time , it is agreed that the vote will take place next month .
Welcome
I have the honour of welcoming an official delegation from the United States Congress , led by Mr Benjamin Gilman , chairman of the Committee for International Relations of the House of Representatives of the United States .
This delegation , the most long-standing of our delegations from third countries , is in Strasbourg to take part in the forty-sixth interparliamentary meeting between the European Parliament and the United States Congress .
Our transatlantic relations are entering a crucial stage at this time and we are facing many new challenges throughout the world .
I really do hope that the parliamentary exchanges we have over the next few days will reinforce our existing solid relationship .
I wish the delegation from the United States Congress a pleasant stay in Strasbourg .
BSE ( Vote on motion of censure )
Mr Happart has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , this is not a point of order but a procedural motion .
I should like to know what Mr Santer is going to do for the human victims and for their families .
( Mixed reactions ) What Mr Santer is going to do about ...
( The President interrupted the speaker ) who betrayed the inter-institutional agreement ...
Mr Happart , you no longer have the floor .
You asked me for the floor in order to table a procedural motion , but this is not one .
We discussed this matter at length the other day , and the Commission gave such explanations as it felt to be relevant .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the motion of censure )
Madam President , at the risk of delaying the proceedings , I should like to give my explanation of vote - or more accurately , my group 's explanation of vote - orally , because the Presidency , yesterday , did not allow me to finish a point of order which explained the majority voting position of the group of the European Radical Alliance .
Today , therefore , I want to make it clear what the position of our group was , and why a majority of us voted in favour of censure .
First , however , I should like to repeat my regret regarding the procedure selected for the various votes on the BSE crisis .
By deciding to vote yesterday on the report by the Committee of Inquiry and the oral questions relating to that text , Parliament indubitably weakened the censure initiative and so helped to undermine one of its own most important prerogatives .
That was why our group , the Radical Alliance , did not take part in the vote on 19 February .
Otherwise , just to make things clear , if we voted in favour of the censure motion , that decision was in no way directed against the Commission as an institution - quite the contrary .
The position of the radicals was dictated by their view of the European institutions .
We are federalists , which is why we regard the Commission as a precursor of the possible Federal Government of tomorrow .
And if we want public opinion to stop regarding the European Commission as a technical , opaque and irresponsible administrative body , we must give it a political responsibility - a responsibility which is permanent , single and collegiate .
That explains the vote by the Radical Alliance .
Madam President , I voted in favour of the censure motion because I do not wish to be an accomplice of the Commission in this serious affair .
I am aware of the responsibilities of the Delors Commission , but those of the present Commission are overwhelming , because Mr Santer and his colleagues ' knew ' for two years !
As soon as they knew , they should have alerted the institutions , the Member States , public opinion .
They failed to do so , because it was Mr Major who took that initiative last spring .
As soon as they knew , they should have proposed the necessary steps to protect public health .
They failed to do so !
As soon as they knew , they should have given their loyal support to the parliamentary Committee of Inquiry !
They failed to do so .
And , today , the Commission is refusing to safeguard the moral , material and financial interests of the Community and its citizens by taking the necessary steps against a Member State .
As the protegé of Parliament , the Commission is emerging from this crisis weakened and discredited .
I am sorry to see it - it is not good for the institutions and it is not good for Europe .
A better solution would have been a strong vote of censure , to enable a new , reconstituted Commission to return to work in a healthier climate .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted against the censure motion .
Bearing in mind the exceptional gravity of the BSE affair , I should like to explain that vote orally .
The Committee of Inquiry , under the talented leadership of its Chairman , Mr Böge , did a remarkable job .
President Santer and Mrs Bonino - and , incidentally , we are very glad that Mrs Bonino is now in charge of an essential part of the department in question , in accordance with the structural reform we wanted - responded favourably yesterday to some of our questions regarding major points in Mr Medina 's excellent report .
Our duty is to remain vigilant , and it is with regard to that strategy of vigilance that differences of opinion have arisen .
Some of us felt it was right to vote in favour of immediate censure , but the majority thought that the threat of censure would be a more effective way of exerting pressure to ensure that our recommendations are in fact put into practice - more effective than packing the Commissioners off home when virtually none of them has done anything at all discreditable .
I shared that point of view and supported the joint motion for a resolution , which recommended that procedure in point 7 .
It seemed to me , therefore , that voting to put the Commission to the test one day and then voting for immediate censure the next would be totally contradictory and would never be understood by the public .
A choice had to be made .
Each of us voted with his conscience .
Personally , I am at ease with the choice I made .
I am deeply convinced that the strategy adopted by Parliament yesterday , by a very large majority , will be seen during the coming months to be the most effective way of preventing such crises .
Madam President , I was one of the 71 signatories to the motion of censure against the Commission , and I am one of the 118 Members who voted in its favour .
My purpose in tabling that motion and voting for it was not particularly to condemn any individual Commissioner but to censure the whole of the Commission , the Commission as a collegiate body , the Commission in its entirety and as a continuing entity , both before and after the changes of 1995 .
I shall not dwell on the grounds for the censure .
It was necessary to sanction certain serious irregularities , especially those so ably expounded by my colleague Edouard des Places in his speech on Tuesday . ' Responsible but not guilty ' is a formula we reject , and one that I reject personally .
If it had been censured , the Commission would in all probability have been reappointed immediately , but no one could have said that we had done nothing .
Well , the motion of censure will have an effect even so .
As with the investiture of President Santer , as with what is going to happen next month with Community transit , the European Parliament has denounced it , the European Parliament has condemned it , and at the end of the day the European Parliament has backed down .
After this unsuccessful motion of censure , this backing down , there will be no more motions of censure .
That is one of the beneficial effects of this operation .
Madam President , I did not vote in favour of censuring the Commission .
Not that I wasn 't tempted to do so .
I even recommended my group to support the censure vote , last week , and I regret the fact that the principal groups in this Parliament - including my own - thought it better not to censure the Commission with a clear , massive and immediate vote .
I regret it because such a vote , apart from sanctioning a Commission which I freely accept was not solely or even principally responsible , would have been a salutary shot across the bows of the institutions and the Member States , a few months away from the IGC , inviting them to question a decision-making system which has displayed its fundamental flaws , bureaucratic opacity , dilution of responsibility , and a system of sanctions which is rigid yet full of holes , making it impossible to reach the guilty parties and forcing us to sanction the whole Commission for the fault of one Member - slaughtering the herd , as it were , because of a single sickly animal .
I understand that the groups did not share our view - neither my own group nor the Socialist Group .
So we had a choice between two attitudes : a vote of no political significance to express individual disapproval , or supporting a strategy of conditional censure which does have some real value .
Mrs Fontaine has said everything that needed saying .
Personally , I made a choice between the ethic of conviction and the ethic of responsibility - between a politically insignificant protest and an effort to induce the Commission to put its house in order .
Madam President , on Tuesday night in this House I made my position clear in a speech on BSE .
I said that Northern Ireland had been sinned against , both by the United Kingdom Government and by the Commission , as well as by the Council of Ministers and Parliament .
Yesterday I voted against the joint resolution on the findings of this special Committee of Inquiry on BSE because I do not believe that any British minister is answerable in law to this Parliament or any of its committees .
On Monday night , as a member of that British Parliament , I voted a censure motion against Mr Douglas Hogg .
I also totally opposed the findings of the Committee of Inquiry in demanding that compensation money paid to UK farmers be paid back .
Consequently , I could not today vote for the censure motion on the Commission tabled by those who want what I believe to be outrageous measures applied to my country .
That is why I abstained in this vote .
Madam President , I abstained .
This is a difficult position to be in .
I know it amounts to not voting in favour of censure , but I didn 't want to vote against it either , because I believe that the deferred censure formula is the right one .
It is the right one if we regard the next few months as a sort of stay of execution , which the Commission must use to carry through essential reforms .
I am not sure how determined the Commission is in this respect .
Furthermore , the way in which President Santer has just left the Chamber once the vote had gone his way might give us cause for scepticism and anxiety .
But it should be clearly understood that many of us - many of us who , today , did not vote for censure - will vote for it at the end of the year unless the essential reforms have been instituted .
That is why the Commission would be wrong to regard today 's vote as giving it free rein .
A clear-sighted view would be to regard it as a serious warning , because today 's vote was a success for those who tabled the motion of censure .
Madam President , it has been said that one cannot blame a new Commission for the old Commission 's negligence .
I agree with this view .
Both Commissions deserve blame .
The former Commission , through its negligence , was guilty of manslaughter .
The present Commission has covered up this offence and has refused to cooperate so that a full explanation can be reached .
In my view this is even more culpable than the actions of the former Commission , and this is my reason for not supporting the majority view about postponement , but instead to hold a vote of no confidence today .
I have no confidence in the Commission .
A Commission which will not even issue a telephone list of the Commission 's employees .
Such a Commission 's disregard for general democratic principles , and the general principles of transparency , does not deserve confidence , but replacement .
We representatives of the Suomen Keskusta party in the European Parliament consider that the Commission has been guilty of serious negligence in dealing with BSE .
We supported the resolution adopted by Parliament on Tuesday although in various respects we considered its formulation inadequate .
We did not support the vote of no confidence in the Commission because the worst negligence was committed during the previous Commission 's term of office .
We supported the resolution calling on the Commission to take speedy and effective measures to prevent the spread of BSE .
If the Commission fails to carry out the measures called for by Parliament in this resolution , we are prepared to give serious consideration to a vote of no confidence in the Commission .
As a member of the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry into BSE , I was able to spend six months studying the main aspects of this affair .
I voted for censure because I am deeply convinced that the United Kingdom bears a considerable responsibility and that the mistakes , failings , errors and dissimulations of the Commission are obvious .
That applies , of course , to the Commission under the presidency of Mr Delors , but also to President Santer 's Commission .
There is no doubt , as I see it , that the Commissioner for Agriculture , Mr Fischler , is responsible ; he began by underestimating the situation , then went on to conceal some reports and block others .
It would have been desirable , for the honour of the Commission , for Mr Fischler to resign from his post .
The fact is that the European Union , through the agency of the United Kingdom and the Commission , has failed in a fundamental duty - the duty to protect the health of its citizens .
Public opinion in the Member States would be unable to understand our failure to sanction such a failure .
That is why I voted for censure , even though I appreciate the significant advances represented by President Santer 's proposals with a view to correcting past errors - one way , as it were , of acknowledging the responsibility and culpability of his Commission .
We have been confronted by one of the most crucial problems that a Member of Parliament can encounter in the exercise of his duties .
Ethical stringency , the way in which we see our duty as Members of Parliament , the defence of the health of our fellow citizens which is their most precious possession , an analysis of the irregularities that have taken place and the ways in which they can be remedied , the desire to ensure that Europe is constructed on a healthy , solid basis , and also respect for the persons concerned - we are not a court , after all - all these principles arise simultaneously in connection with this matter , and at the end of the day they must determine how we vote .
Conversely , anything which might be seen as the result of a mere episode in the development of the trial of strength between Community institutions or as the defence of strictly national or even commercial interests , or as the commonplace course of an essentially diplomatic game , or worse still as political protection , is not worthy of consideration in connection with the moral problem that has arisen .
Provided that these principles are accepted , I believe the motion of censure must be carried .
Of course the British Government and the previous Commission bear the main responsibility , but the report by our Committee of Inquiry showed that the present Commission bore its share of that responsibility .
And , at this time , it is that Commission on which we are being asked to give a verdict .
The fact that other institutions may be at fault cannot exonerate it completely .
I cast this vote despite the esteem in which I hold the Members of the Commission and its President , and a number of senior officials of the Commission .
I vote with my conscience , convinced that this is what our fellow citizens expect of us in a debate such as this .
And , contrary to certain widely held opinions , I am conscious as I cast my vote of playing my part in reconciling public opinion and the politicians , and bringing our fellow citizens back closer to the idea they would like to have of the integration of Europe .
The motion of censure which I sponsored , and for which I and my colleagues in the Europe of Nations Group then voted , was aimed first and foremost at the Commission because of its irresponsible behaviour in the mad cow crisis .
But , over and above that , it was also an accusation levelled at an entire European system which , through its aberrations , has allowed the manipulation of information , the paralysis of the nations ' defensive reactions and the propagation of the disease .
The main value of this affair is the new light it casts on the real nature of the European institutions .
First , the Commission - this one and its predecessor - bears an overwhelming responsibility for its part in this tragedy .
A responsibility arising not from a single or chance act but , rather , from a consistent pattern of behaviour , observed over a long period and inherent in the very objectives which the Commission has made its own .
Having adopted as a priority objective the establishment of freedom of movement , which it misinterpreted as meaning the abolition of all border controls , it saw a threat to the single market in every suggestion made by a Member State with a view to re-establishing national controls , even going so far as to threaten them with proceedings before the Court of Justice , both in 1990 and in early 1996 .
Now , whatever the real faults of the British Government may be , they cannot explain or excuse the inertia of the Commission in confronting the dangers , its abandonment of the principle of caution , its failure to get to grips with the public health aspect , an attitude which it carried to extreme lengths when , as late as June 1996 , it managed to push through the conditional lifting of the embargo on gelatin , tallow and semen , all with a view to re-establishing freedom of movement as quickly as possible .
Anyone in any doubt need only leaf through the pages devoted to that episode by the European Parliament 's Committee of Inquiry .
You will find such damning phrases as ' political pressures ' , ' gave in to manipulation by the industrial sector ' , ' low degree of transparency ' , ' lack of credibility of the Commission 's positions ' , ' at present trying to avoid part of its responsibility ' , etc .
After all , it was indeed the present Commission , not its predecessor , which on 18 December last year authorized the introduction onto the European market of American transgenic maize , still driven by its obsession with freedom of movement , obstinately deaf to warnings and blind to the lessons that it should have learned from mad cow disease .
When obstinacy is carried to this point , we can no longer talk of an isolated error - this is a deliberate attempt to force through , at any cost , a perverted form of integration , whatever it may cost the peoples of Europe .
No one can help wondering , after all , by what mysterious reversal the powers of commercial regulation delegated by the Member States to the Commission , essentially for the better protection of the peoples of Europe , have thus been used against those very peoples , to break down their defences for the benefit of shameful financial interests .
Anyone who takes note of this reversal , and better still analyses the mechanisms by which it took place , will tear away the veil of hagiographic propaganda in which the Commission has shrouded itself and see it as it really is .
But , apart from the institution targeted by this motion of censure , we want to question a complete European system which is being developed against the interests of Europe 's peoples .
We condemn an agricultural policy whose aim is integration into the world market via a productivity race .
We condemn a unification which would prohibit any controls at the internal borders and any possibility that an individual country could safeguard the vital interests of its population , or even its own concept of health , security or environmental protection .
We condemn the political view that holds that , for the ultimate good of its peoples , Europe should be integrated stealthily by omniscient technocrats who alone can overrule our personal interests .
We think , on the contrary , that Europe 's agricultural objective should be high-quality production , necessarily protected by some form or other of Community preference ; that the single market must tolerate the right of nations to differ or to defend themselves , something which in our view is not incompatible with a rational interpretation of free trade ; and finally that the European Union , to make good its democratic shortcomings , must be returned to the direct control of its Member States , a task which , from today , should become the priority of the Intergovernmental Conference .
An empty gesture - that was the predictable effect of this premature filing of a motion of censure against the Commission .
That is the expected result of a campaign which was not designed to succeed , just to make a demagogic political point which has attracted support in certain unsophisticated quarters .
It is not enough to table a motion of censure , hoping for a bit of media coverage - what is needed , too , is a strategy calculated to make it achieve its end . Otherwise it is simply an empty effort to amuse , not to say abuse , the gallery .
Now , we all know that making use of this procedure is a novelty .
If we want to make it a successful novelty - it is regrettable , of course , but it is happening - this House needs preparation to enable it to overcome its delicacy .
It was necessary to abandon a futile initiative in favour of one that might prove effective ; that was the point of the resolution adopted yesterday and the ' conditional motion of censure ' which I and other honourable Members support .
This is a double-barrelled weapon : first , it places the Commission under surveillance and should encourage it to mend its ways in this area , and in others too ; secondly , it gives Parliament time to prepare itself to take the plunge , if necessary , and accept its responsibilities .
Haste and impatience rarely ensure success .
Today 's motion of censure was premature .
Tomorrow , either the Commission will have changed , or it will be changed !
After reading the admirable report by the Committee of Inquiry , one can only be appalled by the responsibility borne by the British Conservative Government .
By giving priority to deregulation at the expense of all health considerations , by denying any danger of damage to human health and by failing to observe the ban on exports of bone meals , the British Government acted recklessly and in some cases culpably .
The European Commission , for its part , has committed a number of obvious errors to which we cannot close our eyes .
How can we not call for penalties against an institution which has played down a crisis affecting public health ?
Who was it slowed down the adoption of simple safety procedures for inactivating the meals ?
Who was it that lifted the embargo on gelatin ?
Who was it that acted in such a way as to give the market preference over public health ?
Not only that , but the lack of clarity within the Commission during the handling of the BSE affair is evidence of unfair use of the institutional agreement .
The vote on the motion of censure against the Commission is a political response to that institution 's demonstration of its lack of any sense of political responsibility .
How can we claim to be creating a Europe based on solidarity if it is incapable of protecting its citizens against diseases released by its own industries ?
In the interests of the Union 's citizens , then , and having regard to the responsibility ethic , we must censure the actions of the Commission .
There are grounds for criticising the Commission 's handling of mad cow disease , but the criticism is not so serious as to warrant a vote of no confidence .
Had it been possible to direct the vote of no confidence towards the British Government or the previous Commission , I would have voted in favour of it .
As it is , I have not done so .
The parliamentary decision is putting pressure on the Commission for future action .
These demands are reasonable and I will support them .
But I will not support the motion that Parliament will combine these demands with the threat of a vote of no confidence if they are not met .
Parliament always has the opportunity to dismiss the Commission so there is no need for it to tell them how it should act in the future .
If the Commission has the confidence of Parliament then it should be treated with respect ; if there is no confidence , Parliament should dismiss the Commission .
There is no need for an in between stage .
A lack of clarity in this respect damages both parties and reduces the impact of the European cooperation as a result .
A vote of censure against the European Commission is a serious act , and we should admit that it may not be the best way of dealing with this situation .
After all , let us not forget that the main responsibility lies with the British Government , whose attitude to this case has been unspeakable from the start .
Then comes the responsibility of the European Commissioners , who failed to do their duty , thus making the last two Commissions collectively liable .
The fact remains that , today , the situation is so serious , the collective liability so great and the risks to the future so terrible that we cannot allow this day to end without a political show of force .
Admittedly , we had a sound resolution yesterday which puts the present Commission under the gun .
I approved of it , and I voted for it .
But today , Thursday , 20 February 1997 , confronted with the motion of censure as tabled , we cannot in all conscience sit back and see it receiving no more than a few dozen votes .
That is why I shall be voting in favour .
I am voting for it not in order to condemn any individual but in order to condemn a course of action that calls for condemnation , an intolerable collective irresponsibility , criminal blindness .
I am voting for it in the hope that it will make it possible to stop what still can be stopped , to make good what absolutely must be made good , and to compel all those responsible to be vigilant in the future in order to ensure that no such tragedy occurs again .
This issue is so grave that it is hard to understand how something like this could have happened in the European Union .
Reading the report of the temporary committee of inquiry into bovine spongiform encephalopathy , there is no doubt that the Commission deserves to be censure for its downright failure to fulfil its responsibilities in terms of prevention and protection of public health .
If the Commission 's responsibilities are collegiate and that is why it was impossible to vote on each Commissioner individually at the beginning of this legislature - as requested by the European Parliament - then , by the same token , responsibility today encompasses the entire College .
The argument is clear , especially on such an issue , which is criminal from every point of view and where there can be no contrivance : the health of the citizens cannot be put at risk and cannot be negotiated over .
My vote of conscience merely reflects what I have said .
The way the BSE epidemic has been handled , especially by the United Kingdom , and its utterly tragic consequences for consumer health require a response from this Parliament that is not just convincing but also responsible , and which will help to guarantee proper protection for citizens in terms of public health .
So Parliament must condemn the British Government strongly and clearly as the great and genuine perpetrator of the BSE crisis ; and it must also denounce the Council 's culpable silence in the face of the British Government 's lack of action and transparency .
But it also has a duty to demand that the Commission follow up the recommendations contained in the report of the temporary committee of inquiry into BSE , adopt the legislative , organizational and personnel measures proposed in it without delay , including measures to guarantee the independence and solvency of the scientific committees and put an end to the dysfunctions which currently exist within the Community 's administration .
It must also demand that the IGC be asked to institute the necessary reforms to allow Parliament to participate fully in drawing up legislation relating to public health and the CAP .
That is why I voted in favour of the resolution on the results of the committee of inquiry into BSE yesterday .
Because in it , as well as condemning those really responsible , we require the Commission to adopt measures to prevent another epidemic which might threaten the health of the citizens and to implement them within a set time-limit , failing which we will move a motion of censure on the Commission .
Responsibility tends to be condemned with grand but empty gestures .
So I think a motion of censure on the Commission now - especially considering that the real fault lies first with the British Government and secondly with the Commission presided over by Jacques Delors - would be irresponsible and a mere gesture that would do absolutely nothing to deal with the causes of this very serious BSE crisis .
So I have voted against the motion of censure .
Following the proceedings of the European Parliament 's Committee of Inquiry , the European Commission has been held responsible for serious errors and omissions .
It is entirely logical , therefore , to draw the appropriate political conclusions .
The Commission , as an institution , must accept its responsibilities and pay the penalty .
That is why I have no hesitation - I am in favour of an immediate censure .
The present Commission has covered up the activities of its predecessor and has not shown the transparency that the Committee of Inquiry had a right to expect .

While it would seem that there is no doubt about the political responsibility of the agriculture commissioners , Mr MacSharry and Mr Steichen , especially for the period 19901994 , the present Commissioner , Mr Fischler , quite apart from obvious errors for which he must be called to account , has obstructed the proceedings by concealing certain matters , as witness the existence of memoranda that were not sent to the Committee of Inquiry .
That is serious .
The Commission is a collegiate institution .
As the law stands at present , only the institution as a whole can be sanctioned .
But there is nothing to stop our governments from reappointing Jacques Santer and those Commissioners who have done nothing wrong .
Indeed , it would be logical for them to be reappointed .
And it should not take too long .
The European public would not understand it if the European Parliament were to do nothing .
I believe that immediate censure is the only appropriate penalty to put an end to the irregularities and compel the new Commission to take the necessary structural and political decisions swiftly .
We must have both efficiency and ethics .
Furthermore , if the present Commission were to fail to take such steps , I should have no hesitation in censuring it twice in six months .
The Commission 's serious responsibility for the way BSE has been handled and for the risks to public health is unequivocally stated in the report of the committee of inquiry .
In view of those statements and given the collegiate nature of the Commission , the principle of the continuity of the institutions and the responsibilities ascribable to the present College of Commissioners , the European Parliament must exercise its duty of control with dignity .
What is more , the Commission misused the interinstitutional agreement , hid the truth and unjustifiably attempted to lay some of the blame on Parliament .
Damaging the harmony of the European institutions in that way is unacceptable and deserves censure .
Only a new Commission can command the legitimacy to implement the recommendations of the committee of inquiry .
To strengthen the construction of Europe , fulfil Parliament 's duties and uphold the commitment that Members have to society , we are obliged to demand the resignation of the Commission .
The repercussions of BSE on human health are only beginning and Parliament must remain free of any blame .
That is why the United European Left tabled the motion of censure on the Commission and why it has voted for it .
I have given my support to the resolution adopted by Parliament yesterday ( Wednesday 19th February 1997 ) .
I have done this because I consider it important that the concrete demands for improvements , stated in the resolution , to prevent a similar crisis in public health must be implemented by the Commission .
This is necessary to improve the work in the field of public health and by so doing increase confidence in the European Parliament 's elected representatives .
But , in my opinion , the resolution is too weak .
This is why I also made the decision to vote for the vote of no confidence in the Commission , even though I realise that this should firstly be directed towards the British Government and the previous Commission .
The current Commission also has a responsibility in this and the investigating committee 's report is so lacking in openness and analysis that a vote of no confidence is justified .
In the case of the ' mad cows ' , the Commission has committed a number of sins , not venial sins , of failing to control , inform and apply transparency , which can be sanctioned with a motion of censure , at least as a condition for restoring consumer and citizen confidence in European institutions .
The European Parliamentary 's Committee of Inquiry has competently denounced these failures , showing that the Parliament is an effective control body .
However , it so happens that in the constellation of culprits for this present situation , the current Commission is just the latest and last in line , after the Council , the veterinary committees , the British Government and the previous Commission .
After all there are no Community competencies in matter of public health which are sufficient to lay all of the blame with the Commission .
There is an urgent need to create them in the Intergovernmental Conference .
The Treaties do not provide for the individual responsibility of Commissioner .
Yet this could be out of proportion with the collegiate responsibility of the Commission as such .
The success of a motion of censure would mean that the European Parliament will have taken power , in an institutional framework which is still dominated by the States and for which the European Union is not prepared .
Since the Commission is not appointed by the European Parliament , it would be difficult to avoid a situation in which an incoming Commission would not be the same as the present one .
This would open a crisis which could actually take the focus off efforts to bring about a single currency which are mobilising both the institution and the states and , by extension , the full democratisation of the European Union .
It would be a better approach to set the current Commission a deadline to carry out the necessary reforms in the sector of animal production and offer vital guarantees to restore confidence .
If this is not the case , we will have to pass a motion of censure , and then I think it would be more likely that we could achieve a much broader majority calling for that .
For the time being I think we should give our support to the ' green revolution ' and ' compulsory labelling ' announced by President Santer of the Commission .
I am against a full motion of censure on the Commission at this stage because I believe that to dismiss the present Commission for the failure of its predecessors would be wrong .
In any case I do not believe that even the former Commission was guilty of criminal negligence , even though it did fail to recognise the potential danger and failed to take appropriate action .
The Council of Ministers was equally responsible for these failures .
National governments also have responsibility for the safety of food and they failed also to warn consumers of the potential danger .
So why should we unjustly make a scapegoat of the present Commission and plunge the Union into a political crisis ?
Such action would resolve nothing and disrupt the very work that must be urgently done .
What we must now do is recognise the weakness in our administrative system that has led to our failure and effect the necessary changes .
We must also base all our future decisions on the best scientific knowledge available to us .
Thanks to on-going research , much more knowledge is available to us today than it was eight years ago .
It is our good fortune to be better informed than our predecessors .
I know the BSE problem is indeed a very grave one and that an estimated 15 people have died from the associated disease of CJD .
Nevertheless , it has affected a very small number compared with the thousands who die every year in the EU alone from the failure of the food handling industry to practise good hygiene .
Recently 15 people died in one Member State from food poisoning as a result of eating contaminated food from one small wholesale establishment .
Hundreds of thousands of people die in the EU each year as a result of smoking tobacco and consuming alcohol and yet we subsidise the production of those products , even though we have unquestionable scientific proof of their threat to human health .
Some of the intemperate statements in this House and elsewhere have created the impression that beef products carry a significant risk to health .
In fact the risk to health from eating beef is very insignificant , no matter what part of the EU it comes from .
I will vote for the motion of censure against the Commission , for a very simple reason . We approved the investigative committee 's report on the responsibilities of the European Union 's bodies and of the British Government for dealing with BSE .
That report is very clear and its conclusions are shattering and unquestionable , and in any case nobody has questioned them .
So the question to be faced by every Member of the European Parliament was and is how it would have been possible for a motion of censure not to be tabled !
The motion , of course , is only directed against the Commission , and that indeed , collectively . But our statutory system does not provide for censure against individual Commissioners , and much less so against the Council of Ministers or individual governments .
As representatives of the European Union 's citizens who must be committed to the protection of their rights , public health , and their security in everyday life , it is our elementary duty , within the existing framework , to react and apportion responsibilities and impose sanctions , to the extent and wherever that can be done .
We cannot plead that in this matter , economic and political interests took precedence over public health , and none of our institutions reacted accordingly .
It is then that we would have an institutional crisis , and not in the event that the European Parliament approves the motion of censure .
As one who is unreservedly pro-European , I consider that Europe needs powerful institutions and that those are tested and demonstrate their worth when times are difficult , and not just in day to day administration .
Together with my colleagues in the Europe of Nations Group , I voted in favour of censure .
Why ?
Because it is not enough simply to expose the responsibilities and disastrous slackness of the Commission - they must be penalized .
That is what the families of the victims expect - those who work in the stricken meat industry , and all those who elected us so that we could be vigilant in supervising the activities of the Commission .
I voted in favour of censure because I do not accept the principle of ' responsible but not guilty ' .
But , some will say , it is Mr Delors 's Commission that is responsible and you are penalizing Mr Santer 's Commission .
That argument disregards the principle of continuity inherent in any authority .

It disregards the fact that , although Mr Delors 's Commission does indeed have a great deal to answer for , Mr Santer 's Commission has covered that up , while pursuing precisely the same irresponsible policy regarding gelatin and transgenic products : the same casual attitude to scientific data , the same structural permeability to pressure exerted on the Commission by lobbyists , the same indifference to public health .
The same lack of transparency , the same obstructiveness : Parliament 's Committee of Inquiry had the utmost difficulty in obtaining the basic data it needed , especially from the Agriculture Commissioner , Mr Fischler .
So , even leaving aside the matter of human responsibility , it is the institutional mechanism that is at fault , and it is that mechanism that must be totally changed if confidence is to be restored .
I voted in favour of censure because I didn 't want the lessons of this major crisis to be wasted - I wanted the Intergovernmental Conference to feel the full effects of the mad cow crisis .
The BSE story has demonstrated that , when the appointed authority usurps the function of the elected political representatives , when the Commission wields supreme political responsibility in a particular area , it is not effectively protecting the fundamental interests of the European public but is acting as the agent of special interests .
We cannot , then , rely upon a body that functions in that way or delegate to it the exercise of whole areas of our own sovereignty .
I voted in favour of censure because if , in such a clear-cut case , the European Parliament fails to accept its responsibilities with regard to the Commission and abandons the attempt to control the Commissions 's activities rigorously , it no longer has any reasons to exist .
If it becomes the function of the European Parliament to protect its own - the European Socialist Party protecting Mr Delors , the European People 's Party protecting Mr Santer , this party protecting that Commissioner - and if , at any rate , its function is not to protect public health in Europe , then the fact is that we are operating within a system of connivance rather than democratic control , an oligarchic and ideological system where the Commission is taboo , above censure , whatever it does .
In a system like that , anything can happen .
I voted in favour of censure because the lesson that Mr Santer seems to want to learn from the crisis is to use is as a justification for another institutional power play : the generalized application of the codecision procedure , extending it to include the Common Agricultural Policy .
This panic-stricken advance is scandalous and unacceptable .
The time has come to stamp on the brake - which is up to the IGC - and halt this perverse mechanism which the Council , out of weakness , is allowing to develop ; a mechanism whereby every crisis , every failure by the supranational bodies serves as a pretext for the seizure of additional powers and resources .
So the Commission has failed in its duty ?
Well , we 'd better give it greater powers and additional officials ....
It is time for the Council to get a grip on itself and comply fully with its political responsibilities , preventing any other administrative body from taking its decisions for it .
The principle of subsidiarity , too , needs to be revived : each government must be able to take its own steps to protect those who elected it , imposing higher levels of protection than those laid down by the European Union and establishing its own control mechanisms in such important areas as health safety .
This is the only way for the European Institutions to recover any credibility now that they have been so severely weakened by the devastating revelations of the European Parliament 's Committee of Inquiry .
The fact that the motion of censure was tabled by a large number of Members from all parts of the political spectrum and all parts of Europe shows a growing awareness that the European institutions are in need of radical reform .
If Europe is to be saved , we must as a matter of urgency put a stop to the malfunctionings of the Community machine , to the proliferation of irresponsibility .
The Commission must be put in its place , and the Council must fully accept its political responsibilities : it is now a matter for the IGC to take concrete steps to reflect these essential lessons of the mad cow disease crisis .
The European Union is the hard core of world democracy , and as such it has certain duties , particularly when it comes to setting an example .
Nothing can exonerate us from those duties : not the general esteem we feel for the members of the present Commission , not the concern we might feel not to obstruct the requests by any particular State currently under consideration in Brussels .
The question that confronts us is how democratic control is to be exercised within the Union .
Public opinion today is sceptical or lukewarm regarding the prospects for continuing progress towards European integration .
Too often , our citizens feel remote from the decisions being taken in their name - in their interest , as we tell them .
They can clearly see the Commission 's dual power : the power to propose and the power to act .
But how that power is controlled is much less clear to them .
They can only feel consternation as they are bombarded with information on the proven failings of governments and the stratagems adopted in certain quarters - by the British Government and European officials - to conceal the truth or delay its exposure , and so protect national or private interests in a field as vital - literally vital - as human health .
These irregularities have been taking place over a period of several years , and this House cannot settle for undertakings and promises to do better .
A strong signal must be sent out to all those who may be disappointed and tempted to abandon the high hopes that swept this continent in the aftermath of the terrible Second World War .
By voting for the censure motion we are casting a vote of confidence in Europe 's institutions and declaring our complete awareness of Parliament 's role as the protector of the citizens ' rights and freedoms .
I abstained in the vote on the motion of censure against the Commission given the findings of the BSE Committee of Inquiry , because :
to vote for would be committing a half-injustice turning the present Commission into a scapegoat for malfunctionings which occurred before they took office and for which , apart from the Commission , others are responsible , namely the Council ; -voting against would be boosting a Commission which , while continuing to give signs of a glaring lack of leadership and a resulting overall loss of strategic direction ( already foreseeable when it was invested ) , but above all an excessively political understanding of subjects of general interest to the citizen , such as public health , really ought to be censured , and if it does not mend its ways , punished.The truth is that there really is a ' lack of Europe ' in the field of public health just as there are generally speaking in the fields of the third pillar which more directly concern the citizen .
With a few individual exceptions of honour this Commission is undoubtedly responsible because it has failed to focus on a situation which could easily become explosive and even uncontrollable .
If it were voted for , however , the motion of censure would be a ' red card ' .
I think that given that we are now in the early stages of the Intergovernmental Conference , it is better to show a ' yellow card ' in the shape of a joint resolution , which was adopted yesterday , and with which I agree .
Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the topical and urgent debate on subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0058 / 97 by Mr Bertens and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on the situation in the Great Lakes region ; -B4-0076 / 97 by Mrs Sauquillo Pérez del Arco and Mr Pons Grau , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the murder of development aid workers in Rwanda ; -B4-0092 / 97 by Mr Pasty and others , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on the situation in eastern Zaire ; -B4-0101 / 97 by Mr Hory , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the situation in eastern Zaire ; -B4-0114 / 97 by Mr Fernández Martín and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation in the Great Lakes region ; -B4-0116 / 97 by Mr Carnero González and Mr Pettinari , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the situation in the Great Lakes region , especially in eastern Zaire ; -B4-0129 / 97 by Mrs Aelvoet and Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the Great Lakes region .
Madam President , this is not the first time we have discussed the appalling situation that exists in Zaire , Rwanda and Burundi .
Once again , that region has fallen a prey to violence , bringing tragedy to thousands of civilians , refugees and displaced persons .
In this situation , I should like to follow the example of Mr Bertens - even if we didn 't sign the same motion - and express the concern felt by the entire Socialist Group .
And its regret , too , at seeing that neither the European Union nor great powers like the United States have really got to grips with the problem by launching sustained diplomatic initiatives and deploying a multinational force with a mission not to wage war but to protect civilians and try to support moves towards peace .
Today , the situation is deteriorating , but we can also see where the responsibility lies : with the governments concerned , admittedly , but also with those Europeans who become involved in that region and supply their ' know-how ' and their ' technology ' .
I have to say that it is really nothing to be proud of to see mercenaries operating in that region .
So what do we suggest ?
Obviously , that everything possible should be done to obtain a cease-fire within the framework of a regional conference for peace , security and stability in the region , which could be held under the aegises of the UN and the OAU .
But if holding such a conference requires making use of means other than mere diplomatic initiatives , I believe that is a necessity to which we must face up .
We call upon the Council to adopt a joint action programme which would enable it to act in other ways than by adopting resolutions .
We call upon not only the European Union ministers but also the United Nations to support Mrs Bonino 's initiative , so that full accounts should be available , enabling a way to be found of solving this refugee crisis in eastern Zaire .
We have seen Mrs Bonino on television , clearly showing her emotion and also her anger at seeing children , women and old people suffering the effects of this situation .
There need to be humanitarian aid channels , if indeed from the political standpoint , we are at present unable to achieve any result .
Finally , we believe that the situation in the region can only be normalized if , during this conference , all the problems are tackled .
There is the problem of the inviolability of frontiers , but there is also the problem of democracy and respect for human rights .
Democracy in Zaire !
Many people believed that President Mobutu , Mobutu the dictator , might work in favour of stability in the region .
We can see how wrong that is .
He too bears responsibility for the present chaos , and we can only hope that everything possible will be done to open the way to democracy in that country , as the only means of bringing peace .
And there must be justice for Rwanda , too , justice for all .
I believe that a great deal needs to be done before reconciliation can be achieved , but once people are conscious of living under the rule of law , conscious that they can return to their homes unmolested , the chances of achieving that reconciliation will perhaps be better than they are at present .
That is the message we want to give to the Commission , which is represented here , and to the Council , which is not .
We call , as a matter of urgency , for very strong action to be taken .
Madam President , the heart of Africa is trembling and quivering with violence , violence that claims more victims , shifts national frontiers and threatens countries with disintegration .
Such a country is Zaire , the nucleus of the African continent .
Old colonial links with Europe have long since stopped being any guarantee .
On the contrary , it is precisely arms supplies from Europe that have prevented the people from participating in power in those countries and so helped to create this chaos .
At last there is a wise African leader who realises that the disintegration of Africa will mercilessly drag the rest of the continent down with it .
Mr President , let the Union use this debate to support this wise African leader in his appeals , to support him in every possible way , to stop arms supplies , to withdraw the mercenaries , for it seems as if the phenomenon of unemployment has now turned into one of mercenaries in Africa , not just Zaire , but also Angola , Chad , everywhere .
Withdraw the mercenaries , set up humanitarian corridors with a military and UN guarantee , call on the new secretary-general , Kofi Annan , to protect the refugees for that is the job of the UN .
Madam President , as the author of the motion for a resolution tabled by the Group of the European Radical Alliance on this crisis in the Great Lakes region , I should like to explain why I did not feel I should call upon my group to endorse the compromise reached by the other groups .
I had two reasons .
The first was that I felt the degree of urgency had been underestimated - not only the urgency of humanitarian aid to the Rwandan refugees in Zaire and the displaced Zairean civilians but also the urgency of the aid to be provided to the Rwandan authorities to enable them to accept a million refugees who are now returning to their country , and those who want to return there .
This really is a matter of urgency .
Nor did I see , as far as our urgent procedure is concerned , what value there was in emphasizing our commitment to the territorial integrity of Zaire .
It may well be an important matter , but I do not feel that it is worthy of an urgent resolution , and I fear that this step may be interpreted by the protagonists in the crisis as a declaration of support for the Kinshasa regime , a declaration which seems to me inappropriate .
That is why , when the time comes , I shall also be opposing the amendment proposed to us by our friends in the Liberal Group on the subject of a military intervention force , because I fear that , having regard to the present situation in eastern Zaire , any form of military intervention - even designed to ensure safe passage for humanitarian aid - may seem to be a territorial statement in a conflict which primarily concerns the Zaireans .
I hope , therefore , that the Security Council 's resolution , especially through its proposal for a regional conference , will make it possible to find a lasting peaceful solution to benefit the entire Great Lakes region .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen . Seldom has a debate been held in the European Parliament in such dramatic circumstances as is the case today .
Commissioner Bonino said on her return from Zaire that she was returning from hell and that the situation in Eastern Zaire was an intolerable scandal .
Not to mention the never ending executions in Burundi .
The most recent information indicates that the refugees in Zaire are not so much trying to escape the war but to escape wide-scale slaughter which threatens not only the indigenous population but also refugees , first and foremost women and children .
Recent history in Central Africa was dreadful but what is happening there today is no less so , and what makes events there even more scandalous is the incomprehensible attitude of the United Nations .
Do I have to remind you that last December it was decided to set up an international intervention force which was disbanded a week later , on the pretext that the Rwandan refugees had returned home , whereas it is now quite clear that there are still several hundreds of thousands holed up in the woods of Zaire .
Emma Bonino said she met people who were officially dead .
And what about the camp where there are more than 5 , 000 children without any parents ?
They are dying like flies , and who cares about them ?
The credibility of the United Nations is really at stake .
Why was the information that the United States is believed to have held not passed on ?
Masses of modern weapons are being used in the battles between so-called rebels and the remains of the Zaire military .
Where do these weapons come from ?
Why is nothing done to act on rumours ?
Why do nothing to dispel the rumours that Western powers are somehow involved in the invasion in Zaire ?
Why can we now read reports which state that the spoils to be gained in Zaire are ' enormous ' ?
To quote verbatim from a document : ' the riches to be shared from Zaire are enormous ' .
And who understands anything any more of Mrs Ogata 's stance ?
Did we not hear the rebel leader Kabila say that the new Berlin conference should be convened ?
Do those who short-sightedly support something like that realise that that treatment of Africa is grist to the mill of nationalism in the world and of demanding changes to frontiers or countries on the basis of ethnic background ?
Right from the beginning this Parliament unanimously said that all military operations in Kivu had to stop .
It goes without saying that the refugees must be able to return home , that they should do so or find shelter somewhere else , but be able to do so without any pressure .
And a tribunal worthy of the name should be able to fulfil its task .
The United Nations must realise that the equivocal policy of last December seriously detracts from their power .
If the weapons fall silent , the international conference for the countries of the Great Lakes regions must be held .
Or do people want to hide the truth here as well ?
A European policy on Africa makes no sense if we are unable to convene this kind of conference .
Let this House at last raise its voice so that it can be heard by the whole world .
This Parliament condemns imperialism , in Africa as elsewhere .
It upholds peace , development , tolerance and the protection of human rights .
It is now time to see if we mean it seriously .
Madam President , there is now an obvious lack of political and humanitarian interest in what is happening in the Great Lakes region .
Hundreds of thousands of refugees and displaced persons are now at the mercy of geo-political strategies originating from Washington and Paris which are blocking any relief activities in the region .
The USA is supporting Tutsi military regimes that are being maintained and developed on the basis of balances determined by their mono-ethnic armies and the commercial traffic these armies control .
Europe and France , on the other hand , are giving their support to the dictator Mobutu , who is actually the cause of so many disasters in the region .
Caught in the middle are millions of innocent , starving Africans who are paying a totally unacceptable price for our crazy foreign policies .
It almost seems as though the USA has opted to foster chaos and use those in power in the region to impose its policy , instead of doing what ought to have been done , which is to promote a multinational buffer force that might have enabled the Great Lakes region to move towards the future democratic legitimization of those regimes , the international conference for a regional solution and the economic reconstruction and institutional reform of Rwanda , Burundi and Zaire .
But all of this is happening partly because of the unacceptable divisions between the Member States of the European Union , whose very credibility is at stake in this crisis .
I am referring to the Council of 20 January - noncommitted and unproductive Council which says a great deal about Europe 's inability and unwillingness to intervene in the area .
This is a decision that shocks us and which we utterly reject as a dark stain on the tradition of European solidarity that makes us , even without striking a blow , a party to the death of thousands of people every week .
The resolution on which we shall be voting today and which my group supports sounds this cry of alarm and proposes a set of measures that we trust will be ratified by this Parliament .
Madam President , the continuing civil war in eastern Zaire will plunge the population even deeper into their appalling suffering .
It is always the civilian population that bears the impact of such suffering - the women , the children , the old men , the young .
The latest news tells us that not only has the government of Zaire been hiring mercenaries , but that there has been widespread rape of women and girls .
We should help to find a political solution .
What form might that solution take ?
We must support the UN 's initiatives .
The latest initiative by Nelson Mandela makes sense ; he says that a solution lies in Africa itself , and that we should support it with technological and financial resources .
There is a need for an action plan for humanitarian aid for southern Africa .
The mercenaries must be pulled out .
The first thing we can do to help is to look at the situation in our own countries .
Here , close by , we have the Foreign Legion .
That is an example of a mercenary force which is being sent out there , isn 't it ?
We must ensure that such things no longer happen , that we support the War Crimes Tribunal for Rwanda , and that this has a deterrent effect .
Nor should we abandon our development policy .
If we have budget cuts here , the money for civilian development will be lacking .
And , finally : an immediate stop must be put to such things as weapons coming from Germany and , as rumour has it , the police equipment for a dictator like Mobutu being provided by German political institutes .
That is a major contribution to peace .
Madam President , if I may I should like to clear up that last point immediately .
Mr Telkämper refers to rumour .
We should not stoop to peddle rumours in this chamber .
If an attempt is made , in a country where such tragic events are taking place , to help with the training of security forces so that they can develop into civilian police forces , without the institutes being responsible for arming them , then I believe that , too , represents a contribution to achieving the objectives this House would like to see achieved .
But now for the subject of today 's motion . The catalogue of disasters at this time in the part-session has become almost a matter of routine .
Time after time , too , we hear that the action taken has produced no effect .
So I regard it as an absolute necessity to come up with a different kind of action .
If the problem of the overcrowded refugee camps cannot be solved , if it is impossible to achieve what Mrs Ogata has called for - the disarming of the militia in the camps - then the question arises of whether we should not direct our efforts towards decentralizing those camps , making it impossible for so many militia men to find concealment among 200 , 000 refugees , and for bandits to pursue their flourishing arms trade there .
We constantly hear - it happened again in this presidency 's paper - words like ' concerned ' , ' demands ' , ' condemns ' .
Those words have not solved any problems yet .
Europe , too , must finally get its act together and send troops , a military force to safeguard humanitarian rights .
And when we come to debate Mr Fassa 's report in due course , we shall find that same demand expressed by the Committee on Development . And I hope that this approach will enable us to enforce the law , instead of just demanding it .
Madam President , the European public has reacted with indignation to two catastrophes : the one which has taken place in the Great Lakes and - another political catastrophe - the fact that the European Union has been incapable of intervening to put an end to the destruction of human life taking place in the Great Lakes .
There are even countries like Spain which have paid with the lives of three aid workers for the presence of civilians and the absence of European Union policy in that part of Africa .
There is indignation about what is happening and the lack of intervention , but there is also indignation about the known causes , the conflict over spurious strategies and indeed the continuing de facto support of dictators like Mobutu Sese Seko .
We hope the recently adopted United Nations Security Council resolution will operate in favour of a political solution to the situation and that the conference mentioned in our resolution will finally be called , which also requires the European Union to engage in joint action as demanded in the text .
Madam President , the Commission shares the deep anxiety - the dread , perhaps I should say - of this House about the situation in the Great Lakes .
It understands the concern of the European Parliament to increase awareness of this subject within the international community .
You are doing something that needs to be done .
The escalation of this violence could further exacerbate the political problems and widen the scope of the humanitarian crisis in that region .
On behalf of the European Union , the Council presidency has just made a declaration on Zaire , inviting the warring factions to negotiate an immediate ceasefire and facilitate access for the humanitarian organizations to enable them to bring aid to the distressed populations .
In view of the gravity of the humanitarian situation in Zaire , Mrs Bonino undertook a mission from 30 January to 2 February with a view to facilitating access for humanitarian aid in the east of the country .
As I understand it from listening to your speeches just now , this was indeed one of your main concerns .
I should also remind you that an appeal was launched on the occasion of Mrs Bonino 's trip and does seem to me , in fact , to have created international awareness of the problem .
Regarding humanitarian aid work , Mrs Bonino made a point of stressing how its implementation was being baulked at present by security problems and administrative difficulties .
That was why my colleague Emma Bonino made representations to the government calling for the international human rights conventions to be respected .
The protection of humanitarian organizations in the countries where they operate is a matter to which the Commission pays the closest attention .
Let me remind you of the recent murders , including the killings of representatives of these humanitarian organizations , especially in Rwanda .
Those murders have had a very powerful and easily understandable impact on the personnel of the humanitarian agencies , many of which have reduced their programmes or are even thinking of withdrawing .
Although the immediate problem today is to find a way of resolving the deteriorating situation in Zaire and Burundi , and although you have rightly emphasized your concerns about this , referring to the problem of the arms traffic and other problems associated with the impossibility of establishing humanitarian aid channels for the present , the ultimate objective of the European Union 's efforts must be to find a global solution .
It is up to the international community to bring the warring factions to the negotiating table and find answers that will enable us to resolve this crisis .
The purpose of humanitarian aid is not to resolve the conflict .
Unfortunately , the reason why humanitarian aid is needed is that there is no solution to such conflicts .
That is why the Commission welcomes the recent resolution by the United Nations Security council on 18 February emphasizing the urgent need to protect refugees and displaced persons and to make it easier for humanitarian aid to reach the victims .
I can assure you that the Commission will be unsparing in its efforts to ensure that that resolution is translated into action .
Madam President , I should like to raise a point of order pursuant to Rule 108 .
Since Mrs Günther reacted to what I said , I should once again like to emphasize expressly that I did not imply that the Hans Seidel Institute was involved in the training of the police force of the dictator Mobutu or helping to arm that police force .
Mr Telkämper , that was more like a declaration than a point of order !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0082 / 97 by Mr Bertens and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on the crisis in Albania ; -B4-0089 / 97 by Mr Pasty and others , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on the situation in Albania ; -B4-0093 / 97 by Mr Dupuis and Mr Hory , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the situation in Albania ; -B4-0105 / 97 by Mr Roubatis and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Albania ; -B4-0113 / 97 by Mrs Pack and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on Albania ; -B4-0126 / 97 By Mr Alavanos and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the situation in Albania ; -B4-0138 / 97 by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the situation in Albania .
Madam President , Commissioner , the situation in Albania is highly explosive .
The dreams of making a fortune of a large part of the population have been shattered and the hard reality of daily life in Albania is making the people extremely bitter .
It is not of course up to the Union to help out the Albanian people financially when their gambling goes wrong .
But we do have to call on the Albanian government to act properly in this situation .
Repression , violence , arresting the opposition , gagging the press is not the way to end the unrest .
That is like a red rag to a bull .
The Commission and Council should call on the government of Mr Berisha to abandon their repressive methods and make a fair , payable and responsible gesture to the duped people of the country .
The government must try in a dialogue with the opposition to find a solution to the current economic and political crisis .
Further democratisation and liberalisation are needed to haul Albania out of the mire .
The Union must be prepared to offer its help here .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am extremely concerned about the situation in Albania , but I am even more concerned about the consequences it might have and about the European Union 's response at a time of such terrible difficulty , which could have serious implications for the country 's future economic development .
I do not want to see anyone taking advantage of this to aggravate an already difficult and delicate situation .
As members of the European Union , we have a moral and civil duty to give Albania as much help as we can to prevent total destabilization of the country and region .
We need to act as carefully and correctly as we have done in the past , and I recall that we sent observers to follow the most recent elections in 1996 , who were able to verify the honesty and correctness of those elections .
The Commission should , within the framework of its programmes , provide technical assistance for the reform of the financial and banking sectors , since , as a result of the collapse of the pyramid investment schemes , Albania is now facing a deep financial and economic crisis .
And this is undoubtedly a personal disaster for a large part of the population in Albania .
Finally , we need to support President Berisha in his calls for law and order , while deploring and condemning the violence of the suppression that has left four people dead and hundreds injured ; and we need to urge the Albanian authorities to conduct , as soon as possible , an investigation to identify and condemn those responsible for the misappropriations that have led to the ruin of thousands of small savers .
And lastly , we need to support Albania 's political leaders , of both the majority and the opposition , in their attempts to restore calm in a population that is living through a very dark moment .
Madam President , Albania has a population of three million , equivalent to one of the smaller regions of the Union .
Here again , we can see that the Union , the Commission and the Member States , too , especially some States such as Italy , have been working on numerous projects but have achieved little .
A great deal of money has been spent , as usual , but little attention has been paid to an essential feature of the rules of the game - the establishment of certain guarantees and systems to ensure that the irregularities that have taken place are not repeated .
We know all about these pyramid saving schemes . We have seen them before in Romania .
Commissioner van den Broek told us that the Commission had been abreast of affairs for many months and that , despite the scale of the financial resources released for Albania over the last five or six years , the Commission was unable -which I find incredible - to put a stop to this business before it exploded .
That is absolutely staggering !
I think it really is high time for the European Union to adopt a foreign policy worthy of the name . Otherwise , we shall go on spending money , it will cost us a great deal , and we shall not even achieve a minimal result - a minimum of development in these countries .
Madam President , a few years ago I visited Albania , just after it had become independent .
It was the most depressing experience of my life .
The depression was caused not by the poverty - I had been to a lot poorer countries in my time - but by the look of shock and hopelessness on the faces of the local inhabitants .
Indeed , going to poor countries , one often sees extensive economic activity on a small scale .
In Albania there was nothing .
People were stunned and had no idea how to respond to the changes .
I became aware then of the enormous gulf that lies between our line of thinking and their line of thinking .
We talk very glibly about democracy and market economy without realizing that both these things require a major effort and , in fact , are part and parcel of our upbringing .
It is very difficult to introduce these into an area which has never known democracy and never really known a market economy .
It was always obvious that Albania would encounter serious problems and , of course , this is exactly what has happened .
We should not be too surprised at the pyramid schemes because they are basically get-rich schemes .
One of the messages that we have been giving to these countries is that if you embrace capitalism you get rich very quickly .
Well , the reality of capitalism is that a lot more people get poor very quickly and most of us trudge along in the middle , having to work very hard to keep our heads above water .
That is an important lesson to be learned .
Another important lesson to be learned is that democracy is not simply about going to the ballot box to elect a government that then behaves like every other government before it .
Democracy is about a proper interplay between the forces of any particular society .
So in this resolution on Albania we have sought to condemn - as we should condemn - those who have tried to manipulate this situation for their own reward .
We are concerned about the reports of the involvement of international crime and gangsters in these get-rich schemes and we have condemned , of course , the action of the government .
Having condemned , what we have to do is look at how we can improve the situation .
What we have sought to do in this resolution is to draw attention to the need for the EU to provide specialized assistance , particularly for financial institutions and the building of financial institutions .
Let us not forget that the history of capitalism in the United Kingdom is strewn with get-rich schemes which have collapsed and banks which have collapsed - this is nothing new .
We have to use our experience and work closely with the Albanian people and their government to try to build proper financial institutions which will open up their economy and develop prosperity .
On the one hand , we should condemn , on the other hand , let us have a look at how we can help them more effectively .
It has been said that Albania is crucial to the region , if we lose control of Albania , we lose control of the region .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I must thank Mr Titley for his very wise remarks , and I am glad that he has said what he has , because I see it the same way that he does .
Unfortunately , our motion is not quite as balanced as what Mr Titley has said and what I am going to say , but that 's what happens , unfortunately , with motions .
Vast numbers of Albanian citizens handed over their savings to confidence tricksters who promised them incredible profits .
Infected with gold fever , people were incapable of attaching any credence to timely warnings - the supposed prospect of fabulous wealth simply befuddled their senses .
They were easy prey , precisely because they had no experience whatever of such hideous excesses of capitalism .
Today , confronted with the grim reality , they are naturally trying to place the blame not on themselves but on the government .
It may well be that the government failed to warn them early enough , but without rock-solid evidence and in view of the euphoria of the investors , the job may simply have been too difficult for them .
When they did broadcast warnings on television in September 1996 , they were not believed .
But the misfortunes of the population and the problems the Albanian government faces as a result are too great to be abused for selfish ends .
Unfortunately , the opposition is doing just that , criminally exploiting the unrest for party political purposes .
Hooliganism directed against public buildings and the police does lasting damage to public order , and must be stopped .
The fact that there were some cases where this was done without the appropriate sense of proportion is very regrettable .
People were killed , and that is terrible .
Obviously , those responsible must be called to account .
How many Members took note of the moderation and democratic maturity with which the Albanian parliament conducted the debate on the proposed declaration of a state of emergency , and then eventually rejected it ?
All of them were more or less blinded , the opposition politicians no less than some members of the government .
But now everyone should be trying to pick up the pieces as quickly as possible and refraining from untenable accusations or suspicions .
The government has begun to pay back the small amount of money retrieved , and will continue to do so .
The Committee of Inquiry must clarify the background , and the EU Commission should help to reform the finance and banking sectors and provide strong support to the government as it works to build the sound and credible structures of a market economy .
So , please , let us not confuse cause and effect , and let us not make party political capital out of these matters .
Our thoughts must be turned to the misery suffered by the Albanian people , and to the urgent matter of enlightenment .
Madam President , in just one minute all I can do is ask the Commissioner two things .
Commissioner , I will not ask you for your opinion about the political situation , human rights , the rule of law , or any of those ardent issues in Albania .
Can you give us the Commission 's estimate of the losses brought about by the so-termed pyramid systems ?
I hear talk of two billion dollars . Far above the gross national income of the country itself .
The magnitude of those losses , Mr Commissioner , shows that this was not accidental , as some here are saying , nor any oversight .
A system was in play .
Eight banks were involved , four of which have declared bankruptcy , and we are waiting for the others to do so as well .
A new economic situation is arising .
And the second question is : with what image , with what perspective is the Commission cooperating with Albania ?
What advice is it giving that country ?
Towards what prospect is it urging Albania ?
Because there are some who have confused capitalism with gambling and public fraud , and nothing else .
Madam President , I , too , should like briefly to express deep concern at the deterioration of the political situation in Albania that has been triggered by the collapse of the pyramid investment schemes , and also at the heavy-handed response of the Albanian Government and police .
The incidents that have occurred should somehow have been avoided and every effort should have been made , in particular , to prevent situations in which people died .
The Albanian Government has proved itself totally incapable of responding to the accusation of collusion with the companies that embezzled investment funds .
I cannot believe that Berisha and his government were unaware of what was happening , that is , massive fraud at the expense of the Albanian people .
I therefore believe that , in pointing to the dangers of the presence of international criminal organizations , we should also point out that the Albanian Government needs to conduct a full and transparent investigation and , at the same time , launch a dialogue with all the opposition parties , for , without dialogue , it will be impossible to achieve the political stability that is so vital now .
The European Union must provide the Albanian Government with the assistance it needs to enable it to restructure the current savings system and introduce appropriate legislative measures to tackle this emergency situation .
Madam President , when the situation in a small , troubled country , Albania , is dramatic , when that country is part of a wider volatile area , when the economic ruin of thousands of small savers threatens to destabilize the newly emergent democracy , when there are serious suspicions of Mafia involvement , I believe our reaction should be immediate and realistic , and not confined to wishful thinking about Jeremiads or ideologically tinted advice .
The first requirement is to offer technical aid capable of restoring the discredited banking system .
But if even that is to be effective , it must go together with generous economic support .
At a time when we are all talking about the globalization of the economy , it is tragic that a small country in a sensitive area of Europe should be allowed to founder economically and politically because of unscrupulous profiteers and incapable governors .
Madam President , the Commission naturally shares the deep concern of this House at the serious social unrest that has recently broken out in Albania as a result of the collapse of these pyramid saving schemes .
Mr Papayannakis has asked what the scale of this calamity was .
According to studies by the International Monetary Fund , very substantial .
They are talking about 30 % of GDP , one billion dollars .
So this is indeed a major crisis , which is why we are concerned , though I can tell Mr Tamino that we are also concerned at the violence of the social unrest to which this protest has given way .
Mrs Baldi and Mr Dupuis have asked what the European Union is doing and why it has taken no action ?
The problem is that Albania , having regard to its past history , has no adequate , or sufficiently sophisticated , legislative and regulatory framework to govern its financial and banking systems .
That is why , since 1992 , the PHARE programme has been granting substantial aid to Albania - aid which does indeed extend to the reform of the banking system and , especially , the privatization of a number of state-owned banks .
The situation subsequently improved , and Albania enjoyed a considerable degree of economic success , particularly by complying with the ideas of the International Monetary Fund .
The problem is that a substantial and rapid deterioration took place in 1996 , leading the Commission , from the end of October last year , to offer Albania technical assistance in solving the legal problems which were being and are being caused by the control of these so-called pyramid investment funds .
But the Albanian authorities refused the Commission 's offer .
I can tell Mr Titley and Mr Lambrias that we are trying to help the Albanians .
That was why the Commission sent a mission to Tirana on 5 and 6 February - as recently as that - to prepare the PHARE operational programme for 1997 .
On that occasion , we were able to assess the impact of the crisis and come up with new aid proposals .
However , as things stand , I am sorry to say that the Albanian authorities are still preferring to find their own solution to the problems created by these saving schemes .
The Commission is sorry that the Albanian Government has rejected its proposal .
This refusal is worrying - I should make this clear - because three or four so-called pyramid companies do still exist and their future is uncertain , to say the least .
I gather that the offers of assistance made by the International Monetary Fund and by the United States were also rejected by the Albanian Government .
In view of this , and in these circumstances , with the prospect of a further deterioration in the situation , the Commission has asked the Council presidency to raise the matter at the ' General Affairs ' council next Monday , 24 February .
The Commission is suggesting that the Union should first invite all the parties concerned to show restraint and refrain from violence .
The Commission further believes that it would be as well to remind the Albanian authorities that resorting to undemocratic ways of resolving the crisis could have profound repercussions on the quality of current relations between the Union and Albania , and especially on the negotiation of a new agreement between the Union and Albania .
In other words , if we want to achieve any results in this matter we must combine humanity with firmness .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
53rd session of the UN Human Rights Commission -B4-0063 / 97 by Mr Bertens and Mrs Larive , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on China and the United Nations Human Rights Commission ; -B4-0077 / 97 by Mr Barros Moura and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the 53rd session of the UN Human Rights Commission ; -B4-0091 / 97 by Mr Pasty and others , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on the 53rd session of the UN Human Rights Commission ; -B4-0094 / 97 by Mr Dupuis and Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the resolution on China / Tibet in the UN Human Rights Commission and on the standpoint of the UN Member States ; -B4-0111 / 97 by Mrs Lenz and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the 53rd session of the UN Human Rights Commission ; -B4-0123 / 97 by Mr Carnero González and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left on human rights - Geneva ; -B4-0142 / 97 by Mrs Müller and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the 53rd session of the UN Human Rights Commission ; -B4-0062 / 97 by Mr Cars and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on the abolition of the death penalty ; -B4-0095 / 97 by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the most frequent cases in many countries throughout the world in which the death penalty is imposed ; -B4-0124 / 97 by Mr Carnero González and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the UN Human Rights Commission and on the abolition of the death penalty ; -B4-0134 / 97 by Mrs Aglietta and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the death penalty ; -B4-0098 / 97 by Mr Dupuis and Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the grave human rights violations in western Turkestan ( Xinjian ) ;
Iran -B4-0059 / 97 by Mr Cars , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on Iran ; -B4-0075 / 97 by Mrs García Arias and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on Iran ; -B4-0108 / 97 by Mrs Lenz and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the Iranian writer and publisher Faraj Sarkouhi ; -B4-0119 / 97 by Mr Vinci and Mr Pettinari , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on human rights in Iran ; -B4-0143 / 97 by Mrs Roth and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the disappearance of the Iranian publisher Faraj Sarkouhi , his brother Ismail Sarkouhi and his assistant Parvin Ardalan ;
Mordecai Vanunu -B4-0070 / 97 by Mr Crampton and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the continuing solitary confinement of Mordecai Vanunu ; -B4-0144 / 97 by Mr Telkämper and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the continuing solitary confinement of Mordecai Vanunu ;
Chad -B4-0057 / 97 by Mrs André-Léonard and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on human rights violations in Chad ; -B4-0118 / 97 by Mr Pettinari , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on human rights violations in Chad ;
Indigenous peoples of Indonesia -B4-0065 / 97 by Mrs Pollack , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the violation of the rights of indigenous peoples and the clearing of tropical forests on the Indonesian island of Yamdena ; -B4-0130 / 97 by Mrs Hautala and Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the violation of the rights of indigenous peoples and the clearing of tropical forests on the Indonesian island of Yamdena .
Madam President , The Union must speak out strongly at the coming meeting of the human rights commission in Geneva .
It must be properly prepared to reach a common position at the UN Commission on Human Rights .
The preparation appears to be better than last year , but there is still room for improvement .
Last year our position was coordinated in Geneva and this time the coordination is taking place three weeks earlier in Brussels .
But I still think it regrettable that not more time is devoted to it .
Better preparation increases our chance of successfully influencing the UN Commission .
Today this House must get it clearly across to the Council that China , Turkey , Burma and East Timor are part of the list of priorities .
Next week 's Council meeting will take the decision .
I hope that the President-in-Office of Council will come out clearly on the universality of human rights , for example , which are also to be applied to China .
The new , and perhaps also the old , Chinese leaders must be condemned , if necessary without fear in the UN context , for the deterioration in human rights in their country ; it is clear everywhere that the situation has not improved .
The Council must speak out loudly in Geneva in favour of an international coalition without any consideration of possible economic retaliation on the part of the Chinese .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am going to try to use my 60 seconds to say something sensible on the subject of what this Human Rights Commission and its 53rd session are about .
Mr Ferber , talking rubbish is a human right too , so we can forgive your heckling !
It is difficult to make a selection among so many different topics when we come to debate this 53rd session .
As Parliament 's rapporteur on the subject of the sexual abuse and exploitation of children , I should like to ask those representatives of the Council and the Member States , and of our Parliament , who are going to attend this conference in Geneva to make this question a central point of debate , alongside the traditional , political debates that are held there : what has gone wrong in a society which has become brutalized to the extent reflected in what we now know of the sexual abuse and exploitation of children ?
In particular , I call upon the European nations to reflect that we must pay the most particular attention to this phenomenon in our own countries and we must eliminate its causes and its effects if we , as Europeans attending such a conference , are to have long-term credibility when we point the finger at human rights violations outside Europe .
So I ask those travelling to Geneva to consider this subject especially carefully .
Madam President , the motion for a resolution lists some ten countries , but the most important one for me is China .
It is the biggest country , the largest population , a growing market , attractive to Western investors , and no sign of movement in the human rights situation .
I mention the occupation of Tibet , the situation in Turkestan and Inner Mongolia , the lengthy prison sentences for dissidents , including Wei Jingsheng .
This is the China whose successor to the late Deng Xiaoping must be persuaded that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights applies to the whole of this earth .
China - because very shortly Hong Kong will come under the rule of Peking and the first signs of oppressive machinery are already visible there .
China - because the opposition there is hoping for a slow but sure rise in the degree of tolerance and openness .
China is coming to the human rights conference in Geneva , a unique opportunity to get together with our colleagues from the American Congress who so recently sat on the platform to use our transatlantic relation in the pursuit of respecting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights which every dissident on this earth calls on - these are the values we want to see implemented .
China cannot be allowed to hide behind so-called Asian values , for these do not apply to this earth .
Madam President , I entirely agree with Mrs van Bladel .
I believe there are many good reasons for concentrating on China , and not because of the passing of the self-styled Great Architect who unfortunately forgot the fifth and most important modernization , as Wei Jingsheng put it : democracy .
There are 1 , 200 , 000 , 000 living in China outside the rule of democracy , and that applies more especially to millions of Tibetans , Mongols and Uighurs in eastern Turkestan .
I am very glad that this House , for the first time , is beginning to discuss them .
For these people , deprived as they are of democracy and liberty , it is an important and urgent matter for the European Union to confront the situation with firmness and not to do as it did last year when , for weeks on end , we witnessed delaying tactics on the part of the European Union - tactics which eventually resulted in a position that was not defended and on which no attempt was made to reach a consensus with the other Member States of the Commission on Human Rights .
This year we need a firm position .
I believe the signs are encouraging .
Mrs Albright has told us that the United States is prepared to support the same resolution as the European Union .
So we need to press on resolutely along those lines , and to put pressure on the European Union governments that are still resorting to passive resistance .
I think it is right to name the countries concerned : they are your own country of France , Commissioner de Silguy , and Italy .
The European Union must adopt a strong and unanimous position .
Only by doing so will we be able to escape from a mood of resignation in the face of the grand design being offered us by the Chinese leadership - development without democracy .
Unless Europe starts to put up a determined fight , that grand design will take a stronger and stronger grip , not just on China but also on many other countries throughout the world .
I believe the time has come to say so , loud and clear , and to take the necessary action .
The sessions of the UN Human Rights Commission in Geneva are , you might say , something else that comes round once a year .
But I believe that we in this House , more than most , should take them very seriously as a possible yardstick for worldwide respect for human rights .
Because this is a situation in which diplomats scrutinize the worldwide human rights situation while giving the most careful consideration to the interests of their own countries , that scrutiny carries a great deal of weight with the various states .
The European Parliament is more motivated by considerations of democratic policy , and so here too there are occasionally differences .
With the aid of the EU Commission - and I must contradict Mr Dupuis here , to some extent - the Council appears at such conferences as the co-ordinator of the Member States , and last year demonstrated a consistency which is astonishing for our Member States .
So we should like to pass on to the Commission and the Council the points that have emerged from past years ' work as being necessary .
Nothing much has changed - the problem countries are still the same .
The list is a long one .
This afternoon , some of those problem countries will be dealt with here .
Nor should the death of the reforming Chinese politician Deng prevent us from drawing attention to the constant human rights violations in that country , as indeed other Members have done , and that point should not be removed from the Geneva agenda .
The motion for a resolution calls for other things too , of course , things that we feel should really be taken to heart by the Human Rights Commission , such as the development of standards or conventions for impunity , or for the trial procedure for politically motivated crimes .
This is becoming a key question in more and more of the world 's countries as they make the transition from dictatorship to democracy .
Then there is the protection of children against sexual abuse and exploitation : I think that what Mr Schulz said applies in reverse as well , and that if we have , for once , achieved something good in our own countries we have the right to promulgate it elsewhere .
Majority opinion in this House favours the abolition of the death penalty , and we should always clearly emphasize that .
The questions relating to indigenous peoples , too , have become very important .
We therefore call upon the European Union and the Member States to treat human rights as a really central issue in the structuring of foreign policy and relations between peoples .
Madam President , I should like to call the Commissioner 's attention to a specific human-rights issue : the question of the death penalty .
It seems strange to have to raise the subject in this House on the threshold of the year 2000 ; and yet it is a human-rights issue that persists in many of the countries with which we have relations .
As the Commissioner knows , Europe has , over the past few centuries , developed a strong humanitarian culture and I wonder why so little is being done to convince our partners and third countries to abolish the death penalty or , at least , to introduce a moratorium that I hope would become definitive .
I believe the Geneva Conference could be an opportunity to reach at least this major objective , and I think it is right and important that the European Union should coordinate its Member States in this respect and exert pressure , actually at the Geneva Conference , to obtain the moratorium I should like to see .
I should just like to remind the House of three cases of particular interest to the Green Group .
In all these cases the European Parliament has adopted appropriate resolutions , and I should like to urge the Council most strongly to emphasize those resolutions in Geneva .
First , Colombia .
Following Parliament 's resolution of October 1996 , the consequences of which included the resignation of the Colombian Ambassador in Brussels , Mr Marulanda , the murders of dispossessed farmers and attacks on the human rights movement have actually increased .
This is an area in which the United Nations must now take action .
Secondly , Nigeria .
Wole Soyinka , the Nigerian Nobel laureate , was until yesterday a guest of Parliament .
He vehemently stated the case for an economic boycott , and especially an oil boycott , against General Abacha 's military regime .
This demand must be taken up by the UN commissions , because only the UN can impose this kind of international boycott .
Thirdly , Turkey .
The Turkish government , supported in some places by Europeans , has so far always been able to avoid condemnation by the UN Human Rights Commission .
But the human rights situation in Turkey has not improved by one iota .
The EU must finally abandon all its misguided diplomatic considerations and make it its primary concern to condemn these human rights violations in its own back yard , especially against the Kurdish people .
That is our request to the Council , and we call upon it to act as a matter of urgency .
Madam President , unfortunately we cannot totally prevent some of our citizens from committing crimes , even such serious crimes as murder .
But we can , quite rightly , demand that States do not legitimate such crime by themselves killing , that is executing their citizens .
The prime evidence for me that the European Union is based on humanitarian feeling and respect for life is that all Member States have abolished the death penalty .
Madam President , the European Parliament has also reason to be confident that all Member governments will be reminded of Parliament 's wishes in this resolution during the meeting with the UN Commission on Human Rights , and that they will demand a universal , all country , moratorium on execution .
Parliament should request the President of the Commission to give an account of the Member States handling of this matter .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on this rare occasion when you are not immersed in matters relating to the single currency but have found time to consider human rights , I should like to address you very specifically , as other honourable Members have already done , on the matter of the death penalty and the moratorium which we are asking the Member States to apply and which we should like the Commission to support at the next conference of the Commission on Human Rights , to be held in Geneva .
This is a very important subject .
On the eve of the third millennium , it is intolerable that the death penalty should still feature in the penal codes of most members of the international community .
The European Union should launch an initiative at the UN General Assembly in favour of an immediate moratorium , something that would make a great contribution to advancing the cause of human rights .
The idea is one of particular interest to certain Member States , including your own , Commissioner , if I am not mistaken .
I hope that the Commission , too , will be attentive to it .
Madam President , I can agree with a great deal of what Mrs van Bladel , Mr Dupois and Mrs Lenz have said about China .
At best , the events in China last night may herald a new era in the country .
The revolutionary old guard which was forced to struggle in tough conditions for self determination for China and against foreign influence and attempts to isolate the world 's largest country have now gone .
At best , and I know that many take a more pessimistic view , the new generation will be able to realise that no country can play a role of any importance in the year 2000 's globalised world if they do not totally respect human rights .
In my capacity as leader of the Chinese delegation I have had many contacts with the Chinese both with the government and those in opposition .
Many Chinese believe that we , here in the European Parliament are pursuing a particular campaign against China .
They have counted the number of resolutions adopted which criticise China .
I think it is important that we stress to China that we are not running a campaign against China , but a campaign for human rights .
There are very few countries on this earth that have not been criticised by us at some point in time ; even countries which are members of the European Union are criticised .
It is therefore a campaign for human rights directed at all those who do not respect them .
There are also a number of people in China who believe that we are not aware of the existence of other traditions and cannot accept such a thing .
They think that we want to force all sorts of European traditions and values onto them .
I cannot understand this at all .
Human rights are not a particular European invention .
Europeans do not have an awful lot to boast about historically in terms of human rights .
Human rights are a universal value .
European representatives must also stress that we are not trying to force European human rights onto them , but that we are trying to make everyone understand that universal human rights are part of modern society .
As the leader of the Chinese Delegation I have , of course , sent a diplomatic message of regret at the passing of Mr Deng , as the death of any person is a loss for someone .
In the same way , I must send a message of regret that human rights activists are still sitting in Chinese prisons , simply because they want to add a fifth modernisation to Mr Deng 's four modernisations .
Of course , opposition is as much a part of the present as the labour camps and the death penalty are a relic of the past .
Madam President , I want to draw the attention of the House in particular to paragraph 8 which calls for the adoption of the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples at the level of the UN Commission on Human Rights as agreed by all parties involved , including indigenous peoples .
This is a very important declaration that we are being asked to support .
Parliament has an honourable record in supporting the rights of the aboriginal peoples who can only too easily be forgotten because they have no states to protect them .
Often , even the right to the land they live on is challenged by the states that surround them .
We adopted , as a Parliament , a resolution in 1994 calling for the establishment of a delegation with the indigenous peoples .
This will be pursued this year .
This is very important indeed .
It will give a sign of encouragement to peoples whose survival is at risk .
When we talk about endangered animal species , we should certainly support them .
But there are many peoples , languages and cultural groups which are also facing grave threats .
So I urge you to support the entire resolution and , in particular , to give ringing endorsement to paragraph 8 .
I ask the Commission to take this forward with our support to the United Nations .
Mr President , The Iranian author Faraj Sarkouhi has been viciously attacked by the authorities in Iran .
His assistant Parvin Ardalan appears also to have been attacked .
This is a despicable act and we in the European Parliament wish to make our views known on this .
But it is the ' critical dialogue ' which our Member Governments are supposedly conducting with Iran which is even more amazing to us .
We in Parliament find it difficult to see that this has led to any positive concrete results .
If Iran does not soon show signs of increased respect for human rights and reconsider its attitude to torture , executions and conspiracies against the lives of non Iranian citizens , this critical dialogue must be reviewed and a new policy using different political means towards Iran must be put in place .
Mr President , despite numerous condemnations of flagrant infringements of human rights in Iran by many organizations as well as the European Parliament and efforts made by representatives of the Iranian Government to persuade us that the situation has improved , regrettably this is not the case , as numerous events have demonstrated .
According to Amnesty International , the number of executions at least doubled in 1996 and arrests of all who step out of line , now of oil workers on strike , and the persecution of religious minorities have continued .
Furthermore , support for Islamic fundamentalist groups involved in terrorism in other countries like Algeria is reported to have been maintained and some 30 opponents of the regime have been killed abroad .
The German authorities have continued to charge Iranian officials with responsibility for the killing of Kurdish leaders in Berlin in 1992 and there have been allegations about the importation of weapons even into Belgium , possibly for outrages there .
Worst of all , an Iranian foundation has stepped up the reward offered for implementing an illegal death threat against Salman Rushdie who is not now and never has been an Iranian citizen .
In the circumstances we must reiterate and renew our condemnation of the continuing gross violation of human rights in Iran at home and abroad and increase pressure on the Iranian authorities on all these issues .
Discrimination against women is also very acute in Iran and we must fully maintain our criticism and take a stand against this .
The policy of critical dialogue has not succeeded in bringing about a change in the Iranian Government 's policy despite all the talk of the moderation of Rafsanjani and the mellowing of the regime .
We must therefore take a tough line with Iran .
We must not only pass this resolution but continue to press the government in every feasible way genuinely to recognize human rights .
Mr President , not a week goes by without news of further human rights violations in Iran .
Two such cases have made headlines just recently .
The press was still discussing the arrest of the writer Sarkouhi , who publishes one of the few critical periodicals left in Iran .
Then came word that a private foundation in Iran had increased the bounty on Salman Rushdie .
The Bahai , trade union members and women are being threatened by the fundamentalists .
The government is arresting people .
So where is the dividing line in this case between governmental authority and religious fanaticism ?
This Iranian government is supposedly concerned to improve relations with Europe , but how does it actually imagine that such relations are to be established , and on what basis ?
Our wish for the Iranian people is that respect for the international principles of human rights will finally re-establish contact between our peoples .
The European Council stated its position clearly on the anniversary of the fatwa against Salman Rushdie .
But when he criticizes the EU , he should be aware that only an international community like the European Union can provide sanctuary .
Many other people , too , in Iran are suffering from the acts of the Iranian regime ; death threats and terrorist attacks outside the country cannot be ruled out .
Mr Newens referred just now to the German case .
We in this Parliament stand up for human rights , freedom of religion and opinion , the rule of law and democracy , and we will ensure that Iran is not in any doubt about that .
Mr President , I , too , should like to address the Commissioner on this issue , since we are , today , strongly condemning the State terrorism practised by the Iranian authorities . But this is not the first time we have done this and I wonder what good it does , whether it actually does any good to go on and on condemning , without really doing anything .
Far too many of the regime 's political opponents have been killed over the past few years , in various places throughout the world , by the special services of the Iranian security forces .
It has even happened in my country , in Italy .
These security forces continue to threaten Iranian citizens who are living in the Member States and conducting legitimate political activities against the regime .
I believe that Europe 's policy with regard to Iran is too complaisant and that what we and , in particular , the European institutions should be doing instead is to pursue a hard-hitting policy . For what is happening in Teheran today is that there is apartheid against women , democracy is being treated with contempt every day and physical attacks on opponents are a matter of course .
It seems to me that the situation is very serious and sufficient to require special action that , in my opinion , has unfortunately not yet been taken .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as other Members have already said , the human rights situation in Iran really is worse than it has ever been .
Women , religious minorities and intellectuals who venture even the faintest criticism of current policy become victims of blatant repression and brutal persecution .
A clear sign of the steady deterioration is that even the official figure for executions in the year 1996 has doubled to 110 .
We know that this is only the tip of the iceberg , and that the number of unreported cases of people being abducted without any form of due process , subjected to the most cruel tortures and then murdered is far greater .
The latest examples of these terror tactics are the repeated disappearance of the publisher Sarkouhi , who was previously held captive in November by the Iranian government and maltreated for 47 days , and - as Mrs Lenz and others have mentioned - the latest increase in the bounty on Salman Rushdie .
Both of these , incidentally , represent attempts by Iran to influence the outcome of the Mykonos trial in Berlin , which has now produced clear proof that the Mullahs have been responsible for the murders of opposition figures abroad .
Time and again , the intolerable circumstances in Iran and the policy practised by the regime of the Mullahs and its secret service of exporting terror have prompted the European Parliament to utter strong words of criticism .
But that criticism is directed not only against those in power in Iran but also against governments within the European Union , and especially against the Federal Republic of Germany .
That criticism is directed against the unqualified commitment to the policy of so-called critical dialogue .
The time really has come to accept that this so-called critical dialogue has failed .
It has been of use to economic relations , and it has repeatedly provided confirmation for those in power in Tehran that their policy can be pursued with impunity .
As far as human rights are concerned , this so-called critical dialogue has changed nothing , and yet the preservation of and respect for human rights is the most important issue of all !
Mordechai Vanunu
Mr President , three previous resolutions passed by this Parliament since 1990 have been ignored by the Israeli Government .
There have also been many questions .
I asked both previous Prime Ministers of Israel and was told that the whole matter was one for the Israeli justice system .
It is not and was not .
It is our concern .
Vanunu revealed to the British press that Israel had nuclear weapons .
Also , he was kidnapped from an EU country , Italy , against international law .
However , that is in the past .
What is not is that for over ten years Vanunu has been kept in solitary confinement in a so-called civilized country , in conditions which Amnesty International describes as cruel , inhuman and degrading .
He is certainly treated far worse than either the American or British spies who were sentenced for selling their secrets to the Soviet Union .
This resolution is really an appeal for clemency .
Vanunu cannot damage Israeli security .
I ask the Israeli Government to end the solitary confinement and to arrange for an early release of this long-serving prisoner .
Mr President , I welcome the fact that after so many attempts and such a long lapse of time we can once again discuss the case of Mordecai Vanunu in this House .
As Mr Crampton just said , we have passed three previous resolutions and we have achieved nothing .
I believe the European Union and the Israeli government , too , have a duty to take action on behalf of this person .
We should ask the Israeli government to show clemency by ordering an early release for Mordecai Vanunu .
What did he do ?
He told the Sunday Times something that everybody now knows - what Israel 's nuclear potential is .
If we go to Israel we can talk about the country 's nuclear weapons capability , we can talk about his arrest - there are no problems with that .
The fact that he was abducted , that this is now part of history , that he was sentenced to 18 years ' imprisonment under conditions incompatible with the rule of law , and that ten years of that term have now passed - this must prompt us all to do everything in our power to release this man from his solitary confinement .
I believe that our Committee on Human Rights should concern itself with this situation and should call upon our governments to take action in this matter , because solitary confinement is a barbarity .
He has no contact with the outside world , except for his brother , and that is a thing we deplore in any state where such a thing can happen .
The least that the State of Israel should do is to hold him under humane conditions , and to ensure that his relatives can visit him and that he can take exercise .
But I believe that after 10 years and now that there is really no longer any charge against him - secret services use means that are much crueller , much more terrible , and as for the information on nuclear weapons , we all know that anyway - there really is no reason to continue holding him at all .
So this House calls upon Israel to show clemency .
Mr President , ten years ' solitary confinement in a cell is an inhumanity , but in all honesty we must admit that recently Mr Vanunu has regularly been offered additional privileges which he has rejected .
I also think that his situation should be improved but my group cannot support the motion for a resolution in its form before us today .
I would have much preferred this House to spend its energy on a matter in the same region which is so important in relation to human rights .
Mr President , for a long time now Germany , France and Greece have been calling for the extradition of the former SS-officer and war criminal , Alois Brunner .
This man is in Syria .
When can justice be given to the victims in France and Greece ?
If Syria is of good will and wants association agreements with the EU then let it go ahead with the extradition of Mr Brunner .
Mr President , the Middle East is working slowly towards peace .
The Hebron agreement has at last been produced .
The visit here this week in Strasbourg of a joint Israeli-Palestinian parliamentary delegation is a sign that business can now be done with both the Palestinians and the Israelis .
The time is also ripe for another breakthrough .
Mr Vanunu has been in solitary confinement in a small cell for more than ten years because of the alleged security risk that he is said to represent ten years after the event .
In the light of the changed circumstances my group calls for clemency and for attention to be paid to the human rights aspects of this sad case .
But this House must be realistic .
I am honest enough to say that the request to all concerned to produce all the evidence on Mr Vanunu 's arrest is ludicrous .
If paragraph 4 is not deleted - and we shall table an amendment to that effect - then the Liberal Group will most unfortunately be forced to vote against this motion for a resolution .
Chad
Mr President , I spent the period from 3 to 6 January as a European observer in Chad to witness the holding of the country 's first democratic elections .
Although this first ballot was properly conducted , I am sorry to say that I cannot express any enthusiasm about the human rights situation .
I saw for myself the violence used by the forces of order against the Chadian people , men , women and children .
Immediate extermination without trial seems to be standard practice .
Although I can understand the difficulties facing the political leadership in Chad -the build-up of arms among certain sectors of the community following thirty years of war , the looting , the assaults - I certainly cannot accept a situation where the guilty parties , or alleged guilty parties , are subjected to violence and conspiracy unworthy of a country in which - I am happy to say - the democratic process is under way .
I therefore call upon President Déby and the future government to put an end to these practices and to install an efficient and just legal system acting in the interests of all and with respect for the rights of each individual .
Mr President , I am deeply concerned about the situation in Chad .
The allegations in the resolution are very serious indeed .
I was also in Chad for the first stage of the legislative elections and I shall be returning to Chad this weekend for the second stage , on your behalf , at the invitation of the government of Chad .
Today the Prime Minister of Chad has come to Strasbourg on the eve of the elections .
I have had a meeting with him .
The Prime Minister has offered the opportunity of a prison visit , besides certain meetings in Chad this weekend , which I have accepted .
The Prime Minister is aware of the grave concern of this European Parliament .
I welcome the Prime Minister to the European Parliament and I say to him that we are aware of the recent history of Chad and that there has been some progress in human rights , but we are in no way satisfied .
The government of Chad and this European Parliament have a responsibility to cooperate in order to deliver a radical and urgent improvement in basic human rights , to allow Members of the European Parliament in Chad this week to collect further first-hand information and to defer the vote today until March in order that we can make substantial progress .
I appeal to all parties to let us do this , to set a timetable and to take this issue more seriously than simply to adopt the resolution , so that we can make progress in Chad and have a vote , if necessary , in March .
Indigenous peoples of Indonesia
Mr President , Yamdena is an island in Eastern Indonesia , and the Indonesian Government has granted very extensive logging permits to certain forestry companies .
Our concern is that this logging may be carried out without any regard for the rights of indigenous peoples .
The area is also extremely ecologically diverse and rich .
Has the Commission sent any kind of fact-finding mission to the area ?
It promised to do so in informal talks with Members of this Parliament last November .
I should also like to know what view the Commission takes of this matter .
The Commission has supported many forest protection projects in Indonesia , but now , in a way , the basis for this protection of forests is under threat .
Will the Commission step up its measures to protect forests in Indonesia , including the Yamdena region ?
I shall answer all the questions in the order in which they were asked .
As regards the 53rd session of the Commission on Human Rights , I must tell Mr Dell 'Alba that I am indeed unaccustomed to dealing with the human rights clause in connection with matters pertaining to the euro , but I shall do my best today to answer the questions that have been asked .
As you know , the Commission is paying the closest attention to the preparations for this next session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights .
Like Mr Schulz , indeed , I find it very difficult to make a choice among all these subjects .
Human rights violations are , sadly , very widespread on this planet , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , and in every case they are always firmly condemned by the European Union - not only firmly but effectively , too , as you will see if you refer to most of our agreements which include ' human rights ' clauses .
The European Union is particularly active at the United Nations and never misses an opportunity to restate its concerns on this matter .
As far as China is concerned , I can tell you that the Union intends to resort to what it considers to be the most appropriate means , while being careful not to jeopardize the prospects of resuming the bilateral dialogue .
We need to take effective action here , while being careful not to appear ridiculous or lose our credibility .
What matters , I believe , is the result .
The question of a resolution on the human rights situation will be debated at the Council of Foreign Affairs Ministers next Monday in Brussels , Mr Dupuis , and I can tell you that a joint approach with the United States is a possibility .
Bilateral contacts with the Chinese authorities have also been established on this subject .
Regarding your other causes for concern , I can tell you that the European Union does intervene , as a matter of priority , in the areas of children 's rights and women 's rights .
Mr Dell 'Alba , Mr Cars and Mr Pettinari have mentioned the problem of the death penalty .
I believe that the Commission has no jurisdiction on this .
I shall therefore pass on your message to the Dutch presidency .
I can assure you , as far as I am concerned at any rate , that I entirely agree with your analysis and with your concerns , and I believe that , at present , there is not a single European State that still applies this penalty .
I believe we should indeed be agitating for its abolition internationally .
Unfortunately , however , I can only give you a personal commitment on that point .
The European Union has also tabled a draft resolution on children 's rights , covering the problems of forced labour , sexual exploitation , children in war zones and street children .
I believe this draft resolution is supported by a majority of the Member States of the European Union .
Point two : human rights in Iran , including the case of Mr Sarkouhi .
The Commission is aware , like Parliament , of the gravity of the human rights situation in Iran , where repression seems to have hardened in the course of the last two years .
However , it is my duty to inform you that the Iranian authorities have sent a request to the United Nations special envoy in Iran with a view to obtaining technical assistance from the UN in areas such as penal reform , the training of judges and aid to the NGOs involved in women 's affairs .
As Mr Pettinari says , we must condemn the human rights violations .
To disregard such acts can only , as I see it , encourage their continuance , which would be unacceptable .
The European Union therefore strongly condemns these blatant violations of basic rights by Iran .
I recall that Iran has signed the Universal Declaration on Human Rights , and should abide by its undertakings if only for that reason .
Like Mr Newens , therefore , the Commission strongly deplores the announcement by a private body of an increase in the bounty offered for the death of Mr Salman Rushdie .
Within the framework of the critical dialogue - and no , Mrs Roth , that dialogue has not broken down - the European Union is endeavouring to obtain further assurances from the Iranian Government regarding Mr Rushdie 's safety .
That is why the Commission is calling upon the Iranian Government to condemn this action unreservedly and to encourage the body concerned to withdraw its bounty .
Also , like Mrs Lenz , the Commission is very concerned at the fate of Mr Sarkouhi , an Iranian writer and publisher .
According to our information - or at least to information available to us - Mr Sarkouhi has allegedly been arrested and tortured on several occasions during the past two months .
The Commission is asking the Iranian Government to provide all information in its possession regarding Mr Sarkouhi 's situation , and it also intends , with the support of the Member States , to bring pressure to bear upon Iran for his immediate release .
Point three : Mr Mordechai Vanunu .
The Commission is still keenly aware of the matter of Mr Vanunu 's solitary confinement , and I can tell Mr Telkämper and Mr Crampton that we are concerned by the conditions of that confinement .

Similarly , the Commission is paying close attention to respect for human rights in Israel , the West Bank and Gaza , and these matters regularly appear on the agenda of the bilateral discussions with the Israeli authorities .
The Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement recently concluded between the European Union and Israel is to be ratified shortly .
Within the framework of the political dialogue with Israel that this agreement establishes , the European Union will be better able to exert a positive influence on human rights issues , and especially on the problem of Mr Vanunu 's imprisonment .
Let me remind you that the Union - and the Commission in particular - will be able to base its arguments on the clause which makes respect for human rights an essential element of the agreement ; if that clause is not observed , the agreement lapses .
With regard to Chad , the Commission considers that the transition to a pluralistic regime has brought a significant improvement in respect for political rights in that country .
However , the situation still gives cause for concern .
The outrages perpetrated by the forces of order , which you mentioned , are jeopardizing the country 's democratic achievements .
In particular , firing on offenders is a serious breach of human rights , which are an essential element of the fourth Lomé Convention under which Chad has certain obligations to the European Union .
Let me assure Mrs André-Léonard and Mr McGowan that the Commission has already made representations to the Chadian authorities asking that the orders given to the police should be compatible with respect for human rights .
Furthermore , the Commission is calling upon the Government of Chad to take all necessary steps to ensure significant progress in respect for human rights and the establishment of the rule of law .
Finally , regarding the tropical forests of the Indonesian island of Yamdena , the Commission is paying close attention to this matter , as you know , and to the question of deforestation and its consequences for the local people and the environment .
The Commission has not sent a mission to the area , Mrs Hautala , but it is helping to finance studies that are taking place , because sustainable forest management is the keystone for the Indonesian development cooperation programme being administered by the Commission .
At present , more than ECU 71 million has been earmarked for projects in this area .
The Commission has also embarked on a review of the priorities for the development programme with Indonesia .
Within that framework , the possibility of undertaking micro-projects , especially in the sectors of water , sanitary infrastructures and education , is currently being examined .
I must however make the point that the room for manoeuvre available to the Commission in its attempts to influence the situation in the island at short notice is , ultimately , very small .
After all , the assessment and approval procedures for development projects normally take between 20 and 30 months , and that period , sadly , means that it is not always possible to take into account the damage that may have been caused to the environment .
I therefore believe that the granting of aid to local NGOs devoted to defending the rights of the local people is worth considering .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 pm .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0087 / 97 by Mr Cars and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in former Yugoslavia ; -B4-0090 / 97 by Mr Pasty and Mr Azzolini , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the situation in former Yugoslavia ; -B4-0099 / 97 by Mr Vandemeulebroucke and others , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the political situation in Serbia ; -B4-0104 / 97 by Mr Wiersma and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Mostar and Eastern Slavonia ; -B4-0127 / 97 by Mr Carnero González , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in former Yugoslavia ; -B4-0139 / 97 by Mr Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina and eastern Slavonia ; -B4-0156 / 97 by Mr Pack and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the situation in former Yugoslavia .
Mr President , Carl Bildt , who is chief representative for the EU in the former Yugoslavia , often talks about the need for time and the fact that we must be patient .
Likewise , the UN representative for Human Rights often speaks about the need for time to resolve the problems in the former Yugoslavia .
Like them , I would like to emphasis that this is often the case .
But , at the same time , it is also important for us to demonstrate in various ways , that although the passage of time is not leading to such rapid progress as we would have hoped , this does not mean that we have lost our interest in and commitment to the former Yugoslavia . We still want to find a definitive solution which means that human rights are respected and that people can live freely where they so desire .
I believe that the resolution under consideration today and our continuing discussions are primarily a means of expressing Parliament 's desire to press on in its quest for further action concerning the former Yugoslavia .
I would like therefore , on behalf of the liberal group , to express our concern over what has happened in Mostar : over the fact that acts of violence there have added to the difficulties in the search for a final solution , and that the international police task force are quite obviously not adequately equipped to be able to resolve the situation .
We can also express our regret over the fact that we have not found a decisive solution to the Brcko-issue and we hope that we will also have better success here in the future .
With regard to this latter situation , we would like to conclude by saying that it is important that we maintain the desire for cooperation and mutual understanding between the UN and Europe which was demonstrated in Brcko , and that pay due attention to this in our final decision on the future of Brcko .
Mr President , I would endorse the remarks of the previous speaker .
What we are confronting is the difficulty of balancing the rights of the various communities who used to form part of Yugoslavia .
In Mostar , we have the Croat and Muslim sides and it seems to me that the only way we can get some kind of solution is to have a kind of de facto federation of Mostar on both sides of the Neretva river .
Likewise , the delicate situation in Brcko I think may be resolved by a similar compromise .
Here , at least , we have the Dayton solution to allow the situation to stay as it is for at least one year under Serb control .
At this stage , in both cases , we have to be patient and ask the people on the ground to be patient and to let the situation settle down a little , and after a year we will review it .
Likewise , the position in Kosovo at the moment is potentially dangerous .
We have to ask that the rights of Albanian speakers are fully respected in that area so we do not create a new flashpoint just when things are settling down elsewhere .
Mr President , as Mr Macartney has just indicated , there are a number of problems in the former Yugoslavia which concern us at the moment but perhaps the most symbolic has to be the situation in Mostar .
Mostar , after all was the city of EU administration , and Mostar shows the strengths and weaknesses of the EU initiatives in former Yugoslavia : the strengths , because there is no doubt that in Mostar we have seen tremendous technical assistance which has helped rebuild it ; the weaknesses , because , of course , Mostar has shown the lack of political will by the Council of Ministers to support some of its rhetoric .
Of course , we all remember that terrible day when Mr Koschnick nearly died .
He was given very little support by the Council of Ministers .
What we have in Yugoslavia , is not peace but an absence of war and we are currently hoping that in the absence of war the communities will start to live with each other again .
But it is very much more hope than anything else .
It is clear from recent events , most noticeably in Mostar , that things are not working as well as we would like .
We have seen the weaknesses that were inherent in the Dayton Agreement , the inability to deal properly with de facto ethnic cleansing , the impression that was left by Dayton that it might be possible to create some sort of Croat federation within the Bosnian federation , which is really behind much of what is going on at the moment .
The inability to deal with the big states , most notably Croatia , and President Tudjman 's activities , particularly in relation to the Croat community in Mostar and the inability also to deal with what I suspect are the real villains behind the situation in Mostar , that is the gangsters on West Bank who have clearly got the city tied up for themselves and do not want normal peace to be resumed .
We have to make it clear that it is vital for the international community not to allow Mostar , given its symbolism , to get out of control .
We need the international police task force and indeed the stabilization force to be more vigorous in keeping the communities apart ; to stop the cowardly attacks which we have seen recently in Mostar ; to investigate them and to take action against the guilty parties .
Quite frankly , if we feel that the international police task force does not have enough power then we ought to be looking at how to increase those powers so that they need not stand helplessly watching people being attacked , injured and , even killed .
We ought to also send out a very clear message that much has been done in Mostar .
The international community has spent a huge amount of money , if that work is undone , if those projects are destroyed again , the people on the ground have to understand very clearly : the international community is not going to be prepared to find the money a second time .
This is the last chance for Mostar .
We must not allow it to be destroyed and we should , in fact , give no more support to the West Bank until they are prepared to work together with the rest of Mostar to build a peaceful community .
Mr President , it seems to me that , unfortunately , there is once again a risk of renewed fighting in former Yugoslavia .
The tensions in Mostar are evidence of the fragility of the cold peace in the Republic , and the international arbitration committee 's inability to give a definitive response as regards the status of major cities in the area is a sign of the former Yugoslavian authorities ' unwillingness to base their countries ' future on multi-ethnic co-existence and reconciliation .
Many parts of the former Yugoslavia are showing signs of a clear lack of political will to deal with the causes of tension through dialogue and policy .
For this reason , the Commission and Council should , in my opinion , make it very clear that European aid for reconstruction is dependent on a policy of co-existence , the free and safe return of all refugees to their home towns , irrespective of their ethnic origin , and respect of the new institutions set up as a result of the Dayton Agreement .
I therefore call on the Commission not to sit back and simply watch the rising political tension and to urge the Council to accept its responsibilities and demand full compliance with the Dayton Agreement from all its signatories .
Mr President , as previous Members have already said , the situation that is emerging in the former Yugoslavia demonstrates the limitations of the Dayton Agreement , which our group has pointed out on several occasions .
These limitations have given rise not to peace but , at best , to an absence of war .
But it is not simply a question of going beyond the Dayton Agreement ; it is also a question of actually implementing that Agreement .
Instead what we have is a situation in which the Agreement is still not being fully implemented and in which nothing is being done to move towards full implementation , resolve the emergency and make the shift from an absence of war to peace .
For these reasons , we are very concerned about what has been happening in the various parts of the former Yugoslavia , and particularly , because they are so symbolic , in Mostar and Brcko .
In particular , I should like to point to the need to reinforce the mandate and increase the capacity of the international police task force , whose action is crucial for any peaceful development of the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
In the case of Brcko , this means that we need to acknowledge that the safe return of refugees must be guaranteed and that the Deputy High Representative must be provided with the necessary resources to enforce his mandate .
In this respect , I should like to stress that it will be impossible to establish any real peace if refugees do not return and if there is no guarantee that the committee provided for by the Dayton Agreement to deal with the return of property will become operational .
In addition , we obviously need to guarantee dialogue - something that we , the Green Group , have long been demanding .
Mr President , I should like to begin by condemning the acts of violence by the Bosnian Croats in the strongest terms .
Secondly , I would expect anyone who can exert any influence on those responsible for this conduct or misconduct to do so immediately .
Thirdly , I would also expect the perpetrators to be punished and removed from office .
However , I would also like to draw attention to the fact that present events in Mostar can trace their origin back to errors committed at Dayton and particularly to the recognition of the so-called Republika Srpska , from which the Serbs today infer that they have nothing to do with Bosnia Herzegovina .
And that has made it very difficult for the Bosnian Croats to renounce Herceg-Bosna .
Secondly , I would call attention to the fact that Sarajevo is becoming more and more of a Muslim city , making it difficult for non-Muslims to enjoy equal rights there .
We should similarly be aware of both these facts , and ensure that this does not constantly give rise to further protest campaigns in Mostar .
Thirdly , I would like to say that the weak attitude of the European Union 's contact group regarding the maintenance of Bosnia-Herzegovina as a multiethnic entity , as laid down at Dayton , is to be condemned .
The consequence of it is that other Dayton signatories , Croatia and Serbia to be specific , are also less than totally committed to implementing the Dayton Agreement as quickly as possible .
Fourthly , I should like to point out that those in the region who are standing by Dayton , meaning those who want to let the refugees return home and are actually doing so , should receive swift and really visible support .
They must be allowed to expect that their Dayton-style good deeds really will be crowned with success , that it is visible , that they receive their reward .
That is the only way in which we shall be able eventually to persuade others to do what they actually promised to do by signing - observing the provisions of the Dayton Agreement .
Ladies and gentlemen , while it remains impossible - in Brcko , in Mostar , in the Republika Srpska and in many places in the Muslim-Croat Federation - for refugees really to return , and as long as we are unable to name a day by which the refugees must be allowed back , we shall continue having difficulties .
We have had good experience of deadlines in the European Union .
We have one at the moment , for the euro .
I think that in the case of Dayton , as well , we should try to set a deadline by which the refugees must be returned , because only the return of the refugees can enable reconstruction aid to bear fruit and peace to be restored .
Mr President , I should like to begin by expressing my complete agreement with what Mrs Pack has just said - I too believe the Dayton Agreement bears a very great responsibility for many of the problems we are witnessing in the former Yugoslavia , problems which are now becoming particularly acute in Mostar and Brcko .
I must admit , though , that the present motion for a resolution fills me with astonishment in certain places at the constant use of double standards .
When we listened to the announcements about the city of Brcko on 14 February , we were first told that the city would be awarded to the Serbs .
Not until this rightly provoked massive protests from the Muslims and Croats was it announced that the decision would be deferred for a year .
Well , we can already begin to imagine what kind of decision will be taken in a year 's time .
There will be a capitulation to the more vociferous and probably stronger claimants , the Serbs , although until the Muslims were driven out they were by far the largest ethnic group in Brcko , followed by the Croats , with the Serbs ranking only third .
Every faction in the world that pursues a policy of ethnic cleansing is now gazing spellbound at Brcko - because they see the possibility that their dangerous and degraded activities may be ratified by international arbitration .
That , in my view , is one of the main dangers .
Nor , following the experiences of recent months with the Serbian part of Bosnia and the flagrant disregard of numerous provisions of the Dayton Agreement , must we allow ourselves to be deluded into thinking that Brcko , once it is under Serbian control , will function in the future as a crossroads through which the historical highway to the north , of vital importance to Muslims and Croats , can pass .
As soon as international control ends , that gateway will be closed .
We should , after all , learn a lesson or two from history . Wherever an unnatural corridor has been created , it has led to the next war .
We need only remember what a disaster the Polish corridor brought down upon us .
One more point about the motion on Mostar .
It would be nice if , at least occasionally , we were to honour the legal principle of audiatur et altera pars , instead of blaming everything on the Croats , which is what always happens here .
Mr President , the Commission is keeping a close watch on the matters raised by honourable Members regarding the former Yugoslavia .
First , may I say that as far as the implementation of the civil aspects of the Dayton and Paris agreements are concerned , the present period is one of consolidation .
The Peace Implementation Conference clearly indicated , at the last ministerial meeting in London , what results were to be achieved during this period .
Despite the progress already made , many problems have yet to be resolved .
Some honourable Members have just emphasized , rightly , the fact that not enough is yet being done to comply with the promise of collaboration with the International Criminal Court .
That collaboration is one of the main political conditions for access to reconstruction aid .
The European Commission thus feels that , in the case of the Republika Srpska , it can only implement projects aimed at improving collaboration between the two Bosnian sectors .
If the country is to achieve the reconciliation it needs , it is an essential condition that war criminals should be handed over to the judicial authorities .
It should also be recalled , in this context , that many of the refugees come from regions that now form part of the Republika Srpska , and that the presence of war criminals in those regions is obstructing their return .
On the other hand , the central government of Bosnia-Herzegovina is functioning , but important decisions certainly still need to be taken , especially on the economic front , regarding such essential matters as the functioning of the Central Bank or the adoption of a single currency for all the Bosnian areas .
These steps are essential for the economic stabilization of the country , and a necessary condition for the mobilization of donors .
Politically , cooperation within the Federation still leaves much to be desired and , Mr Titley , events in Mostar are seriously prejudicing relations between the Croats and the Muslims .
The Commission has drawn the attention of all parties to the fact that the situation in Mostar is crucial for the cohesion of the Federation .
The Commission has stressed the need to do everything possible to prevent the situation from deteriorating .
I should remind you , even so , that the European Union has mobilized considerable resources in men and material to try to reconcile the population of Mostar .
We must not allow the action of a few unruly elements to frustrate these efforts .
Regarding Kosovo , which is another stumbling block in relations with the former Republic of Yugoslavia , I am sorry to say that there still seems to be no sign of a solution .
The authorities in Belgrade must understand that this obstinacy is preventing any progress in their relations with the Union .
The Commission regrets the fact that no Union presence is yet being tolerated in Kosovo , and that Belgrade is even refusing to grant a visa to Mr Vanderstoel , the SOEC High Commissioner for minorities .
Finally , the arbitration decision regarding Brcko has been provisionally adopted .
The international community has now taken on the task of creating , next year , the political and economic conditions that would enable that decision to become final .
The European Commission will be assisting this process by launching , within the framework of the reconstruction effort , projects which may help to improve the situation .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0069 / 97 by Mr Ford and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on racism , xenophobia and anti-Semitism ; -B4-0100 / 97 by Mr Hory and others , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the rise of the extreme right in the European Union , especially France ; -B4-0117 / 97 by Mr Pailler , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on threats to freedom of expression and creation ; -B4-0131 / 97 by Mrs Roth and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the resurgence of racism and neo-fascism in Europe ; -B4-0136 / 97 by Mrs Roth and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the introduction of visa requirements for minors who are dependents of immigrants in the Federal Republic of Germany .
Mr President , can I rise to support the joint resolution and the two amendments in the name of some French colleagues on the issue of racism , xenophobia and the extreme right .
This resolution asks that the one country , the United Kingdom , which has not done so , should agree immediately to the establishment of a European observatory to monitor racism , xenophobia , and anti-Semitism .
They have already agreed to use Article 235 to establish both the drugs observatory and the European observatory on health and safety at work and we can see no reason why in this particular area there should be any problem whatsoever .
If they have any doubts about the need to work together at a European level they need only look back to the events which took place a few weeks ago when Danish neo-Nazis , with supporters of the British National Party , got together through Sweden to send letter bombs to mixed raced couples in the United Kingdom .
If that is not an example of a need to work together at a European level , I do not know what is .
Secondly , the resolution attacks the activities of some of the extreme right-wing parties in the European Unions specifically the Front national in Toulon , Orange and Marignane .
Because of the Front national demonstration due to take place here in Strasbourg in March we heard this morning Mr Gollnisch making an impassioned plea for tolerance and freedom of speech .
I have to say I have not heard so much hypocrisy for such a long time !
We can see what is happening in Orange where libraries are being censored , grants are being cut off and people are not allowed even to get married if they want to marry foreigners .
The last time I went to Marseilles to do a press conference on the issue of racism , it took French riot-police with riot-shields and tear gas to allow me to make that press conference due to a demonstration by the same Front national Mr Gollnisch belongs to .
What I want to say in conclusion is that I am delighted to learn today that the Council of Europe is going to make this chamber available on Easter Monday to enable the people in Strasbourg who want to protest about the activities of the Front national a forum to express their tolerance and their rejection of the evil politics of the people over there .
Mr President , may I say that , for once , our urgent procedure really has lived up to its name - after all , it is a matter of the utmost urgency to counter the rise of racism , xenophobia , anti-semitism and the far Right in Europe , examples of which can be seen everywhere .
I shall mention just four .
First , crimes and offences inspired by racism are proliferating throughout Europe .
You will say that this is , unfortunately , an everyday occurrence , that these criminal activities prove that the worse can happen at any time .
Secondly , we have just seen an unprecedented event in France : a victory for the far Right by an absolute majority of votes cast in a partial municipal election at Vitrolles , showing that the worst can become acceptable for some of our fellow citizens .
Thirdly , in another large French city , Toulon , the far Right council is stepping up its aggression against freedom of expression and against artistic creativity , showing that , however it may be disguised , the bad always comes to resemble the worst .
Fourthly , there is the urgency of the situation .
The urgency , as I see it , derives from the fact that several conservative governments in Europe , and especially the French government , think they can stem the tide of fascism by making concessions to it .
In particular , the traditional French Right is legitimizing the problems posed by the far Right by suggesting that there is a causal link between immigration - and even the symbolic figure of the foreigner - on the one hand and economic difficulties , unemployment and insecurity on the other .
This policy is not only ignoble but totally unsuccessful .
All the repressive legislation on immigration adopted in France to appease the far Right has merely encouraged it .
Stigmatizing immigration provides a direct causal link to fuel the advance of the far Right .
Today , by adopting the motion for a resolution tabled by five groups , and our Amendments Nos 1 and 2 , the European Parliament can help us to make the French Government withdraw its intention of adopting a law to subject foreigners to incrimination and rejection , an opportunist law , admittedly , but nevertheless the very , very old law of the scapegoat .
Some will help us to avoid allowing their friends to commit a gross political blunder .
But the majority in this House will welcome this opportunity to reassert their humanistic view of European integration , the integration of a Europe built on the values of tolerance and freedom and the principles of universalism - the Europe of enlightenment against the Europe of obscurantism .
Mr President , the purpose of this motion is to demonstrate , with reference to a list of facts which could unfortunately be even longer , that racism today is indeed an actual and growing reality throughout Europe .
Although each country has its own specific national features in this area , the foundations of racism are the same everywhere : in essence , the instinctive and simplistic rejection of those who are different , different in their skin colour or their culture , or alternatively a deep-seated and longstanding social crisis , portrayed as inevitable by succeeding governments which refuse to equip themselves with the resources to master it .
France takes the biscuit - if I can put it that way - with its political translation of these two foundations of racism into the electoral successes of the National Front .
The French Government , which , though protesting , allows attacks on freedom of expression and creativity and allows cultural censorship to operate in Toulon and certain other cities , is violating democracy .
A form of hypocrisy that ill conceals ultra liberal orientations which further increase insecurity and poverty .
In any case , what can you expect of an administration that makes use of laws such as the Pasqua laws and the Debré laws ; which exploits , by legitimizing it , the racist argument of the far Right parties , equating a foreigner with an illegal immigrant and an illegal immigrant with a delinquent ?
Rap , hip-hop , contemporary creativity in general , all these artistic movements which have been censored or threatened with censor are shot through and enriched with the diversity of the world 's cultures , and call upon us to open our hearts and minds to welcome the foreigner in the words of Jacques Prévert : ' Strange strangers , you are part of the city , you are part of its life . '
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Year against Racism is being celebrated everywhere .
But celebrations are not enough , and there is one thing they must certainly not be allowed to do - they must not be allowed to obscure reality .
And reality , in the European Union , is marked by routine racist violence , increasing xenophobia and a rising tide of anti-semitism .
The figures on violence are shocking .
On 7 and 8 February alone , a Vietnamese , a Lebanese asylum seeker and two Polish citizens were attacked and very seriously injured in Germany , and a 17-year-old punk was a victim of racist violence in Magdeburg .
But another reality is the ambiguity of a policy which talks about anti-racism while at the same time intensifying institutional racism and institutional discrimination .
As a first example , take France .
The previous speaker has already mentioned this .
The draft Debré law enormously increases the already stringent provisions of the famous or infamous Pasqua laws , elevating denunciation to the status of a duty and a law , under which anyone who provides lodging for a foreigner is obliged to disclose his personal details .
This is the basis for xenophobia , for new splits in society , for disintegration and violence .
No wonder that the French National Front , the original source of such repellent policies , is growing .
As a second example , take Germany .
Federal Interior Minister Kanther gets himself appointed as national coordinator of the European Year against Racism , and what is the very first thing he does ?
He introduces compulsory visas and residence permits for the children of German residents entering the country from the traditional labour recruitment countries , especially Turkey .
This new regulation affects 800 , 000 children .
Is that Germany 's idea of integration , when Turkish children are degraded and marginalized as second-class citizens , when the right to a family is apparently supposed to apply only to German families , and when these children are declared to represent a threat to order and security ?
Human rights are indivisible , here as elsewhere .
The regulation imposed by the Federal German Government is a blatant violation of human rights and must not be allowed to set a new example in Europe !
This regulation violates laws , it violates the UN Convention on Children .
The deteriorating social situation of Turkish workers is discriminatory against these fellow citizens and breaches the terms of the association agreement .
I should like to know what the Commission , as the guardian of the Treaties and also as the guardian of the implementation of the association agreement , is going to do about it .
Mr President , I realize that this may not entirely be a point of order , but I seem to recall that it was the French Socialist Government that made it compulsory for foreigners to obtain temporary accommodation certificates .
If I am wrong , I hope someone will correct me !
Mr President , Commissioner , we can always rely on Mrs Fontaine to be totally relevant and scrupulously precise .
Quite simply , the purpose of the temporary accommodation certificate is no longer the same .
We introduced it in 1992 as a way of persuading the police that an accused foreigner was in a regular situation and could therefore be given a document to establish his place of residence .
That is what that instrument was at the time it was introduced , with my full agreement , by Robert Badinter and Pierre Bérégovoy . Once it is perverted to become an instrument to enable the police to keep track of the holder , that is an about turn , a complete perversion .
And I am afraid that , in that interpretation , my dear Nicole , it is Mrs Roth who is right .
But , that said , you have put the history book straight .
Thank you very much , Mr Rocard .
All of these speeches which are slightly off the agenda are extremely interesting and , as it were , have given a breath of fresh air to the monotony of some of these debates . The presidency looks upon them with a certain amount of sympathy but , in any case , he must do his duty .
Mr President , fascism does not usually come to power unexpectedly .
That is why we must pay careful attention to the early warning signs .
It begins by marking out its territory and organizing the stealthy conditioning of minds . During this phase , culture plays a leading part .
For devotees of a totalitarian ideology , culture can only be conceived as restricted , sterilized , official ; and artists are , by definition , obstructive , cosmopolitan , generous and particular about their freedoms . Creativity is regarded as subversive , and writers themselves are suspect , except of course for those in charge of indoctrination .
In France , in those cities where local government has fallen into the hands of the far Right , this process of standardization has begun .
Admittedly , books are not being burned - the purifying flame is being put to a more cunning use .
Disruptive artists are being kicked out , writers whose names don 't sound right are being censored .
As the municipal libraries cannot be eliminated for the time being , their function is being deprived of any substance .
In a word , the brainwashing machine is in operation .
To combat the advance of these ideas , some have seen fit to occupy the same ground - other honourable Members have referred to this .
Unfortunately , in that little game , every time you bet , you lose , and you are constantly being forced to add to your stake .
But the threshold of what is tolerable is soon crossed , and the vast protest movement in France has just given notice of that to the Government .
Having said that , are we in this House at last going to attack the real problems that fertilize the soil for extremism - are we going to attack unemployment , the ravages of unrestricted free enterprise and their disastrous effects on the social fabric ?
Admittedly , the Commission has not been idle , but in view of the Council 's opposition to change , what is the use of Mr Santer inveighing about the struggle against unemployment ?
Patience is not necessarily a virtue .
Sometimes it is necessary to kick up a fuss , to abandon the politics of peace and quiet and , at long last , provide an answer to the real problems of our citizens .
Mr Hory , I fear that I do not really see eye to eye with you on this motion for a resolution , because it seems to me to be a masterpiece of mix-and-match .
By lumping together news stories from various European countries you finish up with a review of the week 's news , a selection of samples , but not a good subject for a resolution .
The basic evil is there : illegal immigration .
Illegal immigration is harmful to legal immigrants , casting suspicion and discredit upon them .
Illegality gives rise to marginalization .
And how can anyone live on the margin , Mrs Pailler , without having the misfortune to lapse into practices that may become criminal ?
Anyone can diagnose the problem , but remedies are needed .
A few have already proved effective , but the disease is worsening and we need to improve the remedies and change the dose .
All of us in this House , or nearly all , are united against racism , xenophobia and the far Right .
But we are not united about the means .
I am not convinced that petitions - even when swollen from day to day by the editorial tricks of certain French newspapers which take the same names and add forenames the following day , along with other somewhat dubious tricks , are enough to demonstrate the generous impulses of the heart and stir up a deep-seated movement among the public .
A public , incidentally , that is not made up of fools - 59 % of French people favour the Debré laws - because they are confronted with petty crime , overcrowding of certain flats , the conditions in which the illegals live .
Is it even fair to use the term ' illegal ' for some of them ?
Must we say nothing of the exploitation of their labour by their own immigrant fellow citizens ?
Every European country is trying a different approach .
Not all are perfect , but all can become so .
Controlling illegal immigration is the only way of ensuring that the Schengen agreements are applied satisfactorily .
My group is amazed that the signatories to this motion , so particular about the rights of the Members of the European Parliament , in claiming , as we all do , the right to amend the texts put before us , should so violently deny the Members of the French Parliament the privilege of exercising those same rights .
The text of the draft Debré law is about to have its second reading in Parliament .
Our French colleagues are responsible .
They know what the electors want .
They have a mandate to represent the electors .
Do you believe them incapable of respecting it ?
Would you allow the national parliament to give you orders ?
All this agitation might have just one purpose : making us forget the deafening silence of the French opposition when this law was considered at first reading ?
Mr President , the lack of future prospects for many unemployed people , the fear of those at risk of losing their jobs , the sense of marginalization or exclusion - these make up a very large part of the stockin-trade of those far Right movements which seem to be enjoying a fair wind in most States of the European Union .
Can we wonder at the fact that fear , uncertainty and indifference are exploited by those movements for dubious purposes ?
The attitude of the political community , confronted with this situation , should be neither simple nor simplistic .
The least appropriate attitude , and I may say the most dangerous , would be to model one 's political action on the methods that are resulting in the electoral successes of the extremist parties , for the simple reason that the electorate will eventually , sooner or later , prefer the original to the imitation .
No : action against racism , xenophobia and anti-semitism must adopt a multi-disciplinary approach , appealing to actors from the most varied backgrounds , and in particular from community life , the last resort when all others have demonstrated their inability to get to grips with these problems .
The European Union , for its part , should redouble its efforts to carry through the activities and campaigns already in progress .
I am thinking particularly of joint actions between the Council of Europe and the European Union .
The development of ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , once again Parliament is debating racism and xenophobia .
Only a month ago we were congratulating ourselves on the launch of European Year against Racism and Xenophobia , and today we find ourselves obliged to deal with this matter again in topical debate .
And the fact is that not only have disturbing events occurred in the last few days , but this is accompanied by a debate in France on the Debré Bill which is going to strengthen the ideas of an advancing ultra-right , of an ultra-right which is feeding on social discontent and linking immigration with delinquency in a simplistic and tendentious way .
The challenge for the European Parliament and the governments of the Member States is to take the bull by the horns , abandon hypocrisy and double standards and , as well as condemning these threats to people 's freedom , go to the heart of the problem and lay the foundations for eliminating the causes of this rise of intolerance .
The creation of employment and the promotion of collective structures which allow the development of the individual in coexistence and solidary can provide an example for that .
Mr President , the motion for a resolution before us , allegedly dealing with racism , indulges in a practice that is too common in this House , confusing xenophobia with the legitimate desire of the peoples of Europe to control immigration into their territory .
In particular , it is hard not to feel some anxiety when the motion for a resolution singles out for particular opprobrium the text currently being discussed by the French Parliament .
It seems to be directed at a provision which would compel those providing accommodation for foreigners to declare their departure to the local authority .
What is the purpose of that provision ?
Now that the majority of checks on individuals at the internal borders have been eliminated , it has been found difficult to keep count of foreigners from third countries leaving when their residents ' permits expire , which in turn makes it difficult to know how many are remaining in France illegally .
This irregular situation is , of course , being put to use by those who exploit the illegals , and who are now being referred to as ' the new slave traders ' .
To solve this problem , the draft Debré law came up with the idea of imposing upon those providing accommodation for certain foreigners an obligation to declare their departure .
You can think what you like about the effectiveness or appropriateness of this measure , but what is certain is that it is the direct result of the absence of border controls .
So we come to this logical conclusion . A choice has to be made : either a declaration of departure made to the local authority or the police - which many people regard as a meddlesome formality or even police harassment - or the same declaration made at the time the foreigner crosses the border on his way out .
This second solution seems simpler , but it does require the existence of a minimal police presence at the border .
There is also a more general conclusion that can be drawn from this business .
Border controls can ultimately be seen as the most liberal way of controlling immigration , the way that involves least restriction on civil liberties .
If these controls at the outer borders are eliminated , it will automatically be necessary to increase the frequency of police checks throughout the interior .
That is what we fear , and that is why my group has always fought against the European policy of abolishing the internal borders , because we believe , taking it all in all , that the screening effect they provide is ultimately a strong safeguard of freedom .
Mr President , one of the original motions for a resolution before us was entitled ' On the threats to the freedom of expression and creative art ' , which I can only interpret as a really burlesque form of humour , of absurd theatre of the highest degree , especially as it was tabled by the French communist party , a party which has more than won its spurs in the sphere of threats to freedom of expression .
Be that as it may , I for one have long stopped getting enraged about yet another resolution on the so-called fight against so-called racism and so-called xenophobia .
These are phenomena which only stay alive and take on greater importance in the crazy minds of a few intolerant people who try to brand any form of protection of national identities with these terms of abuse .
First of all I see that the protectors of the national identity are being increasingly applauded .
Just look at the exemplary democratic election victory of our colleague Bruno Mégret in Vitrolles .
And look too , for example , at the German Federal Chancellor Kohl and whether a country with millions of unemployed can really afford millions of non-European guest workers .
Secondly I must say that the paper indignation of this empty Parliament is not taken seriously by any sensible person in Europe any more .
To give you one example : after the vote on 30 January on the European Year Against Racism the Flemish Christian-Democratic members of parliament told their own electorate that they had admittedly voted in favour of the resolution but that they were really against it .
Well now , if even the Christian Democrats can allow themselves such funny jokes and cracks against this House , you surely cannot expect me to take this circus seriously ?
Mr President , I welcome the fact that I am speaking after having had to listen to Mr Vanhecke so that I can say that as far as I am concerned the most important aspect of this Parliament is that it forms a buffer against racism , xenophobia , neo-fascism and neo-nazism .
That for me is the most important thing about this Parliament .
That was so more than ten years ago , Mr Vanhecke , when Mr Le Pen came to this House for the first time and when we had the joint solemn declaration signed by the Council , Commission and Parliament , and that was also the case when we had the remit to the Kahn commission and when we have our annual resolutions in this House , and when too we agreed on the European Year Against Racism .
But , Mr President , although the attitude of the overwhelming majority of this House is very heartening , the written word is often is stark contrast with the realities in our Member States .
And I am not talking about the National Front in France or the Flemish Vlaamse Blok or other extreme right-wing parties or of their loathsome declarations are predictable .
No , Mr President , I am talking precisely about ' respectable ' parties , I am talking about democratically elected parliaments which are tending towards worrying nationalism and are proud of the fact that they allow in as few asylum seekers as possible , which take ever more inhuman action against illegal immigrants which they themselves create by their petty minded admissions policy .
The examples in the motion for a resolution , which I shall not repeat , speak for themselves but I really do think that France takes the biscuit with the Debré proposed legislation .
It reminds me of the darkest period of our history , our European history .
A history which we must remember every single day of our lives and which is in fact the very source of our European unity .
That is why , Mr President , we should choose to align ourselves with all those Frenchmen and women who are out in protest against it .
Mr President , one of the most interesting lessons I learned from the Committee of Inquiry into racism and xenophobia , which I had the honour to chair during the previous parliament , was that combating racism and xenophobia involved combating the illegal working and illegal immigration associated with it .
It is that lesson which the French Government , in the wake of other governments , is courageously trying to put into practice .
That is the purpose of the Debré law , or rather of the draft Debré law .
And I would invite those who oppose that draft , without having read it , evidently , to visit certain illegal sweatshops and places where illegal immigrants live , where these wretched people are hidden away in the most inhumane conditions imaginable .
If you want to know what this debate is really about , ladies and gentlemen , you will find it there .
That is why , unlike those who have seen the emergence of the National Front as a historic opportunity to cling to power , or regain it , on the basis of the indignation which that party arouses , I am among those who support the action of the French Government which , with courage and a degree of flair , is trying to fight on the same front ...
( The President cut of the speaker )
Mr President , the joint motion for a resolution concerns the dangers of the re-emergence of racist and xenophobic attitudes in some of the Community 's Member States and , more specifically , France and Germany .
If Alleanza Nazionale were a movement that wished to conceal and disguise its feelings on the subject , it would have made a tactical decision not to speak on this resolution .
Instead , and precisely to demonstrate our complete good faith and our unequivocally anti-racist and anti-xenophobic stance , we should like to argue that this resolution is a very poor policy document , and this for two main reasons .
The first is that the left-wing opposition parties of various Member States are hoping to take advantage of a vote in favour by this House to use it against their respective centre / right governments .
It is no mere accident that no mention has been made of the Italian Government 's recent proposals concerning the expulsion and non-admission of non-EU nationals - proposals that are based on , and even go beyond , French and German legislation on the matter .
The second reason for opposing this resolution is that it attempts to assimilate the word ' right ' with the term ' racist ' . The intention , therefore , is to suggest that anyone who is right-wing is also racist and that anyone who is a racist can only be a right-winger .
This is a semantic strategy , whose masters can be traced to the centres of the former Communist world that specialized in disinformation .
For the Communists , anyone who was to their right was a Fascist and to call an adversary a Social Democrat was an insult and a put-down .
We reject this subtle strategy because our observations both of history and of recent events show that racist and xenophobic attitudes have been adopted by numerous States and governments that have defined themselves as , and indeed are , left-wing .
To cite just a few examples , I would like to remind fellow Members of the way in which the Communist Ceausescu treated the Hungarian minorities , of the way in which the Tibetan minority is being oppressed by Communist China and of the fact that all the ethnic minorities in the Soviet Union were humiliated , deported and lumped together by a left-wing totalitarian ideology .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Nordmann has just told us that the only way to fight racism and xenophobia is by putting a stop to illegal immigration .
I have rarely heard such rubbish !
I come from a country where Hitler collected 43 % of the votes in 1933 , and we had no illegal immigration in Germany then !
But what we did have in Germany then was a vast economic imbalance and a vastly unjust distribution of economic resources .
And that is what we have today in the European Union between the population groups and the social classes , and it is what we have , for example , in the relations between this Union and the southern hemisphere or eastern Europe .
Those are the causes of the pressure of immigration upon the European Union , pressure which is being massively exploited by the ladies and gentlemen on the Right for their own unpleasant purposes .
Let me just say one thing to Mr Vanhecke : when he says he no longer gets het up about anything , that 's not news to us .
And when he says he welcomes the electoral victory of Bruno Mégret , we even believe him .
Except that Mr Mégret has not won an electoral victory , because Mr Mégret was not allowed to stand for election at all , because Mr Mégret is a criminal who was not allowed to stand !
His wife won the election .
Over on that side of the House there are always characters making out they have nothing to hide .
They have more skeletons in their cupboards than the rest of this Parliament put together !
I say that again , unambiguously .
And as for you , Mr Berthu , your ranks include a whole bunch of people with long criminal records , sitting here pretending to be the crème de la crème of European politics .
I just have one thing to say to you , Mr Berthu : the only good thing about Mr Vanhecke is that he freely admits being a fascist and a racist .
As for what you have said here , my only comment on that is this : if I can read Le Pen like a book I can read you like a paperback !
I really feel I have to say that .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , as I spoke so quickly to start with I am going to add another ten seconds on the end .
There is a very important point that we have not yet mentioned today , the fact that this whole debate we are holding , which to some extent was forced upon us by the far Right , completely overlooks one point .
There are victims of racism in the European Union - Mrs Roth has pointed that out - everyday victims , and I wonder where people like Mr Nordmann ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , to be brief , I do wish Mr Schulz would stop constantly resorting to Stalinist methods .
The best way to fan the flames of racism is to start by being slack about immigration controls and then go on to draw endless parallels between racists and those of us who are making an honest effort to defend the people whom we have a duty to protect .
Mr President , I don 't think that what I have to say will produce such a heated reaction .
The Commission is fully aware of the very adverse impact of illegal immigration on public opinion , and especially on the spread of racist and xenophobic attitudes .
It therefore regards it as essential to pursue a policy that combines combating illegal immigration and the traffic in human beings with the integration of immigrants who are lawfully resident here and the campaign against racism , xenophobia and anti-semitism .
As far as combating illegal immigration is concerned , let me remind you that the Council adopted , in September 1996 , a recommendation on combating the illegal employment of third-country nationals .
That recommendation specifies that the illegal traffic in labour must be regarded as an offence and subject to criminal penalties .
Over and above that , cooperation between the Member States is needed to identify the origins of the traffic in human beings and define the best means of combating it .
With this in mind , the Council has set up a working group to exchange information .
With regard to police cooperation , the mandate of the ' Europol Drugs ' unit covers action to combat the traffic in human beings .
Furthermore , the Commission , in accordance with its medium-term social action plan for 1995-97 , is preparing a Green Paper on the problems of illegal working .
This Green Paper should pave the way for broad discussions on the action to be taken by the Union , the purpose of which would be to eliminate any practice detrimental to the well-being of workers or obstructing the proper functioning of the labour market .
With regard to the admission of third-country nationals into the territory of the Member States , the Council has adopted four resolutions : one applies to employees , one to the self-employed , one to students and one to family re-unification .
The Commission intends to submit a proposal for a convention on admission .
The object of that initiative will be to move towards greater harmonization of Member States ' legislation and practices .
In the long run , the aim is to establish an official status for long-term foreign residents in the territory of the Member States .
The European Union cannot confine its activities to immigration control .
It also has to deal with the growth of xenophobic attitudes in our society .
As you know , many initiatives have already been taken at the instigation of the European Council .
The European Year against Racism is the first example of an agreement between the Community institutions and the Member States with a view to undertaking specific actions to combat racism .
It provides a framework for a campaign to alert the public to the danger represented by racism and to increase the emphasis on positive action intended to combat it .
The creation of a European observatory to monitor racist and xenophobic phenomena , proposed by the Commission in November 1996 , will also help to give concrete expression to the Union 's commitment to confront the increase in racism .
The Commission finds it a matter for regret that one Member State is still blocking the realization of this project .
In terms of criminal law , the Council adopted in 1996 a joint action designed to improve judicial cooperation in connection with racially motivated crimes .
Finally , the Commission has also exerted pressure to have a clause inserted in the Treaty , at the Intergovernmental Conference , prohibiting any form of racial discrimination .
The combined effect of all these initiatives will be to improve the effective safeguarding of human rights and basic freedoms within the Union .
The European Year against Racism and Xenophobia provides an opportunity for intensive mobilization , but the action taken must continue after the Year has ended , and it will be the duty of all those involved - the European institutions , the Member States , the social partners , the non-governmental organizations , the media and also the general public - to ensure the continuity of this effort to combat racism , xenophobia and anti-semitism .
Don 't worry , Mr President , I don 't intend to re-open the debate .
But I did ask the Commissioner a question , and I asked him politely , and so I would like an answer .
What is the Commission , as the guardian of the Treaties and also as the guardian of the association agreement between the European Union and Turkey , going to do about the introduction of visas for children and compulsory residence permits for the children of immigrants , for about 600 , 000 Turkish children ?
In my view it is incompatible with the provisions of the association agreement .
That 's what I asked you , and I would like an answer .
I can tell you that , as the Commission is the guardian of the treaties , it will ensure that the Treaty is strictly respected , in accordance with the mandate given to it .
As regards the specific question you asked me I am sorry , but , lacking the necessary information , I cannot give you an answer though I have taken careful note of the question . I shall report it to Mrs Gradin , and she will answer you directly in writing .
Mr President , now that this debate has ended , I wish to make a personal statement pursuant to Rule 108 .
Mr Schulz impugned all the members of my group when he attacked Mr Berthu just now .
He did so , according to the translation I heard , by referring to the so-called criminal records of members of my group .
I demand that he retract his allegations .
We in our group are not under any suspicion of having ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , it was clear to everyone here that I was not criticizing Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's group .
All I said was that I can read Mr Le Pen like a book and Mr Berthu like a paperback , a reference to their intellectual capacities .
If that is an insult to the entire group , I can only beg for leniency !
That concludes the debate .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Before the vote on the resolutions on Chad :
I should like to ask if the authors of these resolutions are leaving them on the table .
I have received confusing information on this .
This is because of the visit to Strasbourg by the Prime Minister of Chad , who has made specific offers to the European delegation that will be in Chad this weekend .
Are the authors maintaining the resolution or taking my advice , which I spelled out in detail , that this should be withdrawn for a month ?
I have heard rumours , but I have received nothing official .
Work of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in 1996
The next item is the report ( A4-0019 / 97 ) by Mrs Baldi , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the outcome of the proceedings of the ACP / EU Joint Assembly in 1996 .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the role played by the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in the discussion under way on the issues and challenges facing the European Union and its ACP partners over renewal of the framework for cooperation is vital .
Very soon , we shall be starting to prepare for the negotiations on the future of relations between the European Union and the ACP States beyond the year 2000 .
In this respect , I should like to emphasize Joint Assembly 's essential role and contribution in the discussions launched in 1996 on the issues and challenges represented by renewal of the framework for cooperation which , beyond the year 2000 and in a worldwide context of fundamental change , will need to continue to shape the privileged relations that have united them since the beginning of European integration .
The continuance of these relations , which involve 85 States , is extremely important for Parliament , as this group of countries comprises the majority of the developing countries and includes three-quarters of the poorest countries of the world .
The Union 's whole development policy will be on the test bench when we come to define a new convention .
Since there is a risk that the subject of development policy will be side-lined through failure to recognize the global associations such as refugees , the environment , drugs , crime and the resulting destabilization , as well as security risks , the European Parliament should throw its full political weight behind continuing relations at an appropriate level and with suitable instruments .
In particular , the Intergovernmental Conference should be urged to give Union development policy its proper place as a separate subject in a revised Union Treaty .
The two debates on this subject , in Windhoek and Luxembourg , showed that members of the Joint Assembly are well aware of the significance of the question of the future shape of relations between the ACP States and the European Union and are ready to argue for continuing development aid .
Discussion on the subject was pursued with the presentation of the Commission 's Green Paper and necessarily includes general questions of EU development policy and coordination with bilateral development aid from the Member States .
After the working group on the subject had concluded its deliberations on the situation of refugees in the ACP countries in connection with the policy on humanitarian aid , on 20 March 1996 the Joint Assembly adopted the motion for a resolution on this subject .
The enormous influx of refugees , and the marked rise in their number , mainly due to events in the Great Lakes region , is a challenge to the international community and highlights the need to improve the legal status of refugees and displaced persons and meet their material and psychological needs , through rehabilitation and repatriation , and personal protection .
Because of the serious problems of small island States resulting from climate change - many of them are facing threats to their economic and even physical existence - a hearing of experts on this problem was held at the Luxembourg session and it was decided to set up a new working group to draw up a report .
In view of the appreciable economic benefit but great practical difficulties , the report adopted by the Joint Assembly in Namibia on industrialization of the ACP countries drew attention to ways and means of using human and natural resources in the ACP countries , to achieve added value in the production of industrial goods that would benefit the local population directly by creating jobs , increasing purchasing power and stimulating supply and demand .
For its part , the Joint Assembly has adopted clear decisions on the subject of internal conflicts and serious violations of human rights in some ACP regions .
It is important to pursue this path , since development , respect of human rights , democratic principles and the constitutional State are closely interconnected .
The many conflicts that still persist and the problem of refugees and displaced persons , and I am again referring to the Great Lakes region , where the situation is particularly difficult - as I have personally witnessed - should spur us to press forward the discussions on the right to intervene on humanitarian grounds and the development aid the international community has the duty to provide , in genuine solidarity with all human beings , so as to guarantee them a decent existence , by taking direct , targeted and coordinated action .
Clear , decisive support is needed for any initiatives to outlaw and remove anti-personnel mines , which are daily placing people 's lives and health at risk and threatening the development of the countries concerned , which should be supported by rehabilitation and land-mine clearance .
I should also like to express my satisfaction at the steady increase in parliamentary representation in the Joint Assembly , thereby consolidating its authority and legitimacy , and confirming the ACP States ' growing commitment to the democratic process .
I also welcome the commitments made under Article 32 of the Fourth Lomé Convention on the democratic legitimacy of this body and , finally , I hope the Joint Assembly will enjoy the greatest possible independence , in terms of separate responsibility for organizing its business , particularly with regard to deciding where to hold its sessions and organizing fact-finding missions and contacts , within the limits of the available budgetary funds .
At the same time , the European Parliament 's calendar should take account of the dates for the Joint Assembly 's sessions , which are known well in advance .
I should like to finish by expressing my hope that the Netherlands presidency will be able , during its term of office , to ensure that Member States of the European Union speed up the ratification procedure , as was called for in Mauritius , so that the Lomé Convention can be signed and the revised agreement ratified .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , naturally I cannot but praise and ratify the full approval already given in the Committee on Cooperation and Development to the excellent report from our colleague , Mrs Baldi .
Reading the report , the incorporation of the concept of development into the idea of foreign policy stands out . Something like that happened in the world of science a few years ago , adding the letter D for development .
Something like that is going on now .
A European foreign and security policy unaccompanied by intense activity to promote development in the most backward countries is inconceivable .
Not for nothing is the Community the world 's biggest donor , taking its own funds and those of the Member States together .
So Mrs Baldi 's call for the development aid budget to be integrated into the general budget of the European Communities is not unreasonable , but very sensible .
So is her call for cooperation and coordination between Community action as such and what the Member States are doing , because while they are not necessarily contradictory they are frequently parallel rather than convergent .
It is also important to mention some points Mrs Baldi has stressed in her document : the work the ACP-EU Joint Assembly is doing for peace - work that we must do together and not separately , as has sometimes happened ( and that is a criticism ) .
For example , missions should be rationally planned for the current year , which is something the European side has thought of doing or proposing in the Joint Assembly .
A six-monthly plan , even an annual plan , for joint travel - subject , of course , to emergencies that may occur - would be a reasonable way to have a presence in countries where conflict exists , could flare up , or is possible .
It is also satisfactory - and the rapporteur mentioned this - that the democratic representation of the ACP countries has undoubtedly improved and we are on the point of implementing genuine measures to ensure this representation , a reflection of the process of democratization which is happily in progress , not without upsets and setbacks , in many of the ACP countries .
Of course , these upsets and setbacks include those caused by tragic situations like the one we have analysed this very evening - the Great Lakes - or the new Nigerian tragedy which the illustrious Nigerian Nobel Prizewinner , Wole Soyinka , told us about in the European Parliament a few hours ago .
There is an interesting mention in the document of the initiative by the ACP Council of Ministers to hold a summit meeting .
And perhaps this should not be just an ACP summit but a joint summit with the European Union . As I have said , Europe is making a major contribution to development - this is very well illustrated , for example , in the work of the ECHO office assisting refugees and in the next Green Paper , which we await with great interest - and it is certainly worth the effort to make that contribution even greater .
Mr President , I too , on behalf of the Liberal Group , would like to offer my warmest congratulations to Mrs Baldi on the quality of her report .
It is indeed of great interest , because it shows very clearly how the Joint Assembly has evolved , especially if we cast our minds back to the state of the Joint Assembly in particular , and European Union policy in general , only a few years ago .
Through Mrs Baldi 's report we can follow a policy undergoing transformation , an evolving policy , gradually adopting a new form to take account of the changes that have happened in the world since the late 1980s .
In this context , it is important to reassert , as Mrs Baldi does , the need for a very strong commitment by the European Union to a development policy which some would like to see relegated to a much lower priority behind other policies , especially those concerned with opening up towards the East .
Differentiation - the second aspect of this development policy - is also very strongly emphasized .
The need to adapt our actions , as best we can , to local situations and differences in level between the various partners is very forcibly brought out , especially in the call for a policy which concentrates more on the needs of the most disadvantaged sectors of population .
Our group also approves of the emphasis placed by the rapporteur on the need to retain the preferential schemes benefitting the ACP States in respect of a number of products , especially bananas , sugar and cocoa - schemes which are still valuable instruments in the service of development and ecological equilibrium .
We in the Development Committee have discussed various projects , particularly in relation to cocoa , and have heard some extremely interesting statements by representatives of the Member States .
Finally , the emphasis on parliamentary representation and increased consideration by the European Union for the requirements of democratization shows that the Union 's policy is finally emerging from the stereotyped Third World approach and coming directly to terms with the idea of genuine cooperation .
Mr President , I , too , support Mrs Baldi 's report because , like her , I feel the ACP Joint Assembly continues to be a very important parliamentary instrument linking the northern and southern hemispheres .
No other body puts representatives of so many countries on an equal footing at all levels , bringing them together to discuss development , democracy and human rights .
It is , then , something that needs to be maintained and developed , as is also demonstrated by the importance of the initiatives taken by the Joint Assembly in 1996 .
In this respect , I should like , among other things , to stress the value of the mission that was sent to Angola very soon after the last session of the ACP Joint Assembly , and which enabled us to see from the inside the problems Angola is facing and the tragic blocking of the peace process .
Whatever the fate of relations between the ACP States and the European Union , which we are discussing on the basis of the famous Green Paper that has been much mentioned in this debate , the experience of the ACP Joint Assembly should , in my opinion , be treasured as one to be repeated .
It would , therefore , be unacceptable if an end were put to a dialogue between North and South that is , quite honestly , one of the few truly positive experiences that European development policy has generated over the past few decades .
For this reason , I also agree with , and emphasize , the references made to the budget in Mrs Baldi 's report .
Mr President , Mrs Baldi has presented us with a very detailed report reflecting what happened at the two meetings .
She deserves our thanks .
I welcome her detailed treatment of the various points , for example how important it was for the NGOs on the ACP side to join us in a discussion process , and that we adopted a clear stance towards Nigeria and that it was right to impose sanctions in that case .
That was also confirmed this week by the visit of Wole Soyinka , the winner of the Nobel Peace Prize .
I believe it should be emphasized that the ACP Assembly adopted an unambiguous position with regard to landmines - prohibition . The production and exporting of land-mines are to be outlawed .
I agree , I believe we should accept that as an obligation and really ensure that no further production of land-mines takes place in our Member States .
But the other side , the development policy side , is important too .
Rehabilitation , caring for the victims , are obligations , and in fact I believe that those who produce these mines should be reminded of their duty .
Another aspect which Mrs Baldi mentions is the free trade area with southern Africa , Article 39 .
I believe that the upshot of the ACP sessions will be that our negotiations with South Africa will be successful .
The essential point , of course , is the future of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly : the concept of parity , the concept of co-operation as a new form of future external policy , and the structuring of the European Union 's foreign policy beyond the content of the Green Paper .
I should welcome it if the suggestions produced by this Assembly , and the ideas and proposals contained in the new Green Paper , were to contribute - with a view to Maastricht II and the future foreign policy - to our having a separate pillar or section that says we want a non-military foreign policy .
In reality , we now have a situation in which development aid funds are being cut back .
We have no power of co-decision over the ACP budget .
It is right that Mrs Baldi should point this out .
The Member States must understand - and we have said this before - that these funds are budgeted .
I believe all this should be combined together to form a non-military part of the budget .
That is the only way to offer these countries prospects for the future .
The rapporteur writes - correctly - that the ACP states include two-thirds of the world 's poorest countries , and I know of no other assembly that consistently pursues these concepts of parity and dialogue and so helps to shape foreign policy .
We should retain that .
After the Green Paper , we must arrange a new form of co-operation with the ACP countries .
I believe we could also expand it to include a few other poorer countries , and that this forms part of the non-military sector of a European Union foreign policy .
Mr President , first of all I should like to congratulate Mrs Baldi on the quality of her report , which is not only an interesting and thorough presentation and assessment of the main work of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in 1996 but also raises much further reaching reflections which might make it possible to strengthen the role and improve the functioning of that Assembly and , generally speaking , deepen and revitalise relationships between the European Union and ACP countries , for which the Joint Assembly is a vital vehicle .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to say that the ACP-EU Joint Assembly has gradually become a more interesting and more effective body .
Most of this is due to the seriousness and dynamics of the body , led in particular by Lord Plumb , who is here with us , but also due to the quality of the reports which have been presented before the Assembly .
I think in particular of Mrs Baldi and Mrs Maij-Weggen , who have presented extremely interesting reports on the question of mines or transport in the ACP countries , which both for the Commission and the participating countries have proved to be of great importance and of considerable impact .
It is the quality of these reports and our commitment to this institution which could bring about more improvements to the Joint Assembly .
Personally , I like taking part in the Assembly 's debates .
For many ACP countries , it is a forum of outstanding democracy and a place where they can see democracy at work .
Many times it is a better example than ten books or a lot of rhetoric .
Mr President , I think that the Baldi report is a very interesting analysis of this matter , and I think that to add anything to it would be superfluous .
I would just like to thank the European Parliament for the interest and commitment which it has shown in the functioning of this institution which has been decisive for the constant improvements which have been noted .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 9 a.m. tomorrow .
Development cooperation policy
The next item is the report ( A4-0028 / 97 ) by Mr McGowan , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on complementarity between the Community 's development cooperation policy and the policies of the Member States ( COM ( 95 ) 0160 - C4-0178 / 95 ) .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking my colleagues on the Committee on Development and Cooperation because this report is very much a product of a great deal of work by them .
I would also particularly like to thank the President of Parliament , who has been under some pressure from the professional offices of Parliament about an important paragraph in the motion for a resolution in the report - paragraph 21 - which outlines the whole range of initiatives that the Development Committee intends to take .
I was asked to remove them but the President supported me , although he pointed out that , in fact , the Development Committee could take these initiatives without putting them before Parliament .
But the feeling is that development policy , the complementarity , coordination and whole future of development cooperation is so important that this should be brought before the House .
I wish to thank the new President for this .
The report speaks for itself but it is , of course , drawn up against the background that complementarity between the European Union and Member States is now a Treaty obligation .
It is something we have a responsibility for and it is also something that the guardian of the Treaty - the Commission - has a specific responsibility for , and I may say it has been extremely helpful with its advice .
The lack of complementarity and coordination between the Union and Member States should not surprise any of us here when we look at the lack of complementarity and coordination and , I have to say , consistency within the European Union itself .
So often development cooperation policy , trade policy , foreign affairs , environment and agriculture - if I dare mention the name - are pushing off in completely different directions , so the fact is that we in the Union are not very good at coordinating , complementing and being consistent .
This provides an opportunity for many of the Member States to continue to pay lip-service to the importance of coordination .
They all say in principle they support it , but the reality is that there is very little coordination about , and I look to the present Dutch presidency to take this more seriously than it has been taken in the past .
Mr Pronk , the President-in-Office , is one of the most able and experienced Development Ministers in the history of the European Union .
But I have to say that I am not even convinced that Mr Pronk is totally committed to pursuing a policy of coordination within the European Union and I hope that given his ability and influence we can expect both him and the Council of Ministers to behave better .
Member States so often use development policy for other purposes : as an arm of foreign affairs , an arm of narrow national interests , an arm of the arms industry , an arm to support the oil industry .
This , generally , is a reflection of the lack of priority that is given to development cooperation .
The poorest people in the world are becoming more numerous and poorer because of unemployment and other problems .
We often say in the European Union that we cannot really continue to afford our own welfare states and social security services .
In exactly the same way , some Member States say that we cannot continue our responsibilities in the rest of the world .
The debate on racism brings this to light .
But we cannot afford , for selfish reasons alone , not to cooperate with people in every country , and particularly those in developing countries .
It is time for us to take on some of the big issues .
Through the Development Committee we have taken on the issue of landmines .
We know that everybody deplores landmines but , of course , they are still produced and still planted in many parts of the world .
It is now time to take on the whole arms industry and arms trade , because six of the permanent members of the Security Council of the United Nations , which includes Britain and France , account for 85 % of the world 's arms trade .
It is time to take on the multinationals .
I pay tribute to Richard Howitt , my colleague here , for the work that he is doing in Colombia .
I wish the Commission would be even stronger in helping us to take on some of the oil companies .
This really is about self-help practice by the European Parliament .
We advocate this in developing countries .
We need a new world order based on an awareness of interdependence , but that means mobilizing support at the grassroots from the public .
I feel our Member States underestimate the concern that there is amongst some of people we represent , some of the poorest people we represent , some of the youngest people we represent - some of them are here tonight .
If we do more in our own communities and work more with the elected Members in the Member States , we can achieve a great deal together .
Mr President , let me start by saying clearly that this debate tonight is about one of the great failures of EU development policy .
Coordination is just not working .
Article 130x of the Treaty is not being upheld .
Mr McGowan is absolutely right in his report when he says that all that we hear about coordination is rhetoric and that coordination is not followed in practice .
There is an important onus on us tonight in this debate to ensure that we do not add to that rhetoric and that we identify the real barriers and real reasons why coordination is just not taking place .
In the time available to me I will address just three .
Firstly , we have to concentrate on how far priorities for development aid are still being determined within the Member States by historic , commercial and political interests .
We are still talking about tied aid in the late years of this century .
For Member States the question is not one of how aid can best be coordinated , but one of donor competition : how far they can buy influence by being the biggest donors in particular situations .
At a time when there is increased pressure on the public purse in so many of our countries , too many officials in Member State governments see the question as one of competition between the development aid budgets in the European Union and the funds they themselves can disburse within the Member States .
The second barrier concerns the fear in Member States of ceding power to the European Commission .
We see this through the absurd Comitology committees which operate in Brussels .
We criticise them frequently for their cost , bureaucracy and secrecy .
Yet if there is any reason for these committees , it is surely to have a two-way dialogue about coordination of aid .
But it does not work .
It is a one-way dialogue .
The Commission gives the information .
The Members States do not .
We see it too in the individual delegations and missions , where we find suspicion and hostility between embassies and between delegations of the European Commission .
Finally , the barrier is the staffing of the Commission .
There are only two people in DG VIII who are responsible for operational coordination and only one person in DG I B , and we are looking at a decrease in the number of staff in delegations to individual countries .
Unless we are prepared to deal with those barriers , there will be no coordination .
We will not have the necessary concentration on the quality of aid , on the participation of less developed countries themselves .
Tonight , let us hear what proposal is going to be made to follow up the pilot exercises .
Are they just going to stand alone or are we actually going to see some action on them ?
Madam President , first of all I should like to congratulate Mr McGowan warmly on his excellent report .
This report comes at a very opportune moment because the informal Council for development cooperation is meeting on 28 February and 1 March in Amsterdam and this is precisely one of the most important subjects of his report .
So it is very appropriate that we are debating this report at this time , and it would be even nicer if my good friend Jan Pronk were also here .
This is the second time this week that a Dutch minister is obvious by his absence .
But I shall not criticize Jan Pronk because I know he is an excellent minister for development cooperation and I worked with him for five years in the Dutch Council of Ministers .
That is already one reason for not criticising him too severely , but he would have been well advised to come here if only to listen to what Mr McGowan had to say .
I hope that he will nevertheless be informed of the contents of this debate .
Madam President , although development cooperation has often produced many good results we must admit that it has also given rise to many complaints about its effectiveness .
Sometimes that is due to bad management in the countries themselves , sometimes it is due to wars and natural disasters , acts of God , but sometimes it is also due to bad coordination of the donors ' aid .
And when the latter is the case , Madam President , we must accept the responsibility and learn how matters can be improved .
Allow me to give you three examples of strange coordination that I myself have come across in practice during my travels .
Up until the eighties Zambia received a tremendous amount of development aid just because it was such a pleasant country ; so much so that more than half of the national budget came from development aid .
Everybody knows that is bad for a country .
It stifles initiative and responsibility and yet together we were unable to reduce it .
And that is a sign of bad coordination .
In Mauritania and Senegal I was there when a Dutch agricultural project which was on the border of Mauritania and Senegal had to be passed over to the local population .
But they did not really want to do that and went to Denmark to see if they would take over the project .
And even the European Union was apparently unable to call these two countries together and make sure that did not happen .
And in Nepal I saw a complaint from two NGOs who complained that a leprosy project was being offered on such attractive terms that even the regional government was asking for backhanders .
You really wondered what it was all about .
These are only a few examples of bad coordination .
Where , Madam President , are the major problems ?
Mr McGowan has mentioned the most important one : since 1994 the Union has had an integrated foreign policy .
Our commissioner for development cooperation , Mr Pinheiro , also has responsibility in his field for foreign policy , trade and human rights , and that works well .
But in the Member States these areas are still kept separate .
And when I look at the differences in the amount of aid , at the differences in guidelines and the differences in the places where aid is given , then I must come to the same conclusions .
There are four countries that reach the OECD norm of 0.7 % .
The others fall far short of that figure .
And as far as guidelines are concerned , as our Socialist colleague has just said , there are major differences between Member States .
Some view development aid as something given to help really poor countries .
Others see it as an extension of foreign trade and yet others regard it mainly as a means of keeping the balance of power in place .
And we all know which countries that applies to .
And then , Madam President , there is also a third problem when we come to cooperation with multilateral organisations , the IMF , world bank , or whether cooperation with the NGOs , where completely different guidelines are being followed .
Some countries work with very many NGOs , others with very few .
The Commission has tried to coordinate matters in some countries .
It may well be understandable that the Commission has not tried to get all Member States singing from the same hymn sheet .
No , what happened is that a number of pilot projects were started in Bangladesh , the Ivory Coast , Ethiopia , Costa Rica and Peru and there they decided to try to coordinate them in the country itself .
Ambassadors met and coordinated the projects .
That works well until you realise that the messages the Member States are sending out are quite different from what is having to be coordinated round the table .
Madam President , the time has come for the Member States to sit round the table and try to work out a better system for coordination .
This is absolutely essential .
The most important point is that this can make aid more effective and the European Union is the largest donor in the world when it comes to development aid .
Most developing countries receive more than half of their aid from us .
In Africa it is as much as 65 % .
I sincerely hope that Minister Pronk , even if he is not present here today , manages to make a breakthrough on several points in this sphere in the informal Council meeting and I hope that Mr Pinheiro will report to him on what we have said here in this debate .
If that happens , then the European Council will in my view have done something positive for the Union and for the Member States , but especially for the developing countries .
Madam President , Commissioner , I warmly congratulate Mr McGowan on his report ; I am pleased that the previous speaker , a friend and colleague , has already said what I intended to say .
Because development cooperation has nothing to do with whether we are political opponents or not .
Mr McGowan 's report has identified very many weaknesses .
The Member States show very little determination to coordinate their policy on development aid with each other and with the Union .
I too could fill an evening 's programme with slides on my experience of 27 years in developing countries , on the striking difference between the Union 's , then the Community 's , development cooperation and the bilateral interests of various European Member States .
The Member States , as I have already said , want their policy on development cooperation to be effective and efficient .
Now the best effectiveness is achieved by coordination , as you explained so clearly in your report .
But the Member States do not appear to be prepared to do that .
The inevitable conclusion is that they are prepared to sacrifice the quality of the aid for their own image in the world , they want to secure their so-called sovereignty and equate foreign policy with foreign interests and foreign relations .
I find this extremely worrying .
Reduced effectiveness diminishes the chances of development in the countries concerned and undermines public willingness to help in our countries , which in turn means that the poor countries will suffer again in the future .
I repeat for the second time : we must put a stop to that state of affairs .
We have been saying that for the past 30 years . The Union 's standing in the world means that the Member States must adhere to European policy guidelines .
I hope that these policy guidelines will be set in this Parliament .
The Union needs to be coherent in its foreign policy , as can be seen yet once more in our approach to the Great Lakes region , our fisheries policy , agricultural policy , and particularly in our arms export control .
Mr McGowan included that one too .
I hope that the Dutch presidency , that promised to act on coherency in policy , will put this item high up on the agenda .
I agree with Mrs Maij-Weggen that it is regrettable that Minister Pronk is absent from this debate on Mr McGowan 's excellent report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe Mr McGowan has presented us with an important and essential report on development policy , which could provide an opportunity for a debate on future strategy and prospects .
I don 't think this is an occasion for soap-box oratory .
Let me start by making two points . In our societies , development policy is a non-starter .
As Mrs Maij-Weggen just said , only four countries are achieving the self-imposed target of 0.7 % of the gross national product .
The last Community budget showed a reduction in real terms , and there have been further reductions in the Member States , too .
Secondly , there is no such thing as a European development policy .
What we have is 15 individual policies , plus an additional Community policy .
That is the real situation .
Recent years have shown no sign of the co-ordination called for in the Maastricht Treaty , and nor does Maastricht II .
Maastricht II is supposed to introduce institutional reviews , as Article 130 tells us .
But what is the actual position ?
It is not even on the agenda yet .
Mr Pinheiro , can you arrange for this to be added to the agenda ?
Our governments seem to have no interest in it .
And then , when I come to look at the budget : in recent years we 've seen environment and development , women and development , drifting towards zero .
NGOs are to get more .
Although we are prepared to take on more personnel at the Commission , the budget situation requires economies .
A few high officials will use up most of the money .
Then we also have an internal structural shift .
The mega-programme has been adopted by the governments without funds being made available , and those funds have been taken away from development policy .
So I can 't help wondering what the strategy actually is .
Mrs Maij-Weggen says that the Community is the world 's biggest provider of aid . Yes , the net outflow of capital in many countries is much greater than what they are getting , and we can all see that more people are hungry , more people are poor , more people are dying .
Yes , we do need a non-military foreign policy .
My last request is for Maastricht II to introduce an institutional reform ; Mr Pinheiro , we need a strong minister , a strong commissioner for this non-military development policy to supplement the foreign policy in the military and security sectors that we have with the CFSP .
Madam President , the Group of the European Radical Alliance completely endorses the terms of the communication from the Commission and Mr McGowan 's report .
For us , this goes without saying : anything which - in conception , in decision , in financing , in action on the ground and in evaluation - allows enhanced additionality between the development policies of the Union and the Member States is welcome as far as we are concerned .
But perhaps I may be permitted , following on from what Mr Bertens has said , to take this report as an opportunity to dream of a situation where this problem would no longer arise , because the Member States would delegate their powers and resources in the matter of the development cooperation to the European Union .
I represent a country , France , where people are more enthusiastic about bilateral aid than they are elsewhere - partly for historical reasons , perhaps , but definitely because of economic and diplomatic influences .
People tell me it would be in the interest of France to maintain and reinforce this bilateral cooperation .
I can 't help wondering what that interest would be , and what century we 're living in .
And I can 't help wondering it even more when I attend debates and votes in this House .
I find France being condemned - just now , an hour ago - for the part its troops are said to be playing in Chad , in the suppression of crime but also of political opposition .
I hear it said that France is accused of meddling in the internal affairs of a country like the Central African Republic .
I am led to believe that France , aided and abetted by Belgium , has played a not insignificant role in triggering and exacerbating the crises in Rwanda and Zaire and I also learn that French aid , distributed unconditionally to dictatorships , is fuelling every conceivable kind of chaos and corruption .
And anyone can learn , as I do , that on the pretext of special bilateral relationships France is very often to be found occupying a neo-colonial position , a charge that is only too well founded and against which France has no defence .
So where does France 's interest lie ?
My conviction is that it would be in our true interest to put our resources at the service of a European development policy which would suddenly take on a new scale and a new ambition .
That seems to me to be , over and above the necessary conditionality , the future of our national cooperation policies , and I believe that the Commission would earn much credit by submitting a proposal for the gradual communitization of the resources of national development policies .
I might add , as a rider to our recent deliberations on racism , that if France really did have special reasons , based on a shared history and a shared culture , to maintain bilateral cooperation with the African States , well , in that case , it might offer better hospitality to immigrants coming from those States .
Madam President , first of all I should sincerely like to congratulate Mr McGowan on his excellent report on the vital question not only of the complementarity of the co-operation policies but also aspects of co-ordination and coherence .
To a great extent the Commission shares the analysis made by Mr McGowan of the situation concerning the lack of real progress in application of the Treaty on European union in this field .
Indeed , despite adoption by the Council , in 1992 , of a number of resolutions and conclusions on the complementarity , co-ordination and coherence of Community aids and those of its Member States , the results obtained to date , albeit palpable , are manifestly unsatisfactory .
The Commission also goes along with the rapporteur 's finding that one of the main reasons for the lack of progress is the lack of interest shown by certain Member States towards strengthening this co-ordination .
The logic of bilateral co-operation is profoundly distinct from the logic of Community co-operation .
We are increasingly oriented towards programmes , towards integrating strategic development in the various countries , together with the World Bank , the International Monetary Fund , the United Nations , in other words a strategic logic , whereas bilateral aid is nearly always oriented towards projects and not for programmes or whole sectors .
That is why complementarity , synergy , co-ordination are words which should be of interest to both sides .
Unfortunately , for reasons which have already been given by members of the European Parliament , there is still a certain amount of shortsightedness on the part of certain Governments , who refuse to see that synergy and co-ordination help the countries to strengthen their own action .
Mr Pronk and myself , when we were making preparations for the Dutch presidency , picked out this subject as one of the vital matters in which progress had to be made , despite the difficulties which we knew we would face . That is why we thought of trying to attack this problem through practical cases of lack of co-ordination , lack of coherence and lack of complementarity .
At the next informal meeting of the Development Ministers which is due to take place at the end of this month , we shall be focusing on this very subject which Mr McGowan has identified in his report .
Finally , I should like to say that there are certain legitimate reasons why the European Development Fund is not included in the Community 's general budget .
There are good reasons .
However , I must say that the Commission continues to think that the advantages which this has , be it when devising policies or in assessing them or in applying them largely outweigh the small disadvantages which might exist for some Member States when it comes to the European Development Fund budget .
I have to insist and ask , in one way or another , that changes be made to this in the scope of the IGC .
I am sure that , if the European Parliament had to play a fundamental role in discussing the European Development Fund 's budgets , some of those aspects of policy co-ordination would play a leading role , not only in reports drafted by some of those members of the European Parliament who are most interested in the subject but by the European Parliament as whole .
Mr President , I should like to sum up by saying that I hope that this subject will come before us again , because it takes two to tango and if we tango together then we can put political pressure on the other partner by acting repeatedly .
As far as the Commission is concerned , once again all I have to do is thank the European Parliament for the interest , commitment and support that it has shown in this attempt to improve the co-ordination of our action with other Member States .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Relief , rehabilitation and development
The next item is the report ( A4-0021 / 97 ) by Mr Fassa , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Co-operation , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on linking relief , rehabilitation and development ( LRRD ) ( COM ( 96 ) 0153 - C4-0265 / 96 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the traditional division between humanitarian aid , rehabilitation and development is increasingly seen as artificial , whilst their interconnection is receiving ever greater attention .
These are the two issues covered by this report and the attached motion for a resolution , which I shall briefly summarize here .
The first part is devoted to the humanitarian aid of the European Union and , in particular , the role played by ECHO .
We cannot deny that the past few years have seen a sharp increase in the Community 's humanitarian aid .
Various issues are involved here , but I shall discuss just four of them , the first being the need for coordination .
A primary aspect of coordination is political and organizational coordination .
As was suggested even in the original draft of the report - and , on behalf of my group , I am tabling an amendment in this respect - it is vital that we set up a single agency for this type of problem .
The second aspect of coordination is what is known as operational coordination , that is , coordination between non-governmental organizations and the Commission 's delegations .
In this regard , we know that agreements have been standardized , and this is a positive step , in that it guarantees stable relations based on clear , known rules .
However , with so many signatories and the marked differences between them , consideration needs to be given to the possibility of adding annexes to contracts .
This would make agreements with non-governmental organizations more flexible .
A second aspect is the question of visibility , and the report looks at its underlying significance , asking , in particular , where we want visibility , at home , in recipient countries or with other donors , and what we want to achieve by it .
A third aspect is that of fund-raising .
In this respect , the report suggests collecting money directly from the public .
Such an initiative would have an important role to play in furthering visibility , since it would increase public awareness of humanitarian issues , without being to the detriment of non-governmental organizations , which could be actively involved in the collection process .
An amendment to that effect is being tabled .
A fourth aspect is the setting-up of a European volunteer service in the field of humanitarian aid .
I feel that the action already taken by the European Union to set up a European civilian service could be integrated here , with the emphasis being placed on development work .
I come now to the second part of the report , the section on linking relief , rehabilitation and development .
In April 1996 , the Commission produced a document divided into four sections , the first of which covers ways in which relief measures can take better account of development objectives and requirements .
In this respect , I should like to point out , in particular , that the document stresses the importance of country-specific impact analyses being conducted before relief actions are initiated .
A second section concerns rehabilitation and post-crisis assistance , where there seems to be a need to expand upon the Commission 's very commendable document by involving local civilians .
A third section concerns development actions and the risk of emergencies .
The Commission 's approach , which focuses on the notions of risk and vulnerability , is highly commendable but , if we are to be sure that account is taken of all the important issues , we need to realize that this is only one side of the coin .
The only way to ensure that initiatives are really successful is to accord the same importance to the skills and abilities of individuals , and so ensure the involvement of the very people we are seeking to help .
A fourth and final section covers man-made emergencies .
Conflict prevention should be an intrinsic element of policy in this field .
One issue not covered by the Commission document is that of the political dimension of humanitarian aid .
However , one cannot be blind to the fact that , although they are supposed to be neutral , humanitarian actions sometimes have political consequences .
The Commission should , therefore , evaluate the implications , case by case , and , if possible , seek to ensure that actions fit in with initiatives on conflict preparedness .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must first congratulate the rapporteur , who is nevertheless my friend , Raimondo Fassa , for his excellent report , and I must also thank the members of the Foreign Affairs Committee who have favourably received all the suggestions made by this committee .
These suggestions essentially related to two aspects : first , improved prevention , especially in the form of support for the creation of the International War Crimes Tribunal and secondly the Union 's capacity for analysing and detecting conflict situations .
Regarding the Union 's capacity for intervention - which I think is a very important point - this report makes a special plea for the reform of the CFSP and the possibility of continuing diplomatic efforts and military and civilian intervention .
Pursuing this argument , and here I must take this opportunity to stress the point to Commissioner Pinheiro , the report calls upon the Commission to study the possibility of setting up a European corps consisting of civilian and military units , capable of undertaking operations to keep and re-establish peace .
At a time of capitulation on the matter of entrusting the southern command of NATO to a European , at a time when discussions on the creation of a European pillar within NATO are becoming more and more difficult , at a time when discussions on the integration of the WEU into the European Union institutions are becoming bogged down , at a time when we can look back on the disaster of Operation Turquoise , at a time when the Union has for four months proved incapable of making up its mind to intervene in the Great Lakes region , at a time when there is no specific proposal on the reform of the European Union 's common defence and security pillar , it is not unrealistic to think that the Union might demonstrate a minimum of creative imagination and equip itself with a European intervention corps to handle these operations of maintaining and restoring peace .
This corps would be made up of military and civilian units specially trained for this kind of situation ; troops , doctors , people capable of setting up and running refugee camps ; a military corps , in other words , which would not be an agglomeration of national units but would be made up of European troops under a European flag .
A proposal of this kind , which is financially viable for the European Union , could be put into practice rapidly .
All that would be needed would be to make an immediate start , undertaking the necessary studies straight away , and if the political will existed a decision could be taken as early as June when the reform of the treaties is under discussion in Amsterdam .
Madam President , Commissioner , personally and on behalf of the Socialist Group I should like to congratulate Mr Fassa on his report .
It demonstrates that the conventional distinction made between relief , rehabilitation and development is increasingly artificial , and that we have to strengthen the interrelation between these three types of action .
Indeed , Community humanitarian aid significantly increased between 1990 and 1995 , unfortunately as a consequence of the growing number of crises which arose in those years .
But we should also bear in mind the fatigue which has begun to show among donors and the economic problems that many Member States are encountering .
Maintenance of high levels of humanitarian aid , despite all of that , could threaten development in the coming years , something which should be of particular concern to us .
Therefore we need close co-operation between the Member States and the Commission in order to make the Community 's humanitarian aid as effective as possible and it is vital that we define a global strategy - as the rapporteur made a very good case for - which is coherent in terms of its application .
This co-ordination should be part of the action taken by the third countries , specialised organisations and international agencies and NGOs .
Mr President , Commissioner , given the stagnation or even the decrease in most aid programmes , the Commission really must create the necessary financial conditions so that , once and for all , we can begin to give priority to the prevention of conflict .
It is also very important to make European public opinion aware of the importance of development aid in the medium term so that we can show the cause and effects of relationship between poverty and humanitarian crises .
Another very good idea would be contributing a European voluntary service , at Community level , for future Community action in the fields of development and humanitarian aid .
We should also pay increasing attention - just as the rapporteur properly pointed out - to the interrelation between short , medium and long term types of aid , through a duly coherent approach .
Nor should we forget - and the Council unfortunately does so - that there is no between long term means for remedying human suffering than conflict-prevention , and so we must take action as soon as the situation in a country demands it of a preventive nature - diplomatic , economic , media , publicity , etc .
The measures proposed by the rapporteur , Mr Fassa , which take into consideration all of these aims , deserve my loudest applause , and I sincerely hope that they will meet with due response by the Commissioner and the rest of the Commission .
Madam President , Commissioner , I do not feel that the role of humanitarian aid should be developed at the expense of long-term development actions .
For some time now , we have been seeing substantial amounts of funding being transferred from cooperation to humanitarian aid , both within the Member States and in the European Union .
I feel , quite honestly , that this is an unacceptable situation in which the richer countries of the world are sacrificing their political responsibility and which I feel needs to be challenged .
Humanitarian aid is , of course , more attractive , or at least appears to be more attractive , to public opinion ; it is more pleasing to the heart , has more power to move people and is , therefore , given more coverage in the press and mass media .
What I feel we ought to be doing instead is to make the European public more aware and convince people that the only way to promote international stability and growth in the poorer countries of the world is through development-cooperation policy and extensive funding for that policy , which implies , in particular , dealing with the lack of economic and political democracy that is a feature of relations between the northern and southern hemispheres .
I , therefore , support Mr Fassa 's report , which makes a number of proposals for improving the links between humanitarian aid , development aid , rehabilitation and economic restructuring .
The report expresses strong support for the actions of non-governmental solidarity organizations , which are often the first to accept responsibility with their courageous presence in areas of conflict .
I am also strongly in favour of ECHO , whose operational principles show that only real , effective and on-going coordination of European relief actions will achieve the desired objectives .
I believe that , in some ways , ECHO is the pièce de résistance of foreign presence in the poorer countries ; I believe that we should guarantee ECHO the secure resources it deserves and should ensure that it no longer suffers the uncertainties of budgetary reserve practices that should not pertain in the humanitarian sphere for policies whose aim is to help those in real difficulty .
It is my opinion that a stern warning should be given concerning the sabotaging by the Council and Member States of the coordination of development-cooperation policies at European level that the Commission had so courageously proposed .
What we are now seeing is a sort of re-nationalization of European cooperation , which is a backward step .
It is nothing more than a deliberate political choice by Member States ' governments , taken in the name of a neo-colonial policy that should no longer exist and which is having the insane result of Member States taking action in the poorer countries in downright competition and so frustrating each other 's efforts .
If we are to achieve all this , there needs to be a political will that should be restated by this Parliament , and I believe that adoption of the Fassa report - which I hope to see and towards which I shall contribute with my vote - would be a small step in that direction .
Madam President , it is high time we started using the enormous wealth of knowledge and experience that already exists , instead of constantly setting up new bodies with new personnel who have to start from scratch again .
I am thinking along such lines as the idea of a voluntary European service for development work .
NGOs have long experience and this is used for the precise purpose of avoiding sending unqualified workers to developing countries .
Instead one should seek to involve the local communities .
There can be no point in sending young unqualified Europeans to developing countries , especially those experiencing catastrophic circumstances , just to help Europe 's unemployment figures .
NGOs also have some experience in country-specific efficiency analysis through their local knowledge and collaboration with the local NGOs .
So why not ask the NGOs and ECHO to enter into a close working relationship in order to produce these country-specific efficiency analyses ?
I remember how Oxfam , for instance , a whole year before the Rwanda catastrophe , pointed out time and time again what was likely to happen there .
There had to be some form of intervention , Oxfam said , but no one listened .
Nor do I understand why it should be necessary for ECHO and the Commission to advertise themselves , bad advertisements at that , and I would like to know how much EU money or ECHO money is being used on such advertising .
I take exception to the section on reform of the common external and security policy , and feel , in general , that points 11 and 12 are somewhat jumbled .
But I am pleased that the proposed changes concerning the role of women and active participation have been included in the report .
Unfortunately a minute or two is not long enough to thank Mr Fassa for all those areas for which he deserves credit .
Madam President , rapporteur , the report we are discussing argues for the redesigning of current links between emergency actions , the rehabilitation phase and development processes , so as to make European intervention more effective .
Our group feels that any such link between emergency aid , rehabilitation and development must necessarily be achieved by strategic planning that embraces all the political , social and technical aspects of development logic and should encourage the harmonization of action being taken by the European Union , individual Member States and the United Nations .
Strengthening of the CFSP therefore seems to be vital , just as uniting the competent services within a single body , which would guarantee the coordination and timeliness of actions , seems to be a way of marking the shift from words to actions .
We are now witnessing crises that could certainly be defined as chronic and serious , and the very fact that they are protracted could allow optimal planning of actions , which could be transformed from initial emergency aid into the more specific form of targeted aid .
We are of the opinion that the Executive 's actions should take account of the needs of the weakest population groups , such as women , old people and children , and that they should encourage local markets by promoting the potential of local supply .
We are , therefore , in favour of the creation of a European body comprising both civilian and military bodies , which would collaborate with WEU to help in resolving crises and restoring peace . We are also convinced of the need for a permanent international tribunal to put a halt to crime and punish the guilty ; of the need for stricter controls on exports of armaments ; and of the absolute urgency of launching a genuine policy to prevent natural disasters and resolve armed conflicts .
Madam President , may I begin by expressing my support for the general thrust of this excellent report and the approach adopted by the rapporteur .
In my contribution I would just like to highlight the main points of the REX committee 's opinion .
First of all , we acknowledge that the Commission makes a valuable and important distinction between the different types of disaster - from pure natural disasters which may nevertheless have structural causes or be endemic in nature to limited natural disasters : floods , earthquakes , etc . , and then manmade emergencies involving violent conflicts .
In the latter often the institutional and administrative framework for development has collapsed , whereas in the former basic institutional and administrative structures remain largely in place , although disrupted or temporarily overwhelmed by the emergency situation .
That is obviously a very complex situation but , nevertheless , one which requires a flexible response .
Then , of course there is the need , referred to by the last speaker , to support and encourage local markets as trading structures , and that is a major element in assisting rehabilitation .
In fact , in many cases it would be the very basis for rehabilitation .
I would like to stress the importance of those involved in the design of relief rehabilitation and development programmes taking decisions to support interventions which promote the functioning or re-establishment of local markets and national or regional trading structures .
No discussion of this nature is ever complete without some reference to the role of the arms trade , and when we talk of major humanitarian disasters , very frequently the arms trade is mentioned and we believe , in the REX committee , that it is essential that the European Union should take steps to establish a code of conduct for the arms trade in regions of countries where obvious tensions exist and conflict is either imminent or under way .
Finally , relating to the link between the document and current European Union practices , the Commission 's approach to the links between relief , rehabilitation and development appears somewhat theoretical and involves a number of basic assumptions regarding the capacity of the European Union to implement this fairly ambitious approach .
I have had a number of very good exchanges with the relevant people in the Commission and the authors of this document and I have told them that I am very glad to see it here and that I think that the document is excellent and goes a long way towards meeting the proposals being made by the European Parliament over the years .
Nevertheless , my main concern is still whether this document can find an effective follow-up in the day-today implementation of European Union relief , rehabilitation and development aid , and perhaps more attention needs to be paid as to how things are functioning at the moment before going into proposals for the future .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I must sincerely thank the rapporteur , Mr Fassa , for his work on this report .
Now , I should like to deal briefly with one or two points .
What I particularly welcome about this report is that it has dealt with the question of military protection for humanitarian activities .
This is a problem that confronts us again and again , and in recent times , especially , humanitarian aid organizations have increasingly been the victims of acts of violence .
I also believe that this is an area in which we can implement a little bit of common foreign policy on behalf of the Union , and so I also welcome the opinion of the Foreign Affairs Committee regarding the Peace Corps .
I share the previous speaker 's view regarding the problems of arms exports .
But although a number of European countries have very strict rules governing shipments of weapons to areas of conflict , there are always criminal elements that find ways and means of coming by arms and then supplying those arms to crisis areas and elsewhere .
So negotiations are all very well , but they are not a final answer .
Another point concerned with aid to disaster areas and sustainable development is , in my view , that where emergency aid is concerned we cannot quibble about any human rights violations - the victims of the disaster come first in this instance .
But in the case of continuing and continuous development work - development aid - we must indeed pose the human rights question , and I regret to say that there is one point on which I must contradict my esteemed colleague , Robles Piquer : not even a degree of prosperity in a country or improved living conditions can justify human rights being trampled underfoot , and I cannot feel any respect for a statesman who has done that , even though we are supposed to speak no ill of the dead .
Madam President , the Commission wishes to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Fassa , on his report and is in general very favourable to its conclusions and recommendations .
The report is a very positive step in the process of formalizing an approach which has been marked throughout its development by continuous consultation with a wide range of interested parties .
The Commission would like to single out a number of points highlighted by the rapporteur for particular comment and also to provide Members with an update on the way the linking relief rehabilitation and development approach is being applied , as well as to comment on some issues of importance concerning humanitarian aid and ECHO .
I am convinced that the effectiveness and efficiency of aid efforts cannot but be improved through a proper understanding of the reinforcement of the links between the different phases of relief , rehabilitation and development .
Equally important , and as highlighted in Mr Fassa 's report , is the need to coordinate actions of the Community and the Member States and indeed , beyond this , to ensure that there is good coordination between the Commission and the other major international organizations and agencies .
Only then can we ensure coherence and promote efficiency .
Another crucial point is the need for better targeting of aid to the people in need .
This can be very difficult to achieve , especially in humanitarian crises involving massive refugee flows and insecurity , but it is nevertheless essential both to make the best use of funds and to maintain public support for provision of life-saving aid in the longer term .
Furthermore , much humanitarian aid has had to be provided in conflict zones , where the civilian population has been increasingly affected , or even the direct target , of violence .
In such circumstances , the humanitarian community is faced with many basic and yet extremely difficult questions as to the neutrality and impartiality of aid .
Questions are rightly asked about how manipulation and looting of warring factions can be avoided , how human rights abuses are countered , how aid workers are protected and so on .
Many of these legitimate concerns lie behind the points raised in the report before us .
The Commission clearly recognizes the serious difficulties involved in providing humanitarian aid in these situations .
The awareness of the inherent risks and an on-going analysis of situations prone to crisis , whether due to political or economic reasons , is an important part of this work .
It is , however , necessary to realize that the problems encountered vary considerably from one crisis situation to another .
The Commission makes great efforts to coordinate with partners such as NGOs , the Red Cross and UN organizations , to adapt the response in each situation .
The report brings the issue of conflict prevention to the fore and this is naturally welcomed by the Commission .
The importance of prevention cannot be overstated ; prevention of conflict and promotion of a level of structural stability are central to the linking relief , rehabilitation and development approach and as you are aware the Commission has prepared a Communication on this subject which is currently being discussed in the Council .
The Commission is also delighted to see that the rapporteur deals specifically with gender and that this issue has also been highlighted in the opinion delivered by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy .
The gender aspect figured prominently in the Communication on linking relief , rehabilitation and development and in ECHO 's work in 1996 and will continue to do so , being an essential part of making our humanitarian assistance equitable and effective .
Women and men have different vulnerabilities to crisis and often different ways of coping with them .
Overall , men tend to have more options than women , as they generally have greater control over resources , greater mobility and decision-making power .
Therefore , we need to work out how this can be accounted for when planning and carrying out humanitarian operations and make sure it is actually implemented in the field of operations .
This concern also links up with the points raised in Mr Fassa 's report on local and regional capacities .
It is all too easy to destroy fragile and fledgling markets with ill advised or poorly focused programmes .
The involvement of local personnel and strengthening local institutions to deal with disasters can prevent many of the negative effects of disaster relief which have been observed , where expatriate staff and resources on many occasions have completely overwhelmed and sidelined local efforts .
This is an area that we are particularly sensitive to in the Commission .
Indeed it is our aim to encourage the private sector which we view as the powerhouse to fuel growth in the ACP countries .
It is in this spirit that we believe that better development reduces the need for emergency relief , that better relief contributes to better development and that better rehabilitation eases the transition between the two .
Progress in implementing the linking relief , rehabilitation and development approach has been marked by a number of milestones .
Indeed , as linking relief , rehabilitation and development is seen very much as an approach which is widely applicable to a variety of situations , its influence has been pervasive and its progress rapid .
Those responsible for the development and implementation of programmes have at their disposal a technique which attaches itself to existing programmes , because all that is required is that the programme be developed with linkages in mind and based on coordination , both internal and external .
The mere fact of considering , at the earliest stages , the future implications of actions taken now helps to focus on improving the efficiency and effectiveness of aid .
Task forces are probably one of the most tangible and pragmatic ways of witnessing intra-Commission cooperation and coordination in practice .
They have been set up in those regions where the approach is most advanced .
The two best examples to date are the task forces that have been in place for some time now for Haiti and the Great Lakes region .
Others have been in place for longer such as in Liberia .
Informally , and thanks to the appeal of and the need for this new approach , coordination and interservice cooperation is better than ever before with the advantage that it is now backed by the Commission 's Communication and the fruitful debate it has provoked .
It has been transformed internally within the Commission into a Joint Instruction signed by the Directors-General of all external DGs and the Director of ECHO and sent to all external services and delegations .
The linking relief , rehabilitation and development is not confined to the Commission .
Member States are invited to participate fully in the work and the Commission is pleased that the Council has agreed that the Commission and Member States should work together on the preparation of global policy frameworks for certain countries and regions .
This report has highlighted many important humanitarian aid issues and is a welcome step in the linking relief , rehabilitation and development , where Parliament has always been supportive as well .
Madam President , I am sorry for speaking at length but this is the kind of report and subject in which much of the substance of our day-to-day action in many of the most difficult areas is at stake .
Therefore I thought my response deserved to be a bit longer in order to express some of our concerns .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
I declare the sitting closed .
( The sitting was closed at 8.05 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I refer to the Minutes .
As regards Amendment No 5 to the Lindholm report .
I was recorded as abstaining on that particular vote .
I had in fact intended to vote ' Yes ' but my fingers had the ' curse of Pasty ' and I just got it wrong .
So can I be recorded as having voted for that particular amendment .
That will be attended to , Mr Hallam .
Madam president , on item 7 , ONP and universal service for telecommunications .
Yesterday 's vote was an extremely difficult one and I fully sympathise with there being the odd mistake , but I would like this corrected .
It says here that we voted three times on deleting the word ' exclusively ' .
Now it would appear to be correctly reported in the Minutes , but afterwards it has three times been wrongly incorporated into the directive ; I would like to ask through you that your services correct this .
The Minutes are excellent but the final text is incorrect .
That is all I wish to see corrected .
I understand your point , Mr van Velzen , and the necessary corrections will be made .
Madam President , I am not referring directly to the Minutes , but rather to the verbatim report of proceedings for Wednesday .
In that report , the inadequate answer given by the Council to my supplementary question to Mr Sjöstedt has been reproduced correctly , and the comment I made later with reference to the Rules of Procedure is also correct .
However , the actual question that I asked has mysteriously disappeared , and has been replaced by a question that I put to the Irish Council Presidency last year .
I just wanted to point out that this means that in some mysterious way parts of the verbatim report of proceedings for December have found their way into the verbatim report of proceedings for February , namely Wednesday .
We shall do everything possible to sort that out .
Are there any other comments ?
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Votes
I have voted against the McGowan report on complementarity between the Community 's development cooperation policy and the policies of the Member States .
I am a firm supporter of improving development aid but I believe that this should take place at national level .
The main aim of the report would appear to be to strengthen the EU 's combined Foreign and Security policy and to ' contribute to the international recognition of a European identity ' which is written in the text of the resolution .
I come from Sweden , a non aligned country , and I believe that our country can make a significantly greater impact in the world as an independent progressive nation than we can by having to adapt to , what is in practice , a super power controlled CFSP .
We have voted in favour of the report as we support the aim to coordinate the EU 's development aid and to avoid duplication of work .
On the other hand , we are totally opposed to the complete harmonisation of development aid for EU countries .
We think it is important that EU Member States continue to operate their own independent aid policies under their own banners .
The Treaty of Maastricht stipulates that the development policy of the European Union should complement that of the Member States .
But that complementarity requires coordination between the Union and the Member States .
And this is where very little happens in practice .
Mr McGowan 's report clearly illustrates this .
This evil is rightly described as a result of the Member States ' lack of political will .
The report unfortunately fails to make the point that this identified lack of political will is a result of the difference in approach of the Member States .
In some development policy is part of trade , in others it is part of foreign policy and at the mercy of political interests .
Think of the French in Africa .
Such a difference in aims makes coordination far from easy .
I have therefore no great expectations of the measures proposed in Mr McGowan 's report .
That is regrettable in that the effect of development cooperation will suffer .
But with the lack of political unity in Europe I think it wiser to take the existing political reality and make maximum use of the opportunities for coordination rather than strive towards the lofty ideal of a coordinated development policy for the Union .
In the explanatory statement Mr McGowan says that public opinion in the Netherlands accepts a relatively high percentage of GNP being spent on development aid precisely because this gives the Netherlands a strong national profile .
That is true , but that support cannot be expected for a European policy .
That is why development should be coordinated within the Union wherever possible but should primarily remain a national policy .
And more particularly so because development aid is not about enhancing the Union 's image in the world on the basis of the amount of money spent on development cooperation , but it is about having the greatest effect in the developing countries .
These are the reasons why we are abstaining on the McGowan report .
Fassa report ( A4-0021 / 97 )
I have voted against the Fassande report on EU humanitarian aid .
I am in favour of developing humanitarian aid but I cannot vote for the report because it strongly advocates a strengthening of the combined Foreign and Security policy and a further rapprochement between the EU and the WEU .
We agree with the ambition of coordinating the EU 's development aid and making it more effective .
But we cannot support this in the irrelevant context of phrases such as ' strengthening the Union 's combined Foreign policy ' and other similar phrases or in the context of requests to the Council to strengthen cooperation with the WEU .
We think that the EU should be a civil organisation and that the WEU should be dissolved .
There is absolutely no reason for the EU to establish a military force together with the WEU which shall be responsible for ' peacekeeping ' initiatives .
This proposal must be rejected .
Clearance of EAGGF accounts
The next item is the interim report ( A4-0043 / 97 ) by Mr Mulder , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the postponement of the discharge to be given to the Commission in respect of the clearance of the accounts of the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF for the 1992 financial year ( com ( 96 ) 0417 - C4-0259 / 96 ) .
Madam President , we have had a European agricultural policy for many years now , and for many years it has been the subject of severe criticism .
I shall not dwell on the merits of this criticism at this juncture .
But there is one thing that must be quite clear : where there are regulations , these regulations must be respected , and where there is expenditure it must be according to the rules .
Over the years this Parliament has raised considerable doubts about the implementation of these financial rules .
That is why on 17 March 1995 this House adopted a resolution that henceforth there should be a separate discharge for the agricultural expenditure in the Guarantee section of the EAGGF .
The Court of Auditors also announced that it would produce annually a special report on this expenditure .
In April of last year Parliament had its first debate under this procedure and the conclusions it reached still make very interesting reading .
First of all last year 's resolution concluded that the personnel services in charge of the control were seriously understaffed .
Last year 's resolution called for the appointment of fifteen additional members of staff .
One year further on we see that only three new members of staff have been appointed .
A second important point from last year 's resolution is that financial corrections were made which should only be made for technical reasons ; political decisions have no place here .
One year further on we see in the report from the Court of Auditors that the Commission has not adhered to that rule .
If we now turn to the 1992 expenditure itself we see that from a total expenditure pattern of some ECU 30 billion ECU 800 m had to be reclaimed .
And secondly , the Commission granted certain favours to countries which the Court of Auditors says were not justified .
I want first of all to take the case of the beef storage in Ireland .
This is quite strange .
The control services of DG VI realised something was not right and made corrections of 5 % .
The Commission 's financial controller said that was too little , that serious errors had been made , it would have to be 10 % .
DG VI then confirmed this idea and repeated that it did indeed have to be 10 % . Ireland protested , but the technical services of the Commission dug its heels in , but then what did the Commission as a political body do ?
It rejected the advice from its technical services and decided on 5 % .
The loss to the Community budget was in the region of ECU 30 million .
In the case of production aid for cotton to Greece the same kind of comments can be made .
The loss to the budget from the cotton case was about ECU 30 million .
In all these cases the Commission fended off criticism from the Court of Auditors by saying that they had given the Member States the benefit of the doubt .
We disagree with that , Madam President .
What lessons can be learned from all this ?
First of all : lack of personnel must not be used to excuse inadequate control .
Investment in staff pays off abundantly in the future .
Secondly : a post facto correction of ECU 930 m , and according to the Court of Auditors it will probably be much higher , is just unacceptably high , more than 5 % of the agricultural budget , and has to be brought under control either by better supervision or by better regulations .
And thirdly : it is inadmissible that the European Commission buys off compliance with regulations by reducing financial corrections for a specific year although no improvements in that budget year were identified .
Furthermore , there is in our view the major question as to whether the maximum financial correction of 10 % is indeed enough .
We want an extra financial correction of 25 % .
Last year this Parliament gave the European Commission the benefit of the doubt .
We shall not do so this year .
We are postponing approval of the 1992 agricultural expenditure until the conditions I have laid down are met .
We shall have to ensure that in future agricultural expenditure is in order and that the Member States , both the public and the governments themselves , do not have the impression that the Commission is improperly implementing this in the future .
Madam President , on behalf of my group I want to thank Mr Mulder for his report and say that my group accepts it and appreciates his hard work , sincerity and fairness .
Of course , it is our primary duty , as Members of Parliament , to ensure that fraud or waste does not occur and we have to recognize that there is a natural tendency for Member States to be less careful in dealing with Community resources than with their own direct revenues - that is understandable .
The rapporteur refers to ECU 800m .
That figure can sound pretty horrific to the ordinary citizen .
But , on the other hand , it is about 2.5 % of agricultural spending .
So that shows it up in a different light .
We have to recognize as well that this is not money which was lost but money which may have been lost .
This is the essential difference we are talking about .
We know some of it is lost ; some of it we do not know about and , if we knew about it , it could be recovered .
I have also a personal reservation about this 25 % rate .
We have fines of 2 % , 5 % and 10 % when Member States are guilty of carelessness or a failure which may lead to loss of Community revenue .
If we lose 25 % of Community revenue , then surely there is something drastically wrong with the Commission in the first place - and with the national administrations .
If that sort of loss and waste occurs , the scheme should be withdrawn completely .
I do not accept that the Commission is so blind as to allow routinely for situations where this can happen .
I have some sympathy with the point Jan Mulder raised concerning the Commission 's decision in relation to Ireland .
I would like to point out - for Terry Wynn 's benefit too - that there were no losses identifiable in the Irish situation .
There was bad administration which may have led to losses .
If losses occurred and people were found guilty of fraud , then they would have been pursued and the money recovered .
But that did not occur : there was carelessness , which may have led to a loss of Community resources .
The Commission services - Mr Fischler 's services - proposed that for 1991 they would reduce or defer half of the fine of 10 % and that if things were put in order in Ireland - which of course they were - then that could be forgiven after two years .
In other words , the decision the Commission made did not affect the resources of the Community in any way .
What the Commission did was to take a high-profile decision , which got immense media publicity and sent the wrong signals to Parliament that a major concession had been made to Ireland , when , in fact , there was no concession .
And it sent the wrong signals to the public that you can be guilty and , through political manipulation , get off .
The fact was that this was a public relations exercise by the Commission and I regret it because it did not benefit the Irish revenue situation .
Finally , I wish to say that I accept that we have to be tough in pursuit of our interests because the common agricultural policy has fallen into disrepute .
But it is not only in relation to agriculture in the Community that fraud occurs .
I heard a news item on the BBC which quoted a British minister as saying that if he could stop fraud in the British social welfare system he would save £ 6bn annually .
In every case where there is public administration at local or national level , fraud occurs .
It is not just here - but that is no reason for us not to be tough on it .
Madam President , we are faced with one of those situations in which the average European citizen is likely to understand none of what we are saying or , worse still , to misunderstand and have a rather confused idea of how we regulate the Community 's administration .
As we have heard , administrative and bureaucratic disorder involves losses to the Community budget as a result of the appalling arrangements for advances paid in excess or the other accounting sleights of hand .
We are currently discussing beef meat in Ireland and aid to cotton production in Greece , but there could also be other examples .
As far as agricultural spending is concerned , it is perhaps really time to simplify matters .
On several occasions , Commissioner , you have spoken , at the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , of the need to bring up-to-date and simplify the CAP and , I think , the administrative system also .
But the time has come , above all , to involve the Member States on a global and continuing basis .
We need to do this to avoid having to chase up , after the event , rather as we are doing with this report , the mistakes that have resulted from misinterpretation or arbitrary interpretation .
Furthermore , our rapporteur , Mr Mulder , whom I congratulate on his meticulous work , now tells us that we also have grounds for criticizing the Commission , guilty of having yielded to political pressure exerted by the Member States and having managed its own internal services somewhat chaotically to say the least .
I do not believe this to be an issue for the Committee on Budgetary Control only ; it is a problem that brings in other areas of responsibility also .
It is , certainly , the responsibility of the Committee on Budgetary Control to identify how properly to recover funds that the Member States have improperly , though we hope not deliberately , abstracted .
We have also to point out that it is still up to the Member States to decide on how 80 % of Community appropriations are to be subdivided .
We should not therefore wage a war of religion between one state and the next or between the Commission and the Council , even though a minimum of flexibility is needed , is vital to prevent excessively rigid bureaucratic obstacles .
In my view , at any rate , we need constantly to be checking and monitoring to be sure that these issues are being properly interpreted and it is not left to the Commission , in the end , to foot the bill .
I am amazed that alongside the bad examples of Greece and Ireland , Italy does not for once appear .
I think that this inability of the European Union to function properly at an internal bureaucratic and administrative level is then reflected in administrative and managerial chaos at an external level , in relation to Europe 's citizens .
As we speak , Commissioner , once again in Italy , at this very moment , farmers and milk producers are facing the police , they are being charged by the forces of law and order because they need to demonstrate in front of the factories of the big multinationals in an effort to limit the damage caused by the infamous quotas , the surpluses of which they are the victims rather than the perpetrators .
That too is the product of poor administrative information and poor internal management .
Madam President , compulsory repayments from advances out of the agricultural guarantee funds are regularly the subject of discussion between the Commission and the Member States .
There is nothing inherently wrong with that .
But they should only be about whether the Commission has correctly estimated the amounts which were wrongly paid out .
Mr Mulder 's report shows that the Commission 's action was unfortunately also dictated by other criteria .
A declaration of intent on the part of the Irish government on improving the control system was sufficient for the Commission to lower the 1991 flat rate correction for Irish beef storage from 10 % to 5 % .
That went against the advice of the financial controller who said that the identified shortcomings were no reason at all for reducing the fine .
This situation is intolerable .
The Commission should not reward Member States for promises .
Compliance with Community regulations should be a matter of course .
The Mulder report further shows that the Commission has not been consistent in laying down sanctions .
In 1991 the same kind of infringements were identified in France and Italy as in Ireland .
These countries did not protest and had to pay the full 10 % .
In the light of the incorrect use the Commission has made of approving the accounts I support the rapporteur in postponing the discharge decisions .
First of all it must be clear that it is only the damage suffered by the Community that determines the amount of the flat rate corrections .
In this it is essential that the criteria for flat rate corrections should be more clearly defined .
Madam President , the amount of the total financial corrections - ECU 800 m for 1992 - shows that the application of Community regulations still leaves much to be desired .
This is not only a financial problem but it is also extremely harmful for the reputation of the agricultural sector and the Union .
That is why I agree with the rapporteur that the services in charge of approving the accounts should be enlarged in order to increase the reliability of the financial corrections .
That does not detract from the fact that proper financial management is first and foremost the responsibility of the Member States and is impossible without the cooperation of the national supervisory bodies .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Mulder has presented a very well-balanced report here today , and in this report he has , to a certain extent , got to the bottom of the problems facing the Commission when the latter takes its decision with regard to the clearance of the accounts submitted by Member States .
The Commission has to get back from the Member States any expenditure which has clearly not been made in accordance with Community law .
The only thing is , ladies and gentlemen , that such black-and-white situations are unfortunately rare .
In most cases , the Commission has to assess the risk to the EAGGF that arises as a result of insufficient compliance with the regulations , especially those that concern the efficacy of the measures carried out by Member States to control applications for aid .
Accordingly , it then rejects part of the expenditure , a part which is in proportion to the risk involved .
The level of expenditure that is to be rejected is considered very carefully , in accordance with fixed guidelines , taking fully into account the arguments of the Member States , and after consulting a body of independent , senior figures .
The fact that the Commission reclaims money is a strong incentive for Member States to control Community funds in accordance with the rules .
In many cases , therefore , they improve their control measures as soon as the Commission 's auditors inform them of any shortcomings .
Whenever this has happened , the Commission has always decided in their favour when determining the rate of correction in cases of doubt , because one of the Commission 's most important objectives is to motivate the Member States to improve their control systems constantly , rather than to punish them .
Ladies and gentlemen , as regards the reduction of the correction for Ireland from 10 % to 5 % , I should like to make the following comments . The Commission 's auditors found that in 1990 and 1991 in Ireland , there were major shortcomings in the control system for the intervention buying of beef , and therefore , for both these years , a flatrate correction of 10 % was proposed .
Both Ireland and the arbitration body took the view that controls in 1991 had improved , and that the risk of loss in that year was therefore lower .
However , at the time the auditors were not convinced of the effectiveness of these improvements , because intervention buying had been suspended with effect from 1993 until the date of the decision on the clearance of accounts .
No intervention buying took place .
Therefore the financial controller did not feel able to agree to a reduction in the correction .
So the Commission , on the grounds of fairness , decided in favour of the Member State , as it always does in cases of doubt , as I said earlier .
I can tell you , however , that in the mean time , once intervention buying had resumed , inspections were carried out in October / November 1996 and the results of those inspections were entirely to the Commission 's satisfaction .
On the second question , regarding the cotton situation in Greece , this entirely exceptional correction of 25 % represents the maximum possible loss to the Community budget .
As part of the measures taken to improve control procedures , the Greek authorities carried out ex-post controls at the ginning plants , which showed that the actual losses were very probably not more than 10 % .
In those circumstances , we could not stick to a correction of 25 % .
In connection with the comments that have already been made , pointing out that the corrections amount to more than ECU 800 million , and that one might well deduce from that that the EAGGF funds were poorly managed , it is essential to make it clear just how big a percentage this sum represents , measured against the total funds , and also to point out that ECU 415 million , i.e. more than half the total sum , concerns a single case , namely the noncollection of the coresponsibility levy for milk in Italy and Spain .
If you treat this amount separately , then the remaining sum amounts to only 1.3 % of Guarantee Fund expenditure .
I do not think that that gives anyone grounds to conclude that the funds are poorly managed .
The Commission is also prepared to review its guidelines for determining the level of correction , along the lines requested by Parliament , in order to clarify and place greater emphasis on the principles that it is , de facto , already observing .
This review will be completed by the end of June , and until then we shall keep Parliament informed of our findings .
At any rate , corrections as high as 25 % should be undertaken only after very careful consideration , because the legal bases on which the Commission acts rarely allow a correction to be undertaken that amounts to more than the actual loss to the Community budget that may possibly have arisen .
Moreover , corrections cannot be made automatically in all cases in which the Commission requires controls to be improved , but only in those cases where a provision of Community law has not been complied with .
However , the Commission also considers it desirable to increase the number of accounts clearance staff , and it will endeavour to find the extra positions recommended by Parliament .
I would just ask you to bear in mind , however , that the sort of staff required for this highly specialized task can seldom be recruited internally , and the number of new jobs is strictly limited .
Against this background , I hope I can count on your support as we seek to achieve this objective .

In this connection , I should like to thank Mr Wynn , in particular , for his comments , and finally I should also like to express my thanks to Mr Mulder again , and to the House as a whole , for this constructive report .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Madam President , our group will be voting in favour of Mr Mulder 's report .
We agree with his conclusions , by the terms of which the discharge to be given to the Commission in respect of the clearance of the 1992 EAGGF accounts will be postponed and made subject to certain conditions .
We also agree with the analysis contained in Mr Mulder 's report , especially regarding the two decisions by the Commission which prompt this postponement .
And , finally , we agree with the conclusions he draws from that analysis . No revisions should be called for , even if that is difficult to accept in the light of the substantial losses suffered by the Community budget , amounting to nearly a billion ECU .
The Commission must amend its procedure for the clearance of the accounts so that a reference to any improvement in controls cannot in future result in a retroactive reduction in the flat-rate corrections .
We also agree with the call for a flat-rate correction of 25 % .
I should like to take advantage of this vote to emphasize the difference in relation to the 1992 discharges to the Commission and the 1993 discharges on Parliament 's budget .
I hope that the postponement of the discharge for which we are going to vote will not result in a contrary decision and will be followed by genuine results , and that the discharge will be refused until such time as Parliament 's demands have been met .
That , in any case , will be the firm position of the Europe of Nations Group , in order that , in accordance with what the group has always maintained , substantial sums from the Community budget should be appropriated in accordance with the legal rules and there should be genuine control exercised by the Members of the European Parliament to ensure that the interests of the citizens of the various nations of Europe are safeguarded .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Assisting spouses of the self-employed
The next item is the report ( A4-0005 / 97 ) by Mrs Lulling , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , on the situation of assisting spouses of the self-employed .
Madam President , those responsible for drawing up our agenda are too often guided by a special scale of values and priorities for reasons that reason knows nothing of .
So it happens that the report which I have the honour to present on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights - a report which is of interest to at least 10 million assisting spouses in the European Union , and perhaps even twice that number - has been relegated to this sparsely attended Friday morning sitting .
It is true that we have been in competition with mad cows , the number of which in the European Union is equally unknown .
It is true , too , that the sad fate of the millions of assisting spouses working in their husbands ' businesses , with no legal status , no independent social security , no financial security in the event of divorce , no claim on the assets to which they have contributed - is a less emotive subject than mad cows for those Members who , this week , tabled a motion of censure against the Commission .
This is 1997 .
In September 1994 , the Commission presented a report on the disappointing progress made in implementing the 1986 Directive on the application of the principle of equal treatment for self-employed men and women , including assisting spouses .
That directive failed to arouse our enthusiasm , because its content could be described as ' decaffeinated ' by comparison with the Commission 's initial proposal , but it did at least have the virtue of existing . I would not deny the fact that progress has been made in some Member States , but , more than 10 years after the adoption of the directive , the majority of spouses participating in the activities of the selfemployed are forgotten people , invisible workers .
As the report on the application of the directive - drawn up by the Commission after a delay of at least three years - has not been presented to Parliament , the Committee on Women 's Rights has had to compile an own-initiative report on these invisible victims of discrimination , the assisting wives working in millions of family businesses , especially in agriculture , the SMEs , crafts and trade , though not excluding those with professional spouses .
I felt that no purpose would be served by lamenting the past and the all-too-obvious fact that the 1986 directive has sadly failed in its purpose . I felt it would be better to look to the future , to make specific proposals to add muscle to the ' decaffeinated ' directive of 1986 - proposals capable of providing a remedy to the precarious situation affecting these assisting spouses , especially in cases of divorce or the death of the husband .
We do realize - subsidiarité oblige ! - that the amended directive we want can only create a framework within which the Member States will have to take action to achieve the objectives which I shall now summarize : we want assisting spouses to have a legal status , enabling them to choose between the status of employed spouse , partner spouse or collaborating spouse ; we want it to be compulsory for assisting spouses to contribute to social security schemes covering illness , invalidity , accident and old age ; we recommend tax incentives meaning the inclusion in the business operating expenditure of the remuneration actually paid to the spouse , on the two conditions of course that this is the normal remuneration for services actually rendered and that all the legally required deductions and contributions should be made .
We also think that measures should be taken to ensure that assisting spouses who have worked for many years in the family enterprise are no longer disadvantaged in terms of inheritance and succession .
Finally , we want appropriate representation for assisting spouses in the professional organizations and chambers of the sectors concerned .
In my own country , as regards invalidity insurance and pension schemes , for example , there has been provision since 1988 for compulsory contribution by assisting spouses , but with the possibility of an exemption .
The reality is that because of this exemption - which is too easy to obtain - out of 2000 craft enterprises where it is obvious that spouses are actively participating in the business , only 164 are affiliated under this rule .
The situation is equally appalling in trade and in the liberal professions .
Why is this ?
Lack of information , fear of the cost of contributions - even though they are tax-deductible - or , quite simply , negligence or lack of interest .
Legislators , which is what we purport to be , must know that it is often necessary to do people favours despite themselves , especially in cases where they tend to shy away from the expense .
That is why we have also proposed compulsory registration for assisting spouses , so that they cease to be invisible workers .
It has been pointed out to me that , in the United Kingdom , this demand would no doubt be blown up out of all proportion by one section of the press as a platform for yet another campaign against Europe .
I should be happy for that to happen - at least public opinion would be alerted and would know that our Parliament is doing something for these invisible workers .
I know that the Commission is in the process of organizing round tables with the organizations concerned with a view to debating the needs of assisting spouses .
I was able to attend the first of these round tables .
If this process continues , and if the Commission draws the conclusions it should from these round tables and from our report , I for my part can promise it that it will run no risk of a motion of censure .
If that were not the case , I should see no better reason there - at any rate , no better than the reason we have been discussing this week - to censure a Commission that disregards the fate of tens of millions of citizens of our Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the rapporteur , who has taken the trouble to present us with such a well-balanced report , a report which also won a large measure of agreement in the Committee on Women 's Rights .
As the report says , the overwhelming majority of assisting spouses of the self-employed are women who work together with their husbands in agriculture , crafts and commerce , and in the liberal professions .
In doing so , most women carry out these activities without any formal recognition of their legal status , and many of them play just as important a role as their husbands - particularly if they are involved in running a farm .
It is very difficult , however , to estimate just how many assisting spouses there are , and the task is rendered even more difficult by the fact that there are no precise criteria .
Many of them are employed on a full-time basis , so that they appear as normally registered employees and are covered by social security like all other employees .
Others , however , are not recognized at all , which means that if the partners divorce or separate they encounter substantial difficulties , and women in particular are often left out in the rain without any social security protection .
Others , again , are partners in the business - in other words there is a whole range of different possibilities .
The 1986 Directive was intended to provide joint action to improve matters .
However , it is lacking in precise direction and its vague wording makes it difficult to define a joint status .
The problem is made worse by the fact that Member States have proved reluctant to transpose the Directive into their national legislation .
The Member States are refusing to transfer responsibility to the Union , and we have now reached a blockade situation .
Our great difficulty is that the Social Chapter is not yet part of the Treaty .
It is therefore particularly important that we should give our attention to ensuring that equality of opportunity is included in the Treaty on European Union , and to the fact that it constitutes an important pillar for women and for citizens ' rights in the Union .
Member States , however , are somewhat disinclined to take action on this matter .
Therefore we , in the European Parliament , must exert pressure on them to grant more status to these women .
But where should we start ?
I believe that this report indicates that the question of compulsory registration for women should not be left up in the air .
Instead , we must exert pressure in order to ensure that all women are included , and that they can become members of statutory pension and invalidity insurance schemes , so that some progress can be made in this direction .
And on this point I should like to say that , standing as we do on the threshold of the 21st Century , we should not still be relying on old 19th Century family roles where marriage is regarded as an institution to provide for women , certainly not when we have divorce rates of over 30 % .
Women must no longer be the worker ants in family businesses , who work themselves into the ground without complaining , and who , while bearing the double burden of work and housework , lose all status and all rights .
Therefore we need an independent invalidity and pensions insurance , we need independent professional representatives for these women , and they must be given opportunities for further training , and I believe that on the eve of International Women 's Day , on March 8 , this is a requirement for which the European Parliament should take full responsibility .
I would therefore ask that this report be approved
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the debate about the rights of assisting wives began about 30 years ago in Austria .
Today , the legal position is as follows : the assisting wife or the husband can be employed quite normally as employees .
They are then covered by sickness , accident and pensions insurance .
If the activity consists merely of internal assistance , then it cannot constitute a working relationship , but the assisting spouse can take out sickness insurance along with the other partner .
If the marriage ends in divorce , then under § 81 of the Marriage Act , the marital property and marital savings are divided up .
The only thing is that the wife must have actually made her contribution .
Under § 83 ( 2 ) of the Marriage Act , this contribution consists of the following : ' running the joint household , caring for and bringing up the joint children , and any other conjugal support ' .
That may also be a good piece of advice .
As far as farmers ' wives in particular are concerned , the separate paying out of pensions was introduced in 1989 in Austria .
A farmer 's wife can demand , even against her husband 's wishes , that 50 % of his pension should be paid directly to her .
Since 1992 farmers ' wives have had their own pensions .
Since 1 July 1990 , farmers ' wives also receive benefit for a ' non-working period ' of one and a half years following the birth of a child .
There is also a farmer 's wife 's weekly allowance , based on the wife 's own insurance , which is payable for the statutory maternity leave period , which in Austria is four weeks before and four weeks after the birth of a child .
With effect from 1 January 1993 , a woman who retires receives a supplement for each child , and periods spent bringing up children are also counted as qualifying periods giving rise to pension entitlement for the purposes of calculating her own pension .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we should continue the discussion .
I should be happy to give all of you the documents describing these legal options .
We are not discussing fantastic dreams : what we are discussing is a reality and a right that is already being experienced in a Member State of the European Union .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . I totally agree with Mrs Lulling .
The fact that this report is being taken on a Friday of the Strasbourg part-session is already an indication of the lack of interest in this subject .
It is a true reflection of the situation of assisting spouses today .
The assisting spouses are usually described in state registers as ' with no profession ' or ' house mother ' or ' housewife ' .
They are often a major unknown factor for social security .
In reality , however , they are an indispensable aid to their husband .
The Liberal Group therefore warmly welcomes this own initiative report but would welcome even more enthusiastically the Commission 's proposal for amending the existing directive .
The assisting spouse deserves more than just recognition from her husband and family .
Circumstances such as divorce , death or invalidity of the spouse can put an unexpected end to this recognition and herald in total misery .
To the report .
What I think is particularly important is first of all that we opt for a compulsory system of registration and enrolment with an insurance .
We have seen from the French system that a voluntary system does not produce the expected reaction .
Secondly , we need a legal statute which despite being compulsory should be sufficiently flexible , especially with regard to calculating the contributions .
If we make the granting of a statute too complicated we risk unwittingly creating a category of concealed assisting spouses , and that is certainly not our intention .
I also support the rapporteur 's proposals for greater awareness and encouraging those concerned to register their spouses in a tax incentive scheme .
I regret to have to say that the Belgian government is barking up the wrong tree on this point and is turning the clock back .
As of 1 January of this year they have stopped allowing independent workers to set part of their income in the name of their assisting spouse and is therefore killing off this tax incentive .
The assisting spouse can henceforth only be registered as an employee or business manager , but for many liberal professions this is impossible in view of the deontology of the liberal profession and company legislation .
There is no longer any question of flexibility .
But hopefully the new European legislation will persuade the Belgian government to think again because what it is currently doing is very like the Echternach procession .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope that we can soon have here a debate on the legislative proposal on assisting spouses .
I would be interested in hearing the Commission 's plans on this score .
Mr President , what used to be called atypical work has now become typical .
The instability and precariousness of labour relations , the fruit of the flexibility of the so-called labour market - never seen to be sufficiently flexible by employers - has now been expressed in the significant appearance and increase in the numbers of self-employed persons .
Whereas in many cases self-employed persons are nothing more than workers who have lost their legal status but retain a real occupational status which is identical to the previous one , in other cases self-employment is a new and different activity replacing what used to be called typical occupational activity .
This evolution has led to others in the cumulation of discriminations and the situation of assisting spouses of selfemployed persons , usually referred to as the wives of self-employed persons , to which particular attention should be paid .
We congratulate the rapporteur on doing so in this report .
Given that we are talking about the assisting spouses of a derived and very heterogenous group of workers , it may be estimated that , despite the lack of definition of professional status and the difficulty in quantifying them , they must be much larger in number than the 3 million referred to in the Commission report on social protection .
Given that three-quarters of them are women , they could even account , in a single Member State such as Greece , for a quarter of the female population liable to be considered as active .
As Mrs Lulling emphasises in her report , and I take this opportunity to compliment her on her work , Directive 86 / 613 is unsatisfactory especially because it fails to define the status and is ineffective vis-à-vis the right to social protection of this group of workers .
That is why it must be amended and it must be amended this year , 1997 .
The set of proposals made in the report deserve our agreement in principle and can act as a good working basis for a new directive aimed at dealing with situations which must not lead to the enshrinement , by old and new means , of discrimination against women in the world of work , because , in this case , of the virtual lack of visibility
We must also support , as a complement to the prerequisites of the directive to be replaced which have not been complied with , the concretisation of initiatives such as debates and round tables giving the interested persons a real chance to take part in defining their needs , status as well as the wording of the new directive .
Mr President , I pay tribute to the very welcome initiative taken by the Committee on Women 's Rights in producing this report in favour of providing decent social protection for assisting spouses .
Like the rapporteur , I too deplore the years of delay , the time wasted by the European Commission , years that could have been used to good effect for a better exchange of views between the various parties concerned .
None of us can reasonably deny the need for legislation on this ; as to whether the protection scheme set up should be optional or compulsory , I think that question does not arise .
Experience in Luxembourg has shown that nothing is achieved by inviting voluntary contributions .
The reason for that failure is blatantly obvious : small- and mediumsized enterprises and the self-employed , in every country of the Union , already bear a crushing weight of taxation and charges of all kinds , which incidentally the big multinationals find it too easy to escape .
Also , as well as making it obligatory for the Member States to organize social protection for assisting spouses , we have a duty to make it compulsory to provide proper information to the workers concerned and to require the national authorities to manage the money they collect with due care , contrary to the habits adopted by the majority of governments in the States of the Union , whether Left or Right .
Mr President , the own initiative report which we are now assessing , drafted by Mrs Lulling , whom I must compliment , is a work of enormous difficulty given that it refers to a group of millions of invisible workers , so invisible that statistics officially categorise them as ' inactive ' categories .
They are inactive because they are not registered as unemployed nor are they seeking work because they do not lack a job , but it is neither recognised nor remunerated .
This situation applies in particular to the wives of self-employed workers who assist them working in fields or in any type of tiny family business which can be found anywhere and which employ , according to studies which have been carried out , millions of people .
Both Community legislation and national legislations when they , rarely , make express reference to the situation of the spouses of self-employed persons - such as Portuguese legislation - come up against the reality which is quite different from the spirit of the law .
Women still very often see it as their duty to help their husbands or companions without being paid and they look upon this huge work - which is not included in the calculation of the GDP of any country - as an obligation which their status of spouse requires .
If we accept this and consider the fact that they are not recognised by law and have no rights whatsoever , we can then understand why we are talking of invisible workers : they work but earn nothing , they work but they have no social rights , even where the law so provides .
That is why I agree with the proposals made by the rapporteur , as well as the amendments , aimed at withdrawing all of these working people from their clandestinity : compulsory inscription of assisting spouses in social security schemes , making it compulsory for Member States to take not only appropriate legal measures but also to make attempts so that they can be effectively applied , introducing incentives to family businesses to comply with these obligations , all of these are proposals which have to be supported .
That is why it is vital that the Commission should prepare a new directive on this subject , from the social and financial points of view .
After all , there are many more workers who are not counted in GDP or entitled to social security .
I also think that the proposals for greater flexibility in the system and its adaptation to business size are particularly pertinent , as well as the proposal that in many small family businesses social security costs should be deductible from their profit declarations .
Finally , I would call on self-employed workers associations to regard it as their binding obligation to fight for the social situation of the spouses of their respective partners .
Again I wish to congratulate the rapporteur and I hope that this proposal , which the European Parliament will undoubtedly approve today , will very shortly be converted into a proposal for a directive by the Commission .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate the Committee on Women 's Rights and the rapporteur in particular on taking the initiative to highlight the situation of the assisting spouse and to put forward proposals to create a statute at long last for a category of the population which is large in number but small in statistics .
I hope to hear later that the Commission has been inspired by this for its legislative work .
Mr President , I have been following this matter since long before the 1986 directive and I have always wondered if the statute of the assisting spouse would be as empty and insignificant if this group were to consist mainly of men .
As far as I am concerned the situation of the assisting spouse is a yardstick par excellence for the continuing discrimination between men and women .
In my own country , Mr President , that is Belgium , the assisting spouse is the only group of people who are permanently active in a profession without being covered by a compulsory social statute .
But 97 % of this group is made up of women .
This situation cannot of course be separated from the still poor representation of women in professional and interprofessional organisations and in the political decision-making process .
If women are not there at the table their interests are not defended as well as they could be .
What we need in all Member States of the Union is no more and no less than a statute based on the same automatism as that of the self-employed , farmers and the liberal professions , namely a statute that offers social and legal protection for every risk which is present .
The other side of the coin is undoubtedly a certain price tag , but where no-one denies that there is a price to be paid for everything for respected self-employed entrepreneurs , all sorts of objections are raised when it comes to the assisting spouses of these entrepreneurs .
Mr President , I conclude with the thought that the fact that we have to discuss this here in the year 1997 is not only incomprehensible but downright scandalous .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank the Committee on Women 's Rights and in particular its rapporteur Mrs Lülling , for their excellent work .
The report we are debating today is a clear proof of the European Parliament 's interest in the promotion of issues such as equal opportunities for and equal treatment of women and men .
I believe the issue of equal treatment for women involved in the activities of their self-employed husbands is a particularly important one .
As you know , that issue was addressed at Community level for the first time in 1986 , with the adoption of Council Directive 86 / 613 / EEC of 11 December 1986 .
Assessment of the measures undertaken by Member States in that area reveals , as the report too points out most clearly , that a great deal still needs to be done , both in relation to social security and concerning the position and recognition of the role of the spouses of self-employed persons in the family business .
As Mrs Gröner too stressed , we must not forget that the lack of progress in that area partially reflects the traditional view about the role of wives in family businesses .
A view which makes no distinction between marital and entrepreneurial coexistence .
There is indeed a tendency to regard the contribution of wives to family businesses as a self-evident extension of conjugal duties .
The lack of progress also reflects the difficulties that exist concerning the adaptation of social security systems , and concerning the expenditure incurred by that adaptation for family businesses in which both spouses are working together .
The Commission is aware of those problems .
We have funded many studies , which demonstrate the serious lack of social protection for assisting spouses .
At the same time , however , it is also true that existing possibilities for voluntary insurance or for the acquisition of a separate legal status are not taken up .
On that point I would like to say that the issue of assisting spouses is included among the objectives of the Fourth Medium-term Action Programme on equal opportunities .
The Commission has undertaken to carry out a careful assessment of the situation , to include broad consultations with all interested parties .
Our aim is to examine the possibility of submitting an amended directive that will respond to the real needs in that sector .
The round-table discussions you welcome in your report and in which you played an energetic part , are the forum for the consideration of the issue .
But if we are to understand the obstacles in the way of improving the social protection of assisting wives , we need more information about their views and about the attitude of professional organizations .
For that purpose measures and policies must be implemented which are flexible , owing to the complex nature of those obstacles and also because the social protection of assisting spouses is related to issues such as the recognition of their role in family businesses , as both Mrs KestelijnSierens and Mrs Thyssen stressed very clearly .
Nowadays , society is undergoing important changes .
Women want to undertake a more active role in the labour market at all levels , as Mrs Torres-Marques too stressed .
However , we are encountering difficulties , and mainly lack of funding , as Mr Ribero very clearly emphasized .
We face problems such as the lack of appropriate services to offer business advice , a lack of suitable professional training , and a failure to recognise the abilities of those involved .
Besides , agricultural reform and changes of the CAP will radically alter the lives of farmers , and in that context the improvement of women 's status in family farming enterprises must be one of our priorities , as Mrs Flemming stressed .
All those factors must be considered together in the discussions about the self-employed and their assisting spouses .
Mr President , I would again like to thank Parliament for its support on this issue of equal opportunities , and to congratulate Mrs Lülling once more on her excellent report .
I am sure our collaboration will continue with the same aims and priorities .
Nowadays , equality of opportunity between men and women must be emphasized so that we may respond to the demands of our times and develop more effective policies to bring women into the labour market .
Thank you very much .
Thank you , Mr Papoutsis .
The rapporteur , Mrs Lulling , now has the floor .
Mr President , I should like to thank Commissioner Papoutsis most sincerely for his very positive speech , and I should like to place on record what he has just said , i.e. that the Commission will submit an amended draft directive .
Since Mr Flynn was unable to be here today , I should like to express the hope that the fine words of Mr Papoutsis will be followed by action on the part of Mr Flynn .

Thank you very much , Mrs Lulling .
The debate is closed .
The vote will now be taken .
Before the vote on Amendment No 4
Mr President , I should like to alert this House to the importance of this amendment because in the text of the report we referred to social security contributions based on personal income .
This in fact is a very ill-chosen expression , because there is no country and no compulsory insurance scheme in which contributions are paid on the basis of personal rather than professional income .
The amendment clarifies this point .
I should therefore like this amendment to be adopted , together with the different wording , because it is better than my own , which referred to a ceiling basis for social security .
The alternative wording refers to a flat-rate basis .
I think this is an important detail , but if honourable Members fail to agree with the second part , I shall call for a separate vote on the first , because it is never possible to collect contributions on the basis of personal income .
This is not done anywhere , and I would emphasize that .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Leghold traps
The next item is the oral question ( B4-0002 / 97 ) by Mr Collins , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , to the Commission , on the position of the European Commission on leghold trap legislation .
Mr Collins has the floor .
Mr President , this is the on-going saga of leghold traps .
It is a sorry tale of Commission misdemeanour .
Members will recall that leghold traps are a particularly vicious way of trapping wild animals for use in the fur industry , a way which causes the animals extraordinary and unnecessary pain .
Members will also recall that last year 's report on leghold traps by Carlos Pimenta , which called for their banning , was supported by a huge majority in this House .
On 9 December of last year , the Environment Council followed our lead and demanded full implementation by the Commission .
That was on 9 December .
On 18 December the Commission flatly rejected that demand .
So Parliament voted for it last year .
The Council voted for it in December and on 18 December , the Commission , which is not elected nor accountable to anyone , rejected our demands .
The Pimenta report calls for humane trapping procedures and was cleverly written so as to avoid conflict with the European Union 's commitments under GATT and WTO .
It even goes so far as to impose a ban on fur from animals caught in leghold traps and to allow for its lifting when agreement has been reached with third countries to stop leghold use .
This agreement would not even have to be in force for the ban to be lifted .
It was merely to be agreed .
The European Parliament managed to strike a blow for the principle while giving third states ample room for manoeuvre .
Yet we hear now that the Commission is considering proposing a new regulation which seeks to exempt Russia and Canada .
It has no justification .
It displays a complete disregard for the democratic voice of Parliament as well as the decision of the Council .
I have written to President Santer and this morning I received a reply from him .
I do not accept his reply .
It is a brave attempt to justify the unjustifiable .
The Commission must recognize that the question of leghold traps is an issue of animal welfare .
This is not just about trade .
The Commission cannot allow principle to be subsumed in a desire to placate trading partners .
It must have the courage of our democratic principles .
Our Commissioner and our Commission must stop being the representative of the WTO in Europe and must start being the mouthpiece of the European Community in the WTO .
They have their priorities the wrong way round .
That is why the question is raised today , because the General Affairs Council meets next week and the Environment Council meets in March .
The Commission must realize what a hornet 's nest it has stirred up by its decision and I ask it to tell us today how it squares its decision with respect for democratic procedures and principles .
I would like the Commission to tell this House why legislation it has passed is not being implemented and I would like the Commission to give this House the assurance that it will consult both Parliament and Council before adopting any international agreement on leghold traps .
Lastly , I demand that the Commission this morning tell us clearly that there are no circumstances and nor will there be any in which it will seek to frame legislation that avoids the need to consult the European Parliament and avoids the need to observe the wishes of the Environment Council .
I hope the Commission can give us these assurances this morning .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to tell you that President Santer responded by letter on 4 February 1997 , to the letter sent to him by Mr Collins on 23 December 1996 .

In his answer , President Santer explained clearly and in detail the Commission 's views about the issue .
The Regulation is fully in force and applies to anything relevant to its orders that takes place within the Community .
The only difficulties arise in connection with the application of the Regulation 's provisions on external trade .
Let me remind you , however , of the starting point .
Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 3254 / 91 on leghold traps provides two separate options for avoidance by third countries of the trade restrictions imposed by the European Union on fur imports , either by banning the use of leghold traps , or by the use of trapping methods that comply with internationally agreed standards for humane trapping .
Those options available to third countries demonstrate the intention of legislators , where international standards are concerned , to solve the issue of compatibility between the commercial measures specified in the Regulation and international trade rules .
Unfortunately , however , as you know , the international standards had not yet been established when the specific order came into force on 1 January 1996 .
That was because of the unsuccessful outcome of the work of the International Standards Organization , work which the European Commission had no chance to influence .
Consequently , the regulation could not be applied under the conditions and for the purposes laid down in the text .
For those reasons , in November 1995 the Commission decided to defer the implementation of the regulation for one year and to propose to the Council that Regulation 3254 / 91 should be amended .
More especially , the aim was to make it possible to negotiate an international agreement on standards for humane trapping with the main fur exporting countries , i.e. the USA , Canada and the Russian Federation .
Until recently , the Council supported the approach proposed by the Commission , as is proved more especially by the instructions it gave the Commission in June 1996 , instructions relating to the negotiation of an agreement on standards for humane trapping .
The European Parliament , at the first reading of the proposed amendment of Regulation 3254 / 91 , also backed the negotiation of such an agreement , but at the same time it called for the immediate application of the restrictions stipulated in Regulation 3254 / 91 and for them to remain in force until the agreement in question had been concluded .
It is not true that the Commission ignored that call .
On the contrary , we considered that a ban on fur imports would not contribute to the creation of appropriate conditions for constructive negotiations .
The value of an international agreement , which would for the first time establish rules for the control of the trade , should not be underestimated .
As you know , in December 1996 an agreement was initialled on international standards for humane trapping by the European Community , Canada and the Russian Federation .
The Commission conducted the related negotiations on behalf of the Community , in full compliance with the rules of the Treaty .
More especially , the Commission confirms that the agreement is on the one hand fully consistent and compatible with the orders of Regulation 3254 / 91 , and on the other hand entirely in accordance with the Council 's instructions to the Commission in June 1996 .
The Commission is also convinced that this cohesive , ambitious and legally binding agreement is the best means to ensure the substantive improvement of the level of protection for trapped animals in North America , the Russian Federation and Europe .
At the same time , the agreement safeguards the legitimate trading interests of the subscribing parties .
In contrast , the absence of an agreement would probably lead to trade disputes , which could not achieve anything in relation to the protection of animals and , in addition , the absence of an agreement would have fundamental negative economic and social consequences both in the EU and in other interested third countries , mainly for the native populations .
Furthermore , a trade dispute would undermine the credibility of the Community 's trade policy , which is clearly always opposed to the use of unilateral trade measures with extraterritorial applicability .
For that reason , on 24 January 1997 the Commission submitted to the Council a proposal for a decision on the European Community 's approval of the agreement .
Of course , and always in accordance with the rules of the Treaty , the Council will be asked for its opinion concerning the specific proposal .
At the same time , the Commission has set in motion the action necessary for the implementation of Regulation 3254 / 91 , as it was asked to by the Environment Council of 9 December .
In fact , the Official Journal has already published the Commission 's regulation on the certificates that importers must hand over to the Community 's customs authorities before furs can be imported .
As for the list of third countries , the Commission 's procedure mentioned in Article 5 of Regulation 3254 / 91 is still in force .
Finally , and again in accordance with the decisions of the Environment Council of 9 December , the Commission has made contact with the third countries involved .
The aim of those contacts was to examine the possibility of amending the agreement initialled by Canada and the Russian Federation .
And I would like to inform you that just a few days ago certain meetings took place , in New Orleans on 14 February and in Ottawa on 17 and 18 February , to convey the Environment Council 's requirements to the interested countries .
Those contacts have not so far borne fruit , and the Commission is now waiting for supplementary instructions from the Council , so that it can take the matter further .
I would like to assure you that the European Commission not only respects and accepts Parliament 's role and parliamentary control but also , as you know , we have repeatedly demonstrated that we try in every way , even beyond the statutory framework established by the Treaties , to cooperate with the European Parliament , especially on issues of this kind which are not only sensitive for economic activity , but mainly also , touch upon the sensitivities of Europe 's citizens .
I therefore also want to assure you now , that the Commission will continue to keep Parliament informed about developments in this context .
Mr President , I should like to ask the Commissioner a question about what he has just said .
He referred to the likelihood of bringing this into operation in December .
Since we are dealing mainly with the northern hemisphere , would he not agree that it is rather silly to have the cutoff date half way through the trapping season ?
Would it not be more logical to make it this summer ?
Thank you very much , Mr Kellett-Bowman .
I do not think that is exactly a point of order . It is rather a question of chronology .
But Friday 's flexibility allows me to give the Commissioner the floor if he wants to reply to Mr Kellett-Bowman 's chronological concern .
Mr President , I would like to assure Mr Kellett-Bowman that the mechanism will become operative as soon as we reach the agreement that will make its implementation acceptable to all the Member States .
Mr President , as the Commission has got nowhere with these further negotiations , it has manoeuvred itself into an utterly indefensible position on the leghold trap regulation .
Not only has it defied Parliament but it has also defied the Council of Ministers which is truly breathtaking .
In the interest of unfettered free trade , the Commission seriously expects the European Union to lie down and effectively chew off its own leg just as 600 000 fur-bearing animals caught in these barbaric legholds do every year in Canada so that fashionable women in Europe can wear fur coats , and the fur trade and the Canadian Government can continue to make millions of dollars .
These are the traps that the Canadian Government does not agree are cruel .
It all started with the tuna / dolphin issue when trade won over environmental needs .
Now the Commission is prepared to sacrifice what some may feel is the soft option - furry animals - both on leghold traps and in the cosmetic industry , in the hope of winning free trade trade-offs .
Well , it won 't do !
This WTO business is getting completely out of control and so is the Commission .
The so-called draft agreement on the leghold trap with Canada and Russia represents not so much a compromise but a suicide note .
For instance , Article 13 says : ' No party may impose trade-restrictive measures on fur and fur products originating from any other party ' .
That makes a complete mockery of our legislation !
Faced with the stubborn refusal of Canada to stop the use of leghold traps , the Commission , ignoring its mandate from its masters in Europe , has simply said : ' O.K. keep on with your cruelty and we will keep buying your furs - everything is fine ! '
More than 60 nations world-wide , including of course , the European Union , have banned the use of the leghold trap so there is no unfair domestic advantage to the European Union here .
Furthermore , Article 20 of GATT contains the perfectly adequate defence of an import ban under measures which are acceptable if they are necessary to protect public morals .
These public morals need protection .
Civilized nations cannot put up with sacrificing public decency and environmental imperatives on the altar of free-trade .
There have to be some limits and the leghold regulation sets down the limit that we want implemented in this particular case .
We want a little backbone from the Commission .
Mr President , I am sorry but once again Sir Leon Brittan is hiding behind his colleagues on the Commission , who are not to blame , in that he is not appearing here today to discuss something for which he has sole responsibility .
The speech by Commissioner Papoutsis - and I hope he does not take this as a personal attack because it was not his speech but Leon Brittan 's speech - is a set of lies .
First of all , the 1991 Regulation is still in effect and it has not been revoked by any legal act approved by the European Parliament or by the Council .
The Commission has not implemented it and the Commission has actually suspended it by means of a letter by two Directors General .
This is not admissible in legal terms .
Secondly , Sir Leon Brittan , the 1996 Regulation - which as has already been said here today was presented by the Commission - was rejected at first reading by the European Parliament which voted against the Commission 's proposals .
The Council of Ministers did not follow this up and it has not approved the common position , as it is so far away from the Commission 's position .
The third lie , Commissioner , is when you said that the agreement reached with Canada was in keeping with the Council 's terms of reference .
Yet the same Council , on 9 December last , specifically said in its decision that the agreement with Canada was not in compliance with the terms of reference which it had awarded .
Stop lying , Sir Leon Brittan !
We can discuss the substance of this .
What I cannot accept is that you should come here and play with democratically elected parliamentarians whose duty it is to control the legitimacy of the decisionmaking process .
This is a question of substance and it is also a question of the respect for institutions .
I am offended by the way in which the Commissioner comes here and lies to us !
Finally I should like to put two questions : as Mr Collins said , what is the legal basis which has been given to these agreements with Canada and Russia ?
Is the Commission trying to replace the co-operation process with a process of simply consulting the European Parliament ?
What does the Commission really want ?
Does it want to exclude the European Parliament !
And finally where is the money for scientific research , and for finding more humane methods of trapping animals ?
Mr President , I shall not repeat the sad history of this dossier .
Ken Collins , Carlos Pimenta have traced it admirably .
Our group fully agrees with you and yet I must say that in view of the brief reply from the Commissioner it would appear that commercial interests are far more important than animal welfare and democratic principles .
He said that if we had put it through we would have had serious problems in the field of economic relations and trade interests .
That is the wrong starting point if there is a 1991 directive which says that animal welfare should take precedence over trade interests , and the Commissioner and the whole of the Commission is ignoring that .
I consider the role played by the Commission in this straightforward leg trap affair is highly suspect .
The Commission acted against the will of the European Council of Ministers , against the will of the European Parliament .
All of us , both the Council of Ministers and the Parliament , wanted an import ban on fur from countries which still allowed the leg trap .
This Commission decision goes against all earlier agreements ; Commissioner , you and your colleagues should have another look at the videos , and they you will see just how cruelly these animals are captured .
This is not a resolution or an opinion from Parliament against hunting , but it is against a cruel method of capture .
We hope , now that the Commission is threatening to forget about an import ban and planning to enter into an empty free-wheeling agreement with fur exporting countries , that the European Council of Ministers will act quickly to make an import ban effective for the European Union and correct the ways of the European Commission .
Mr President , for the past two years this House has been fighting a Commission to bring about an import ban on fur which has been obtained by means of the leg hold trap .
We reel from one surprise to another .
First of all the regulation is postponed and now a compromise is proposed that really cannot be understood as a compromise .
The Commission has managed to threaten to take to court the only country that planned to implement the regulation at the correct time .
How on earth is that possible ?
Did the Commission really think that it is cleverer to present this so-called compromise , this agreement , to the Council of General Affairs rather than the Environment Council because the Council of General Affairs may listen more carefully to trade arguments and less to animal welfare ?
It is quite clear that Commissioner Brittan won a victory here over Commissioner Bjerregaard .
I want to make several appeals .
The first is to the President-in-Office of the Council of General Affairs , Mr Van Mierlo , not to accept this point on the agenda of the Council of General Affairs and to pass it on to the Environment Council where it belongs .
Mr Van Mierlo would be compromising his colleagues and making a mockery of them if he were to accept this .
The environment ministers , at least an overwhelming majority of them , have indicated that they are unwilling to accept this agreement .
I also appeal urgently to the Commission to stop going along the road of the least resistance and tackle the environmental debate , the animal welfare debate and the debate on nature in the WTO context .
For it is quite clear that that is being ignored in the WTO and that if we want to save anything here then this urgent question must be put on the agenda where we must win the day .
I have received a motion for a resolution tabled under paragraph 5 of Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following the Commissioner 's reply , I should like to say that I very much welcome the fact that Mr Collins has raised this oral question at this particular time .
Since we have only an incomplete knowledge of the results of the negotiations between the EU , Canada and Russia , on the subject of which many critical voices have been raised , it is high time that the Commission kept Parliament comprehensively informed .
I am rather surprised at the length of time it take for this House to be to some extent informed about the draft agreement , whereas lobbyists and other groups have the complete texts of agreements made available to them .
In this respect - and thank you , Mr President , for having already given an indication in this direction - Parliament should use the resolution that we are about to adopt as a means of giving a signal .
I also support the objectives contained in the motion for a resolution that has been tabled , in which the emphasis is placed on attitudes towards leghold traps .
Traps that are cruel to animals must be made to disappear , and on a worldwide basis .
Other traps may be used only if they are not cruel to animals .
That must be the guiding principle .
All we need to do in order to proceed further is to refer to Mr Pimenta 's report from last year , which tackled the many and various aspects of this problem , in other words , prohibiting traps that are cruel to animals , developing international standards for humane traps , taking into consideration the special role and situation of indigenous peoples , and clarifying the trade-policy aspects .
At the same time , I should like to warn against the possibility of achieving precisely the opposite effect by acting too ambitiously .
As a negative example , I would simply refer you to the case of Brent Spar , where incorrect information resulted in a great loss of credibility .
In my opinion , the activities of the past week , and the heap of paper that landed on Members ' desks , was over the top .
I really don 't have anything against lobbyists , but in the interests of the case itself we need a more balanced argument .
We shall only succeed in getting the countries concerned to alter their behaviour if we can appear credible to their people .
This applies initially to the indigenous peoples , who are the ones who are directly affected .
We must also take into consideration the special characteristics of their cultures and , when we have processed the results , we should draw the appropriate conclusions .
Mr President , in this Parliament , I am one of those who belong to the Working Party on Hunting , and I also represent the protection of animals , because I am convinced that a true huntsman , a true hunter , is also a protector of animals at the same time .
As such a man , I should like to thank Mr Collins with all my heart , for having brought up the question of these inhumane traps again .
I have been a Member of this Parliament for 18 years now , and I can tell you that this has been going on throughout the whole of that time , and I regret to have to say that on the Commission 's side there have repeatedly been manoeuvres to postpone and obscure the issue , so that it has not been possible for us finally to take a clear decision .
We have , admittedly , taken some decisions , but then these have not been implemented , for which various excuses have been given .
Here I should like to place special emphasis on one point in particular : there has been a lot of reference to humane traps .
Perhaps it is possible to make such traps , but the sort of traps that are currently described as humane , at least in the press , are almost as inhumane as the previous kind .
The fact that you cover the traps with a bit of rubber makes no difference at all to an animal 's legs .
The tragedy is that the animals , especially in Canada , sometimes have to live in the traps for days , in horrific circumstances .
I believe , therefore , that we have an absolute duty to make the Commission seriously aware of the fact that now , finally , we want to see actions , not words .
What I mean is that we should not go to New Orleans , and heaven only knows where else , but that we should finally take action , on our side .
I know that there is major resistance , but then resistance exists in order to be overcome .
I would therefore ask the Commission - and I have also just agreed with the Böge motion , because I considered it right to issue it with an ultimatum - to pay attention , because our patience is slowly running out .
Mr Pimenta has the floor for a personal statement .
Mr President , half true is as bad as a lie .
The Council of the Representatives of the Member States rejected in January the list of countries which the Commission wanted because the Commission had included Canada and Russia even with a preamble saying that it was provisional .
Please Mr Papoutsis it is not your fault .
You do not know the details .
Do not try to protect someone that does not deserve protection .
Mr President , first of all I want to say that I am not trying to protect anybody .
I am trying to defend the authority and decisions of the European Commission , and as you know , the Commission takes collective decisions and is judged by all the other institutional bodies and subjected to parliamentary control on the basis of those collective decisions .
As for the list of specific countries , as I told you earlier , the Commission submitted it to the Council .
The Member States did not agree , and from that standpoint , we are delaying not through any fault of the Commission 's , but because of the Council 's inability to reach a decision .
Secondly , as for the Council 's instructions you referred to , which were given to the Commission which followed them to the letter , please let me , Mr President , include in Parliament 's Minutes the Council 's Minutes , which I will hand in to your Secretariat .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The vote will now be taken .
I will be supporting the resolution demanding that the Commission implement the wishes of Parliament and ban the import of furs caught by use of the leghold trap .
It is not acceptable that the dogma of free trade be allowed to override the issue of animal welfare .
Leghold traps are the cruellest punishment that can be administered to an animal .
As we saw this week , animals in pain attempt to chew off their own legs to escape the pain .
The European Union and almost sixty other countries have banned the use of the leghold trap .
There is absolutely no reason , absolutely no justification , why we should allow in the interests of free trade that the Canadians and Russians import furs into the Union that would be illegal if trapped here .
The Commission should follow the wishes of Parliament , the Council and , most important , the overwhelming majority of the general public in Europe and ban these cruel imports which merely allow fashionable men and women to exhibit their inhumanity to animals .
Mr President , I find it remarkable that , in voting against amendment no . 3 , certain facts were denied , but I will now address these .
I will vote against the proposed resolution because I am convinced that an unthinking repetition of the demand for implementation of the enactment provisions for the issuing of an import ban on furs would get in the way of using the route of negotiation in order to achieve a system which , in the long run , would do more for animal welfare , because what we are dealing with here is the trapping of animals in Canada , the USA , Russia and the EU , where millions of animals are constantly being caught by means of traps .
But we are far from fulfilling the requirements we are laying down in the regulations .
Leghold traps are banned publicly in the EU , but this does not apply to private land , and they can be bought , with instructions for use , on the European Parliament 's doorstep .
Traps are mostly used to catch pests , and an import ban on skins will not act as any incentive to stop the use of traps for this purpose .
Through negotiation , however , we can ban all forms of cruel traps , to the benefit of the animals concerned .
I know that , before the regulations were adopted , an abortive attempt was made to negotiate , but this does not mean that the present negotiations would suffer the same fate .
The negotiations which the Commission has started with Canada , the USA and Russia are the first international agreement to focus on animal welfare .
Let us not jeopardize this , destroying the basis for these negotiations , by bringing a WTO action which could go on for years , without in any way promoting animal welfare .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Genetically modified maize
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions to the Commission :
B4-0003 / 97 by Mrs Breyer and Mr Lannoye , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the marketing of genetically modified maize ; -B4-0005 / 97 by Mr des Places , on behalf of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , on the placing on the market of genetically modified maize ; -B4-0012 / 97 by Mr Pasty , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe on genetically modified organisms ; -B4-0013 / 97 by Mrs González Álvarez , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the request for a moratorium on the entry of genetically modified maize into the European Union ; -B4-0014 / 97 , by Mrs Barthet-Mayer and Mr Kouchner , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the placing on the market of genetically modified maize ; -B4-0015 / 97 , by Mrs Roth-Behrendt , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the placing on the market of genetically modified maize : authorization procedure ; -B4-0016 / 97 , by Mrs Grossetête on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the placing on the market of genetically modified maize.Mr Lannoye has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I should like to ask for the debate to be postponed pursuant to Rule 131 of the Rules of Procedure , paragraphs 1 and 2 , and for it to be held on the Monday of the March part-session , 10 March , as the first item on the agenda .
Why do I ask for this postponement ?
It was noted just now that Sir Leon Brittan was not here for the important debate that we have just had .
I note that for the present debate , which is at least equally important if not more so , on genetically modified maize Mr Papoutsis is representing the Commission .
We have absolutely nothing against Mr Papoutsis personally , but it is clear that Mrs Bjerregaard should have been here .
Apart from the fact that we are going to hold the debate under somewhat unfavourable conditions , at the end of a Friday morning and with very few Members present , we have a Commissioner who is unfamiliar with the subject -and I intend absolutely no criticism of him personally .
So , I repeat , pursuant to Rule 131 , I ask for a postponement until 10 March , as the first item on the agenda .
Mr Lannoye , I have looked up Rule 131 and you have the perfect right to make that request .
But allow me to give you two pieces of advice : first , Mr Lannoye , Friday is a working day as worthy as any other and , therefore , I think it is a sign of respect to all the Members who are here to regard it as such .
The second point is that no commitment can be made at this time about the agenda in the next part-session . That is a matter which depends entirely and exclusively on the preparation of the agenda .
What we can do now is decide to adjourn the joint debate .
Ladies and gentlemen , we will therefore listen to one opinion in favour and one against and then we will put it to the vote .
Mr Lannoye , you have the floor .
Mr President , I am no great expert on the Rules of Procedure , but I can read and I note that Rule 131 ( 1 ) states that a political group may move that a debate be adjourned to a specific date .
That is what I have done .
The ' specific date ' is Monday 10 March , as the first item on the agenda for the March part-session .
This seems to me to be in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .
I will certainly take up your point and pass it on to the Conference of Presidents which in principle determines the agenda , as you know , and I am sure it will take account of your argument , but the Chair cannot make any commitment now .
Mr von Habsburg has the floor to speak against Mr Lannoye 's proposal .
Mr President , I should like to say that I am totally opposed to Mr Lannoye 's motion , not because it is not justified rhetorically , but because it will simply mean ruining Friday as a working day .
We were elected to serve our constituents , regardless of whether they are many or few in number .
Here at least , quality is a substitute for quantity .
We have often found this to be the case , and I would therefore ask Members to vote against it whatever happens .
I should like to thank the President for having said the same thing .
Friday is just as much a working day as any other .
Thank you very much , Mr von Habsburg .
The Chair would never want to influence a vote .
I understood that the reasons Mr Lannoye gave went way beyond the fact that this is Friday .
So in this case , I - who always advocate dignifying every working day , including Friday - would not want any vote to be influenced from the Chair .
The Chair must be absolutely neutral when it comes to a vote , up to the point that , in general , it does not even cast its own vote .
Mrs Pailler has the floor to support Mr Lannoye 's proposal .
Mr President , I think this is a particularly important debate , following the casting of 118 votes in favour of censuring the Commission on a very closely related subject .
We should therefore like the Commissioners responsible for the matter to be present and we should like there to be enough people here for this debate to be as dignified and serious as it deserves to be .
Yesterday , Mr Caccavale asked , for completely obscure reasons , although there were plenty of people in the Chamber , for his report to be postponed , and I believe that no one took umbrage at that .
Well , that was Thursday , and his report was postponed .
I don 't see why we can 't have the courage to postpone a subject as important as this to a time when more Members will be present , together with the Commission and perhaps even the Council .
Thank you very much , Mrs Pailler .
I shall now put the request to adjourn the joint debate to the vote .
( Parliament approved the request ) Mr Ford has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I presume that the list of speakers is closed , so that those Members who did not think it important enough to stay here this morning will not suddenly decide that this is an absolutely fascinating issue when it is on a Monday evening !
Can you confirm that the list of speakers is closed ?
Mr Ford , you are well aware , because you are a very important member of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , that the list will be opened again for the debate so that those Members of Parliament who wish to take part can do so .
Mr Rübig has the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , I find it irresponsible that such an important debate should be postponed .
That is not a point of order Mr Rübig .
It is a personal opinion - and a very respectable one - but it is not a point of order .
Parliament has made the decision freely by a vote which is final in a democracy .
The Presidency is obliged to respect the majority will of Parliament .
Adjournment of the session
Ladies and gentlemen , once again I have had the agreeable duty of chairing these exemplary Friday sittings .
I hope you all have a relaxing weekend and , once again , let me thank all the services of Parliament for their work and you , ladies and gentlemen , for making it so easy and agreeable to chair this sitting .
I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned .
( The sitting was closed at 11.30 a.m. )
Resumption of session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday , 21 February 1997 .
Communication and statement by the President
I have to inform you that last Friday I sent a telegram of condolences to the parents of the little girl , Lubna Benaisa , whose body had been discovered the previous day in the city of Brussels .
I did so on my own behalf and on behalf of all Members in the sure knowledge that I was expressing the feelings and sadness of the whole Parliament at this further barbarous act perpetrated against those who are most vulnerable .
May I also say how touched I was at the splendid example of dignity and unity shown both by the Benaisa family and by the entire population of Brussels .
I should not like such an important occasion as International Women 's Day , which was last Saturday , to pass by without some mention in Parliament .
The celebration of International Women 's Day has become incorporated in the political calendar as a major event .
It is a day for considering the progress made in the building of a fairer society with greater solidarity , a day for setting objectives , for continuing to move towards the full integration of women in all areas of life on an equal footing with men .
At times such as these , when unemployment figures have reached record levels in some Member States , those principles need to be reiterated ; we need to take a stand against exclusion and avoid any backsliding in the timid progress achieved .
This year the celebration of International Women 's Day coincided with a key moment : the Intergovernmental Conference for revision of the Treaties setting up the Union .
The Conference is taking stock of various positions , already setting the guidelines for the new texts on which the development of the Union will be based in the future .
The building of Europe has played a leading role in the slow process of breaking down the historical barriers between women and of the labour sector .
The Treaty needs however to incorporate more global plans forming the basis of an equal opportunities policy and specifically to include some mention of positive measures against discrimination .
The proposals contained in the text which the Irish Presidency prepared are a very important step in this direction .
Parliament will see that they are consolidated and incorporated in the new treaty .
However , we do not need to wait for the results of the Intergovernmental Conference to continue with the building of a legal framework which is better tailored to promoting equality of opportunity .
To this end great importance must be attached to the development of Community legislation .
The proposal for a Council Directive on the burden of proof in sex-discrimination cases is the cornerstone of the new system of legal protection .
I think the Union 's institutions should set an example , as pointed out in Mrs Larive 's report adopted last autumn ; the European civil service is an ideal field for putting into practice an ambitious equal opportunities policy enabling women to be involved in the highest levels of decision making .
Although the European Parliament is the institution with the highest percentage of women in its higher administrative grades , the figure is barely 20 % .
Efficient administration cannot allow this inequality .
It is not , however , merely a question of percentages .
We need to change attitudes , review the procedure for entry into the European civil service , offer occupational training programmes opening up new horizons for mobility and provide real opportunities for both women and men to pursue a career and have a family .
Last Friday I met representatives from the European Women 's lobby and a delegation from the Joint Committee on Equal Opportunities from our institution , who put to me a series of specific proposals for furthering the building of a society with greater solidarity and a more efficient administration .
I undertook to work within the framework of my office to achieve those objectives .
I know I can count on your firm support for that .
( Applause )
Mr President , I am naturally very grateful to you for having made this surprising statement and for the fact that you are so well informed about the dossiers that are currently with the Committee on Women 's Rights .
I would like with you to refer back to this 8 March in the knowledge that the statement that would be issued by the Commission and its president presented difficulties in connection with the important dossiers that we have put on the agenda this morning .
As the chairman of the Committee on Women 's Rights I defer to that , and I am grateful to you for having begun this sitting by referring back to 8 March .
You mentioned a number of things which are still causing a host of serious problems , such as the preparation of the intergovernmental conference and the proposals laid before it by the Irish presidency .
I do not want to disappoint you , of course , but in the area of women 's rights the Dutch presidency is also having a go at sifting out a number of these issues .
The anti-discrimination paragraph is one case in point .
Mr President , I am particularly pleased that you are prepared to place your hand on your heart and to concede that in the European institutions , including the European Parliament , there are far too few women in senior posts . And because you have stated that so clearly I assume that over the next two and a half years you will , among other things , take the opportunity to make drastic changes to Parliament 's recruitment and promotion procedures , in order that women , too , can be afforded the chance to make a career .
I hope that in April , in the presence , then , of the Commission and Mr Santer , we shall be able to speak together about women 's issues on a broader front .
I thank you for this statement .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr Hory , I thank you personally , but I think I must allow those who have asked to speak to do so .
Mr President , on behalf of our group I have written to you to congratulate you on your stance , and I must point out that all of our French Members were at your reception in Paris and that they have joined with the rest of our group in agreeing with your stance .
I confirm that to you now .
This subject was also discussed , I believe , in the Conference of Presidents . When we discuss urgent subjects in this House , we must ensure that we do so in a representative manner .
You have emphasized - and I will say it myself - that the topical and urgent debate must occupy a more favourable position in the part-session .
I can only endorse your words , Mr President , and say , on behalf of my group , that we are in full agreement with you on that .
Mr President , I am pleased that we are all taking the opportunity to speak even though we are making the same points , because it already became clear last Thursday that all groups were unanimous . In the case of my group I expressed the view of all Members who thought that you had upheld the European Parliament 's position splendidly in Paris and that your action in no way constituted interference in sovereignty or in the domestic policy of any country - in this case France - but rather that you had stood up for some of the citizens ' basic rights on which the European Parliament is obliged to pronounce .
You fulfilled your obligation and fulfilled it very well , as all chairmen of Groups in this House agree .
Keep to this course , Mr President , with this prudence and this strength .
Mr President , I too should like to express my thanks , and my belief that you were right to react immediately because the whole incident really was quite incredible .
The European Parliament conducted an intensive debate on racism and xenophobia , and then did something that sets it apart from a good many governments : instead of confining itself to formal declarations , it actually expressed unwelcome criticism , directed not just at the Debré draft law but also at the plans announced by the German Interior Minister , Mr Kanther , to introduce visas for children .
So the European Parliament did what it is supposed to do - a political act .
The reaction of the French Government in saying first that questions of human rights and fundamental freedoms within the European Union are a matter of internal affairs , as Mr Chirac and Mr Hervé de Charette stated , and secondly that the European Parliament has shown that it is superfluous , is completely unacceptable to us .
My view is that by adopting this resolution the European Parliament showed that it is anything but superfluous - that it is capable of a political reaction and of doing more than just coining formal phrases .
I would like to ask you , too , whether there has been any reaction from the French Government .
Has there been any kind of apology for what the Foreign Minister said ?
I think an apology is the least that could have been expected .
Has Mr Chirac commented at all on his remarks ?
If you have heard of any such developments , I hope you will let us know .
Thank you very much , Mr Roth .
I regard the matter as closed and I therefore naturally did not think that any kind of public apology was needed , especially since Mr Hervé de Charette , when addressing the French Assemblée Nationale , expressed his respect for the European Parliament .
What is more , I shall very probably be meeting Mr de Charette in Rome within the next few weeks to deal , of course , with the most important topics which are of interest to this Parliament and to the Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , I refer to the Minutes of 20 February .
I have noted an omission in the verbatim report in connection with the resolution on the human rights meeting in Geneva .
I refer in particular to what was said concerning China . I urged the delegation from the United States Congress which was present in the gallery at the time to speak up for human rights in China in line with our established values .
I cannot find this in the verbatim report , Mr President , and I hope that a correction can be made .
Mrs van Bladel , we shall check to see whether part of a speech or of a resolution has in fact been omitted from the Minutes .
Mr President , I want to return for a moment to the question raised by Mr Hory , though unlike him I do not want to initiate a Franco-French debate , which would be inappropriate .
I wanted to ask you whether this incident might serve as a basis for a number of positive conclusions regarding the holding of our topical and urgent debates .
Those debates were instituted in 1979 , at a time when this Parliament did not yet hold all the powers it holds today , especially the legislative powers , when it was trying to establish itself as a kind of forum .
As a result of the way in which our proceedings have developed , these topical and urgent debates have now been put back to a period of the part-session such as to cast doubt on the representativity of the House and even the object of certain resolutions that are adopted , as you have said yourself . Even apart from that problem , there are numerous questions about the admissibility of texts and particularly the admissibility of amendments , especially last-minute amendments .
It is customary , for example , not to raise in a topical and urgent debate a question that has been debated by Parliament in connection with the preparation of a report .
The holding of the Intergovernmental Conference raises a serious question about relations between our Parliament and the national parliaments .
Is it reasonable that questions that have been debated but not yet settled by the national parliaments can be settled by the device of an urgent resolution , which in fact means with no prior report ?
That , Mr President , is the kind of question , a troubling one in every way , which must be asked in the wake of this incident , and I should be very grateful if you would refer the matter to the Bureau and the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , so that we can have a procedure for topical and urgent debates which will not give rise to this kind of controversy and will not involve you in another incident of this kind .
Thank you very much , Mr Nordmann , but I would remind you that any Group is entitled to raise this question with the Conference of Presidents if it thinks that is what is needed .
In any event , I shall inform the Conference of Presidents of what you said and they will consider it as they think necessary .
Mr President , on 17 February a letter arrived at my office in The Hague which read as follows : ' By order of the President I hereby forward to you the text of a motion of censure on the Commission tabled by 63 Members pursuant to Article 34 of the Rules of Procedure . '
It was signed by Mr Vinci .
This letter , Mr President , thus had to do with the motion of censure on the Commission that we were due to vote on in Strasbourg that same week .
My problem is not with the letter itself , but rather with the way in which it was sent to me .
It was sent to the Netherlands by courier from Brussels at midday on Friday , and I assume that it was sent to the homes of all of the other Members as well .
In my case it arrived when I was already in Strasbourg .
My question is this : what was the point of the procedure ? That is the first thing I want to ask .
Secondly , how much did the procedure cost ? To send a letter to 626 Members by courier , when we all have fax machines at our offices in both Brussels and Strasbourg , is a bit of a waste of money , surely .
Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , I am very pleased to answer your question .
The letter was not sent to the 626 Members , but to those for whom Parliament did not have a fax number .
All Members - and there are many of them - who have provided the administration with their fax number received a fax to the same effect .
Mr President , you mentioned just now the unanimous support of all the groups for the position you adopted during your visit to Paris .
I must ask you to note that this unanimity cannot include the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations .
You did indeed do what a president of the European Parliament logically must do , and reflected the will of the majority .
Nevertheless , I would remind all those who make ringing declarations on the importance of Parliament 's activities that this famous - and umpteenth - resolution on racism and xenophobia was adopted on that memorable Thursday afternoon by 106 votes to 101 , and that in actual fact , by expressing its opinion as it does on Thursday afternoons about a more and more varied and less and less carefully considered range of subjects , the European Parliament undermines its own credibility .
What the French Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Hervé de Charette , said merely echoed what might be thought by any objective observer of the European Parliament who studies the content of its resolutions .
The fact is that Parliament sees fit to express an opinion on any subject at all .
It did so that afternoon , despite the fact that a national parliament , which is the expression of State sovereignty , the incarnation of democratic legitimation , the representative of an entire national population , was debating that issue .
It did so although it had no jurisdiction in the matter .
The position expressed , you should know , reflects the point of view of a great many European citizens .
I believe , Mr President , that we should learn another lesson from this incident , as well as the one pointed out by Mr Nordmann , which I endorse .
We should ensure that texts that appear on Thursday afternoon 's agenda are carefully prepared and concern Parliament 's areas of responsibility .
In following the procedure you know about , especially on the occasion of the visit here by the French Head of State , Parliament will have encouraged several countries , including France , to refuse to extend the powers of a Parliament that does not deserve them .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , I am not going to comment on the substance of your speech , which I respect as I would any other .
I must , however , call your attention to the fact that there is no provision in our Rules of Procedure authorizing Parliament , or anyone else , to declare texts inadmissible in substance .
It is the political groups that must ensure that these texts are introduced , or voted upon , in a manner consistent with the dignity of Parliament or with the criteria that each group finds appropriate .
Unlike other parliaments , which - legitimately - confine their agendas to items introduced there by governments , our Parliament has a different tradition and the Presidency cannot limit amendments , whatever they may be !
( Applause )
Mr President , I would like first of all to congratulate you on your wonderful statement with regard to the celebration of International Women 's Day .
In that context I would like once again to draw the attention of the House to the ongoing plight of Roisín McAliskey , a prisoner held in a British gaol , Holloway Prison ; who is held in Category A status ; whose status has been reduced slightly in the last number of days ; but who is seven months pregnant and does not have full access to proper , 24-hour medical care .
As well as that , there are still no arrangements to ensure the safe delivery of her unborn child .
I ask this House - we pleaded last time and we plead once again - to show its support on humanitarian grounds ; not to make any judgement on whether Miss McAliskey is guilty or innocent , but purely on humanitarian grounds to call on the British and German Governments to give her full access to proper medical treatment and to ensure that her child can be born in normal circumstances , without her being shackled to prison officers , and that she will be allowed to keep her child after the birth .
I would point out that the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs is dealing with the matter you mentioned and will be submitting appropriate proposals to the House .
Thank you very much for that , Mr Provan .
Mr President , I should like to speak on Item 16 of the Minutes , ' Genetically modified maize ' .
During our last part-session , the various oral questions relating to this subject were put back to a later date , specifically the present part-session , according to the Members present , at any event .
I note that the Minutes give no reason for the postponement of that report .
The Members felt that the Commission was not represented by a sufficiently knowledgeable person - neither Mr Fischler nor Mrs Bonino nor Mrs Bjerregaard saw fit to attend that debate , and yet it was a very important debate on an essential question , a question that may become more serious in future years and , who knows , give rise at some stage to a repetition of the mad cow crisis .
I therefore believe it to be essential , Mr President , for the Minutes to show why a postponement of this debate was requested .
That is not necessary in principle , Mr Berthu , but we will check .
The reason will appear in the verbatim report , in the speeches made by the various honourable Members , which will clearly show the reasoning of those who proposed the postponement .
( The Minutes were approved )
Order of business
The next item is the order of business .
The final version of the agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents pursuant to Rule 95 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed ; the following amendments have been proposed or incorporated :
Monday : I suggest , in agreement with the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , that we reverse the order of the two reports by that Committee .
That is that we deal first with Mr Van Velzen 's report on the Green Paper on Living and Working in the Information Society then move on to Mrs Waddington 's report on the Commission 's White Paper on Education and Training - Teaching and Learning .
Are there any comments ?
( The order of business was adopted )
Tuesday : The Green Group has asked for the joint debate on the six oral questions to the Commission on geneticallymodified maize , which was postponed last Friday , 21 February , to be added to the agenda either for Tuesday evening or for Thursday afternoon .
I would mention that the Conference of Presidents has decided to include this topic in the April part-session .
I call upon Mrs Breyer .
Mr President , we asked for this to be postponed last time because the Commissioner with overall responsibility , Mrs Bjerregaard , thought it unnecessary to be present for this important item on the agenda .
As you know , there has been a great deal of controversy about the approval of genetically modified maize , and some alarming studies have now been produced which confirm that there is a grave health and ecological risk .
Because of that risk , both Austria and Luxembourg adopted regulations in mid-February to ban imports .
We were unanimous that it cannot be right for just two countries to protect their populations ; we must debate the matter here in Parliament and clarify our position on these disregarded studies and the authorization of this product . Even within the Commission there were those who asserted that this decision was taken on the basis of an economic debate , on the basis of the interests of the genetic engineering industry and the USA , and that the question of health risks had been pushed into the background .
So we regard it as a matter of urgency for this debate to be held before the end of this month .
Why ?
If those products come onto the market now , there could be problems if we conclude , in April for example , that the granting of the application to market them was inadmissible , because by that time the products would already be on the market in every European Member State except Luxembourg and Austria .
So I would ask you once again to arrange for a roll-call vote on our request , so that this extremely important matter can be debated during the present week .
Mr President , I do not know whether the interpretation into Greek conveyed exactly what you said , but I have noted a particular point several times because it creates confusion : it is not the Conference of Presidents that makes decisions .
The Conference of Presidents can only propose a decision to Parliament .
There is a difference .
It is Parliament that decides .
I should like to ask that the point should be noted , to avoid misunderstandings .
I put the green Group 's request to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the request )
Wednesday and Thursday ( unaltered )
Friday :
Mr President , I notice there is an item on the agenda relating to the organization of the common market in rice .
To my knowledge , although it was in the working document , it was never discussed in the Conference of Presidents .
Frankly , my group is not in favour of placing it on the agenda for this week .
We would prefer that it was deferred until April .
So I would ask you to put that to the House , because I think other group leaders will confirm that there was no agreement on the matter in the Conference of Presidents .
The other item concerns Wednesday evening .
You will see that one of the last reports on Wednesday evening is the Linkohr report .
This is a second reading .
If it is not taken on Wednesday - as you know , things can sometimes crop up - can we be assured that it will be dealt with first thing on Thursday morning , since it must be voted on by lunchtime Thursday ?
As regards the last point , Mrs Green , it is no problem to continue the debate on Thursday morning if it does not end on Wednesday .
That does not entail any change in the agenda .
As for the first point you mentioned , it is no trouble to put to the House the request you are making on behalf of your Group to delete from Friday 's agenda Item 42 , oral question to the Commission on the serious crisis in the rice sector tabled by Mr Fraga Estévez , Mr Colino Salamanca , Mr Fantuzzi and others on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .

Mr President , I want to say that we agree to the request made by the spokesman for the Socialist Group .
I have consulted some of those who signed the oral question and they fully agree that it should be debated in the April part-session .
I put to the vote the Socialist Group 's request to postpone until April the debate on the oral question on the crisis in the rice sector .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
Mr President , I should like to take advantage of this unanimous vote , which has altered Friday 's agenda in a sensible way , to ask you and the Conference of Presidents to review a situation that has remained unchanged at the last three or four part-sessions , whereby agricultural topics have regularly been taken on Fridays , often as the last item on the agenda .
Apparently , that decision was a deliberate one , so as to encourage better attendance on Fridays .
Given that this objective does not seem to me to have been achieved , I would ask you - and I believe that I am speaking for many of my colleagues in the Committee on Agriculture - to restore agricultural items to more popular days of the week , in order to ensure that such items receive the attention they deserve , starting with this serious problem of rice .
Thank you very much , Mr Santini .
I think that all the members of the Conference of Presidents are here , will have got your message and will take acount of it as they deem appropriate in their decision making .
( Parliament approved the Agenda thus amended )
Future of Schengen
The next item is the debate on the report by Mrs van Lancker ( A4-0014 / 97 ) on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs on the functioning and future of Schengen .
Mr President , I can imagine that if Mr Fabre-Aubrespy was still here he would be likely to say that this Parliament has no business discussing Schengen .
In my opinion , however , this report on Schengen comes at a particularly crucial time . At a time , that is to say , when the future of Schengen and the importance of bringing Schengen back to where it belongs , namely to the Treaty , are being discussed in the framework of the IGC .
Schengen has always been presented as a testing ground for a future regulation .
However , that European regulation cannot be more than a refined copy of the model , even though improvements need to be made on very many points .
The fact , ladies and gentlemen , that in the absence of a European consensus the Schengen countries are putting in place their own measures to guarantee the right of the free movement of persons and the right of security of their residents is , in my view , a good thing .
The criticism of this Parliament is targeted , specifically , at the way in which those goals are being pursued .
Firstly , Schengen has strayed very greatly from its original goal : of the creation , that is to say , of a large European area in which people can move freely .
In practice , the governments are imposing more and more conditions on the free movement of persons .
For nearly two years , ladies and gentlemen , the French government has insisted on maintaining its internal border checks .
Moreover , the arguments for that are all good ones : GIA terrorists could slip in through Belgium , Holland makes provision for drug-takers , and , tomorrow , Italy will no longer to able to keep the lid on illegal immigration .
Obviously , national sovereignty still counts for more than international cooperation .
But other Member States , too , are using Schengen as a pretext for policy measures which are often repressive , particularly with regard to undesirable aliens , migrants and refugees .
According to the Schengen annual report , the Schengen information system has been used principally as a database on undesirable aliens .
Refugees are increasingly being refused entry at the external frontiers and airports .
And Schengen itself is erecting a second barrier around the territory it covers , without any guarantee that the right of refugees to request asylum and to nonrefoulement can be honoured .
With Schengen one is embracing a perilous notion . The notion , that is to say , that anti-immigration policy equates with a higher level of security .
Even so , this Parliament has said time and again that organized international crime cannot be combated merely by keeping a tight check at the frontiers .
At the same time , police cooperation , which is essential in the battle against crime , is pitifully inadequate .
The police are making hardly any use of Schengen . Only the minor bilateral arrangements in the border regions are beginning to bring a few small successes with the cooperation of France - where Schengen is not functioning at all - despite the cynical reality .
In the meantime , the Schengen labyrinth is ensuring that daily practice is generating a dangerous grey area of personal contacts between police forces over which there is absolutely no democratic and judicial control .
Schengen must therefore shift its priorities as a matter of urgency . If security really is to be taken seriously other priorities must be selected .
Secondly , this Parliament has frequently complained about the lack of parliamentary and judicial control .
This report makes clear yet again that most national parliaments have scant information and are prevented from exercising control over their ministers for Schengen affairs by statutory obstacles .
Judicial supervision of Schengen is minimal because the European Court of Justice has no competence at all ; disputes arising from interpretation of the meaning of Schengen clauses are resolved by national judges and by the Executive Committee .
Frequently that leads to a huge level of discord .
That apart , the whole business of international exchange and international police cooperation without international judicial and parliamentary control is a threat to democracy .
That is why the European Parliament , in this report , is again calling for the communitization of Schengen matters , so that , ultimately , the Commission can acquire the right of initiative on questions relating to the free movement of persons and the internal security of Europe 's residents and the European Court and the European Parliament can finally be allowed to play their proper roles .
It is clear that the Irish proposals on Schengen matters , and still less the Dutch proposals , do not match our requirements .
Indeed , the free movement of persons , as depicted in those proposals , is smothered by the whole reasoning of the preceding measures , and I can rightly say , I think , that in them the free movement of persons is relegated to the tomorrow that never comes .
The roles of the European Parliament and the Court of Justice are neither developed fully nor actually torpedoed .
I think that nationalization of this policy is on the agenda more than ever at this IGC , with the proposals as they now stand , and that is something that this Parliament must never allow to happen .
Coming as it does now , this Schengen report is very important , because it insists , once again , that proper democratic and judicial control over the highly important matters of the security of the citizens and the free movement of persons can be achieved only through regulation by the European people themselves .
I hope , therefore , that Parliament will feel able to give the report a big vote of approval .
Thank you very much , Mrs Van Lanker .
I should like to say a word of welcome to Mr Fischbach , Minister of Justice of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg and formerly one of our colleagues , who has taken the trouble to come here to attend this debate .
Mr President , Mr Fischbach , ladies and gentlemen , in the remarks she has just made Mrs van Lancker used a key sentence regarding the debate on freedom of movement in the European Union when she said that this debate is taking place more and more on the basis of renationalization , a dangerous renationalization to my mind because - as was also made clear in Mrs van Lancker 's report - a debate is being triggered in the Union which resembles two trains approaching each other on the same track .
We do have in the European Union , on the basis of Community law , free movement of services , capital and goods ; but we do not have freedom of movement for individuals .
On the one hand we seem to have created a Union in which we can move cows around wherever we like and in whatever condition we like , without being checked , where we can transfer money - as much as we like , for as long as we like and as often as we like and where we like ; where we can transport any kind of service - take the example of the building industry - often outside the law , without being prosecuted for it . And yet a decent citizen , a Member of the European Parliament , say , wanting to travel from Germany through Luxembourg to France to come and do his job here , has to be checked every time because the French Government says it must watch its borders to ensure that no Dutch drug dealers get into the country - and that is what happens not just to the honest citizens who sit in the European Parliament but to many other people too .
There is no escaping the impression that we have a European Union in which we can do anything we like with money , with goods and with services , but in which citizens are denied freedom of movement on the flimsiest of pretexts . Most of those pretexts are something to do with the fact that governments - and I am prepared to say so quite provocatively - are no longer able to get to grips with their problems of internal policy , whether economic or social , so that they arrange their border controls as a theatrical production in order to calm their own populations , saying in effect , ' Everything 's under control on the crime front provided we have enough policemen at the borders . '
Just how dim do the governments of the Member States really think their own citizens are ?
Do they really think that by disregarding Schengen they will persuade drug dealers to turn up at the border between Luxembourg and Belgium with their suitcases and wait politely to be asked if they have anything to declare ?
Mrs van Lancker also mentions , rightly , the fact that the Schengen Information System is to be abused and employed as a defence mechanism against illegal immigration , which cannot be brought under control , incidentally , because there are still not enough people in the European Union who say frankly that we are a continent of immigration and that is why we have rules on immigration .
Unless we ensure that the Schengen framework applies throughout the Community , then we shall experience something - I address this observation to you , Mr Fischbach , as Chairman of the Schengen Executive Committee - which the Council might like but we in Parliament would not - a situation where freedom of movement in the European Union is implemented not on the basis of Community law , which is where it should be implemented , but on the basis of inter-governmental co-operation outside Community law , at the level of bilateral treaties , the end result of which would be that the Council would say , yes , we do have freedom of movement , but we don 't have it where it legally belongs .
That is why it is indispensable for this Parliament to say today that we want freedom of movement .
We have a very favourable attitude to the constructive elements of the Schengen Agreements , but we want a guarantee that these arrangements will have a basis in Community law with parliamentary control .
When , on 14 June 1985 , the founding countries of the Schengen area signed the agreement that bears that name , they certainly had in mind Montesquieu 's words ' political freedom for a citizen is that peace of mind that comes from the opinion each man has of his own safety ' .
When this agreement came into force in March 1995 , that same philosophy was supposed to prevail .
But certain countries soon found a few imperfections in the system .
The Netherlands referred to their difficulties connected with passenger control at Amsterdam-Schipol airport .
France , in turn , invoked the safeguard clause contained in Article 2 of the Convention , partly because of the failings of the Schengen Information System and the slackness regarding migration flows , and partly because of the weakness or even recklessness of certain Member States with regard to drugs .
Today , these problems remain , though in diluted form .
On reading Mrs van Lancker 's report you could sometimes get the impression - without too much exaggeration - that the Schengen area amounts to a prison universe , that personal freedoms are under threat and that the right to freedom of movement which is a foundation of our Union no longer exists .
That impression is incorrect .
On the contrary , in order to breathe life into the spirit of Schengen , we need to reinforce it with essential accompanying measures , in order to construct a Europe where security and freedom go hand in hand .
We must not forget that the Schengen Agreements , imperfect though they are , have enabled the citizens of the signatory States to understand the true meaning of the freedom of movement required by the Treaty , still a dead letter but living in the spirit of Schengen .
That is why my group will be unable to vote for this report , without certain amendments , although I do share some of the rapporteur 's concerns .
I am thinking of the need for better co-ordination between the various bodies that will determine the success of Schengen - Europol , SIRENE , SIS - and the conformity of the handling of the databases with the conventions of the Council of Europe .
Mr President , there is a lot of criticism that can be made of the Schengen Agreement and its execution .
There is talk again of secret agendas and unverifiable actions by the governments ; no parliamentary control , no proper judicial control , and so forth . Schengen must therefore be only a transitional thing .
In the future we must integrate it into the European Union .
Moreover , in the coming revision of the Maastricht Treaty we must communitize as many as possible of the matters that fall now within the ambit of Schengen .
That means giving competence to the European Parliament - including it , that is to say - and also giving competence to the Court of Justice in this field .
To that end the Schengen secretariat must be brought under the European Union 's wing .
My next point has to do with the Netherlands-France drugs war , as it has been aptly called .
I think that France must now bring an end to vigilance on its northern border , as the main tenet of the Schengen Agreement so demands .
The Dutch , on the other hand , must do more to meet foreign criticism of Dutch drugs policy .
Rapprochement leading to European harmonization on drugs policy is what is needed .
France must do more to help addicts and the Netherlands must do more to combat drug production and the trade in drugs . Those countries must tackle the problem together with the other Member States .
Following the vote on the amendments we like the general tenor of Mrs Van Lancker 's report and we shall therefore vote for it .
We compliment her on her excellent work .
Mr President , first I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on the report she is presenting here today .
The report makes a clear , thorough and critical analysis of the functioning and future of Schengen .
The freedom of movement of persons is one of the four freedoms to be achieved within the framework of the Treaty on European Union .
The Schengen Agreements are dated and should be replaced by Community legislation , so that judicial control is in the hands of the Court of Justice of the European Communities and democratic control is in the hands of the European Parliament .
As regards the functioning of the Schengen Agreements , we regret the emergence of new types of discrimination : on the one hand between citizens of the Union on grounds of nationality and on the other with regard to the citizens of third countries legally resident in the Union .
The implementation of the Agreements also warrants some criticism , since it has led to the adoption of a series of police and legal measures based on a tightening of security and to an immigration limitation and law enforcement policy .
The abolition of frontiers should not lead to systematic controls in frontier areas or to the hermetic sealing of the external borders .
Finally I should like to voice my concern about the fact that the Schengen information system is used chiefly as a data bank for undesirable aliens , including foreigners with no previous criminal record or who are without means .
In short , we must continue to move towards the freedom of movement of persons , turning the Schengen Agreements into a Community policy , avoiding any kind of discrimination against citizens of non-member countries legally resident in the Union and without turning Europe into a veritable fortress .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the governments involved like to see Schengen as a success story .
Last year we were proudly presented with a first annual report - the only source , incidentally , from which the public can find out anything at all about the way Schengen operates !
That report was mainly concerned with such things as the hit rates for the Schengen Information System with its 3.7 million data sets .
It was concerned with the high density of controls at the outer borders and with the so-called compensatory measures at the internal borders .
It was - as Mrs van Lancker has already said - really a report on co-ordinated defence against refugees .
The opening of the internal borders was the sugar coating designed to conceal the taste of the new barriers at the external borders of Schengen , and to legitimize the fact that new Schengen frontiers have been created within the European Union .
This opening of the borders is really only a pretty fiction , if that , because what has really happened is that the borders have been shifted inwards a bit .
Perhaps we are not checked as often as we used to be , but try asking black people or people of Asian origin .
Their very appearance makes them suspect !
The undemocratic way in which Schengen came about and the undemocratic way in which it operates have often been criticized in this Parliament .
Despite that , an unchanged co-operation agreement has now been concluded with Norway and Iceland , obliging those countries to accept Schengen without any ifs or buts , but depriving them of any right of co-determination or right of representation on the Executive Committee .
This is a two-class system , and as far as I am concerned it is also the model of a European heartland which I really do not want !
What is now being proposed for the Intergovernmental Conference , which is that Schengen should be adopted , is not at all the communitization that we are demanding - in other words the merging of Schengen with the European Union .
Instead , Schengen is to be taken over unchanged in its existing undemocratic form .
We reject that vigorously , because it will also undermine the guarantee of the continuance of the Treaty .
I hope this principle will be maintained .
Then we will enthusiastically support Mrs van Lancker 's report !
Mr President , I can 't help feeling that this report is just another way of asking a familiar question : what kind of Europe do we want ?
Do we want a Europe of governments or a Europe of citizens ?
Our governments tell us they want to bring Europe closer to the citizen .
In fact , though , it 's the same old story - all show and no substance .
European citizenship is still an objective , not a reality .
The free movement of persons is a constitutional basis for that citizenship , pursuant to Article 7a of the Treaty . Now that ten million German marks or pounds sterling can cross the continent in a few milliseconds , the obstacles placed in the way of the free movement of human beings are becoming completely intolerable .
With Schengen , we 're getting bogged down in intergovernmental matters , we are ratifying an inequality , a form of discrimination as between the citizens of the Union and , even more so , towards citizens of third countries .
There is a lack of democratic control , a lack of legal control , a lack of solidarity and a surfeit of hypocrisy .
Because , let 's not beat about the bush , my own country signed - that 's hardly the word , it proclaimed - Schengen and immediately withdrew from it , because of a bomb in Paris or because it disagreed with the policy of one of the Union governments on marijuana .
Where this subject is concerned , it will probably be up to the IGC to find a solution , given that the structure is a temporary one which should be integrated into the third pillar , which should be communitized .
Not only that , but the Council 's unanimity rule should be revoked on any question relating to the movement of persons , so that Europe can finally become a Europe of Europeans .
Mr President , Mrs van Lancker 's report on the functioning and future of Schengen is the result of an own-initiative manoeuvre by the European Parliament in a field in which it has no powers .
First , because the Schengen Agreements are external to the Union .
Secondly because in so far as it might concern the third pillar , this House has not received a request for consultation from the Council presidency , pursuant to Article K6 .
So what we have here is one of those cases of interference by the European Parliament which , if anything , are harmful to its image , the more so in that the arguments put forward in the motion for a resolution seem to us to be very far removed from the feelings of the public and of most of the governments involved in the Intergovernmental Conference .
Let 's take one example .
One might legitimately wonder whether the Schengen Agreements , which have often been described as an experimental laboratory , can be extended to the whole of the Union .
But the way to answer that question is to start by learning the lessons of the experiment .
Otherwise , what would be the purpose of the laboratory ?
Well , there are at least two inescapable lessons which the European Parliament is failing to learn , though fortunately the governments of the Member States seem rather more aware of them .
First , it is totally inappropriate to suggest that all personal checks at the internal borders should be abolished - incidentally , we deplore the fact that the European Parliament sees fit , once again , to condemn the French Government for its anti-drug controls at the Belgium-Luxembourg border although those controls are perfectly legitimate and perfectly lawful .
Secondly , the list of accompanying measures provided for by the Schengen Agreements should be reinforced , not truncated as the European Parliament suggests and as Mrs van Lancker has once again demanded , especially when criticizing the data on undesirable aliens contained in the SIS , the Schengen Information System .
These accompanying measures should be reinforced , Mr President .
For example , we should ensure the efficient functioning of the system for declarations of entry into the territory , which applies to nationals of third countries when they cross an internal border of the Schengen area .
Turning a blind eye to such essential security problems is no way for the European Parliament to gain the sympathy of the citizens of the Member States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after all this criticism I am going to take up the cudgels on behalf of the Schengen Agreements .
The Schengen process is functioning in Europe , which is more than you can say of most institutions .
It has brought specific advances in freedom of movement , meaning that the citizen has acquired the opportunity to experience Europe .
Many citizens can now travel straight through from Finland to Portugal without stopping , even though there may well still be room for improvement in certain details .
So this is a positive result , and , incidentally , one that makes it clear that something can be achieved through flexibility in Europe by allowing some to move forward rather more rapidly than might have been the original common intention .
That is a clearly positive signal for Europe .
When Mr Schulz complains that any beef steer can wander across borders unobserved and unchecked , but he himself has to show his passport , the perfectly reasonable explanation for that is that Mr Schulz is clearly not a beef steer and so must expect to be checked from time to time .
Apart from the abolition of the internal borders , Schengen also of course includes improving the security of the external borders - and not just as a defence against crime , especially organized crime , but also as a defence against a second problem which weighs heavy on many European States , the problem of illegal immigration .
Here again , Schengen has brought progress .
The Schengen Information System gives us , for the first time , efficient co-operation between police forces , and it may become apparent that such co-operation has more to offer than checks at the internal borders .
Overall , therefore , we are in favour of this process and we want to see it continue .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Van Lancker on her excellent work .
It has clearly raised a number of points which today 's debate might help to clarify .
I think we must start by acknowledging one thing : with every day that passes , we are dealing a mortal blow to the European people 's confidence in Europe , since we promised them that these obsolete and ridiculous internal borders would be abolished as from 1 January 1993 .
I believe that although Schengen is a step forward , it is not enough in itself , given that it results from an intergovernmental agreement and not an initiative from the European institutions .
Schengen must obviously be extended to the whole Community . I do wonder , however , whether behind all the hairsplitting and quibbling by colleagues on all sides over the various accompanying measures - which is in fact a pretext for not pressing ahead with the idea of applying Schengen throughout the Community - there is not ultimately a lack of political will to proceed with European integration , particularly as regards the third pillar .
It is crucial above all , in my opinion , to abide by the principle laid down in the European treaties and in the Schengen Agreement : Europe as an area of freedom and democracy , under the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice and with democratic control over the processing of data .
That is why we are calling for guarantees for our citizens - it is clear that the tightening of security must not be used as a pretext to restrict their freedom !
Mr President , I find the report submitted by Mrs Van Lancker to be very interesting in every respect , especially as she ventures to highlight the serious problems arising from the Schengen Agreement .
I am for example referring to the lack of democratic parliamentary control over the Schengen Agreement and the lack of openness in Schengen - important sections concerning the application of the agreement are still , as emphasised under item 11 , classified as secret .
Furthermore , Mrs Van Lancker points out that the Schengen Agreement is part of the more restrictive and brutal refugee policy currently being developed in Western Europe and that Schengen is above all about control ; if one reads the actual text of the agreement , several of the paragraphs are not about freedom or flexibility but deal with various methods of control .
For us in the Nordic countries who are opposed to membership of the Schengen Agreement this is an important argument .
It is good that they have been acknowledged by Parliament as we are often accused of scaremongering when highlighting these facts .
The Scandinavian countries are currently in negotiations on joining the Schengen Agreement .
However , for the last ten years , the Nordic countries have had a Passport Union in operation which is would be replaced by the Schengen Agreement .
The report emphasises how well this Union operates .
For Scandinavians it represents a passport freedom which cannot be compared to that of the Schengen Agreement as it is combined with the right to control domestic borders , a situation which is entirely incompatible with the Schengen Agreement .
Today it is proposed to abolish the Nordic Passport Union and replace it with the less workable Schengen Agreement .
In the long run , this would jeopardise the passport union between the Scandinavian countries since Iceland and Norway , not being members of the EU , could be excluded at any time from the Schengen Agreement should they not agree to particular decisions .
In addition , should the Schengen Agreement become supranational , a constitutional amendment would be required in Norway , for which at the present time there is not a sufficient majority .
In addition , we must consider the probable outcome of referendums on the results arising from the Intergovernmental Conference , which I believe will produce a negative response from the Scandinavian countries .
Accordingly , I am of the opinion that the negotiated agreement should be put on hold and not be put into effect while the negotiations of the Intergovernmental Conference are in progress .
Mr President , the attempt to arrive at a Union policy and at totally free movement of persons by using Schengen as a testing-ground is something that I have never been able to support .
It has always struck me as a utopian concept prompted by an optimistic view of humanity .
Certainly , I can see the additional benefit of an intergovernmental Schengen with unanimity in decision-making as a prerequisite .
In such a framework one could get to grips with the ' free movement of persons ' experiment in a credible manner and work further towards police cooperation in Europe .
I do not share the view expressed by Mrs Van Lancker in her report that Schengen must quickly be communitized .
Nor do I agree with the manner in which she lambasts the functioning of Schengen .
The report is rather critical of the flanking measures which , as far as the Council is concerned , are prerequisites for the free movement of persons within the Schengen framework .
I am very pleased that the Schengen testing ground for policy , as I have called it , has induced the realization that these measures are essential .
Because what sense is there in having free movement of persons if the security of those persons cannot be guaranteed as a consequence ?
To imagine that a huge free internal area can be established without there being any need to worry about the consequences smacks of naivety .
Obviously , the political goal has become so revered that the risks , the risk of diminished security , for instance , are being accepted into the bargain .
The report of the Committee of Inquiry into transit fraud in the movement of goods that is to be debated this week is a good case in point in my view . You throw open the borders but fail to take adequate account of the consequences and , because of that , you do not put in place the measures that are need to forestall the problems .
I can give provisional support to an inter-governmental Schengen that will work towards the free movement of persons and a high level of security for the citizens in a realistic manner .
However , the Van Lancker report is an entirely different kettle of fish , and the future vision of Schengen that it presents is something that I cannot possibly support .
I do not think I am a cow either , as Mr Nassauer pointed out about my colleague , Mr Schulz .
I think it is something which unites us not only with the socialists but with everyone in this hemicycle , but that is not why I am pleased not to be checked .
However , when I see labels entitling my luggage to travel through airports , whilst I on the other hand , have to show my identity card or my passport , I do feel a little perplexed .
Evidently , as has been mentioned here , Schengen is a step forward towards freedom of movement and we are not going to deny that .
But it is such a cautious step and above all so unclear that some of us are concerned about it .
We have moved forward it is true , but how ?
With exclusively intergovernmental agreements which it is difficult for the European Parliament to check and for the national parliaments to control in view of their extra-national nature .
We are anxious to know whether we are to continue like this or , as has been said so often , whether we are to have a Community legal basis which will help us to take those matters forward .
The report therefore seems to me to be opportune and I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on the content .
Flexibility has been mentioned here .
Flexibility to move forward .
We might discuss that , but in principle we should be in agreement .
So to move forward , but how ?
I think we need to move towards greater democracy , more rights , more freedoms and , above all , without agreements between the Governments placing too much emphasis on certain problems , for example immigration .
I know it is a problem , but we cannot work simply by stressing only the security or frontiers aspect to press for ' solutions ' which are to say the least not very transparent .
Yes to doing the right thing by the citizens ; yes to fulfilling the promise we made - and I include myself in the ' we ' as one of those with an interest in seeing this European Union progress ; yes to the promise we made for a free and open European Union in which we can travel ; yes to being able to call upon the Court of Justice of the Union to uphold that ; yes to as flexible a Union as is desired , but one which is moving forward , not towards a scenario in which - as seems to be the case in the CIS - we should have little to offer with the States nevertheless rapidly reaching agreement saying ' don 't worry , at least as regards security , your security , we shall reach agreement ; yes indeed , just don 't tell us how ' , but rather towards a scenario of greater democracy .
Mr President , mobility is exactly what the Schengen Agreement is about , something which ought to be of general interest to the majority in this assembly .
People expect to be able to move freely across internal national borders .
But you cannot ask citizens to accept the resulting inadequate safety and security measures or an increased inflow of narcotics from a neighbouring country .
Mobility should benefit the people not criminals .
That is why compensatory measures are required .
Where would we be today in the development of mobility without the driving force that Schengen constitutes ?
The Scandinavian countries should participate , as suggested , preserving the Nordic Passport Union .
As far as Norway and Iceland are concerned , practical solutions must also be found in the future .
Following the difficulties at the committee stage , Rapporteur Van Lancker has shown a willingness to negotiate .
However , misunderstandings are not unusual in a matter like this , for example the purpose of Schengen being to prevent general immigration when in fact it is illegal immigration which is being curbed , something which most parties would otherwise approve .
It is in people 's interest to push for mobility and this involves a number of measures and actions .
The revisions of the treaty now also make it possible to incorporate gradually the terms of the Schengen Agreement as the Commission has already constructively proposed .
This would also increase the level of control for the people .
If Parliament decides to oppose the security measures , we risk becoming a stumbling block to the idea of mobility , an impossible position for Parliament .
Parliament should adopt an unambiguously positive attitude towards the Schengen collaboration .
Mr President , Mr Fischbach , making Europe into one large single market with no internal borders , simply from the commercial and economic standpoint , is a grave error .
We have seen that in the Renault Vilvoorde affair , where the lack of European social rules became apparent to anyone .
The same thing is happening with internal security .
To open the borders for free movement without giving any thought to the essential corollary of public safety is scandalous .
How do you expect our citizens to support the European plan if they form the impression that Europe is not doing enough to protect them against crime ?
It was to fill this gap and compensate for the shortcomings of the Community institutions that the intergovernmental structure of Schengen was created .
And Schengen has thus become a laboratory where it is possible to test , on the ground , those actions and structures which should subsequently be integrated into the framework of the Treaty on European Union , if only to institute that Parliamentary control and those legal guarantees which , for the present , are lacking .
So I see Schengen as a positive initiative , which is certainly not being used to bully the citizen , as the van Lancker report implies , but is in fact offering him a guarantee of his personal safety .
Police activity against criminals , thieves , the Mafia , drug pushers , illegal immigrants , must not be reduced - it must be increased and integrated into the European structures .
Because only then , Mr President , Mr Fischbach , will we gain the support of the peoples of Europe .
Mr President , for me , Schengen is an instrument which effectively combines security with freedom of movement .
Anyone who only wants freedom of movement has obviously failed to understand Schengen as an instrument of security for the citizens of Europe .
Anyone who says no to police checks , no to the inclusion of undesirables in the Schengen Information System or no to the ruling on third countries has not understood Schengen .
Similarly , anyone who dismisses Schengen as an instrument to counter immigration has also failed to understand it .
What we need is a security instrument , and that is what Schengen offers .
Anyone who assembles an antiSchengen package in the form of a motion like this or a report like this must ultimately expect these proposals - which are directed against public security - to be rejected .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted with today 's report on the functioning and future of the Schengen Agreements , and I wish in particular to compliment the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs and its rapporteur , Mrs Van Lancker .
This draft report highlights the special nature of the Schengen Agreements , which on the one hand are a contribution to achieving the goal of abolishing checks on persons at our internal frontiers - in accordance with Article 7a of the Treaty - but on the other are taking shape outside the context of the European Union .
Attention is drawn to this point both in your assessment of the present functioning of the Schengen Agreements and your comments on the future .
The Commission 's position on Schengen is well known .
From the outset , the Commission has looked favourably on the Schengen initiative as a testing ground for , or a forerunner of , the European Union , albeit designed to be replaced gradually by Union instruments .
In this context , at my initiative , the Commission put forward three legislative proposals in July 1995 aimed at achieving this objective throughout the Union .
In view of the Union 's slow progress towards this goal , and given that even if all the proposals were to be adopted quickly , there would still be no guarantee of their immediate implementation , the importance of Schengen has not only been confirmed , but has in fact increased .
Indeed , Schengen and its extension are the only means of allowing our citizens to benefit , as of now , from the right to freedom of movement and security .
However , this does not mean that Schengen is the best of all possible solutions or that it is perfect in all respects .
The report brings to light various shortcomings .
I share many of your concerns , first and foremost as regards the lack of transparency .
But I do not share all your concerns , as I shall make clear in a moment .
On the subject of transparency , I can tell you that , as the Commission 's representative on the Schengen Executive Committee , I insisted before the committee that the public should be given more information on Schengen .
As a result of what I said , the Executive Committee decided to send the European Parliament the first annual report on the implementation of the Schengen Agreements .
Personally , I attach the greatest importance to providing our citizens with information on their rights , and to the fact that they will not lend their support to the building of Europe until we present them with a single market which allows ample freedom of movement for goods , services and capital , but also for our citizens themselves . This , as has been pointed out , is still inadequate .
It is vital to inform our citizens , as proved by the recent ' Citizens of Europe ' information campaign carried out at Community level .
I believe that a similar initiative to inform our citizens should be undertaken on Schengen , for example to tell citizens of third countries who are resident in the Schengen states what rights the Agreements give them , in particular the right to travel - carrying their residence permits and under certain conditions - without the need for a visa .
The second major concern highlighted in your report , and one which I share , relates to democratic and judicial control over Schengen .
Schengen is not entirely outside democratic and judicial control , given the role played by the national parliaments and the courts of the Member States concerned .
It would seem logical , however , since Schengen is one means of ensuring the entry into force of Article 7a , for the European institutions - especially the European Parliament and the Court of Justice - to be able to operate in this field .
Let us now move on from these considerations concerning the institutional inadequacies of Schengen to your views on the future of Schengen , which I broadly share .
Firstly , the abolishing of internal border checks on persons is an objective of the Union , and should therefore preferably be achieved by means of the Union 's decision-making procedures and legal instruments , which are gradually to replace those of Schengen .
We must therefore continue our efforts to gain approval for the proposals we have presented to the Council on this subject .
As regards the second priority for the future which is singled out in your report , only if this approach proved unproductive should an alternative solution be considered , namely the integration of Schengen into the Treaty on European Union .
Here too , I share your views .
It would be acceptable to integrate Schengen into the Treaty on European Union only if it contributed added value in institutional terms .
This means that the integration of the Schengen acts into the Treaty would have to take place alongside the granting of competences to the European Union institutions .
Mr President , Mr Nassauer has just been kind enough to refer to me .
I should like to repeat once again what he said .
I had mentioned the fact that cattle can travel unsupervised in the European Union , while I have to produce my passport .
Mr Nassauer saw fit to observe that all this means is that the border guards take note of the fact that I am not a beef steer !
My thanks for the compliment .
At the same time , Mr Nassauer pointed out that he is apparently one of those who can travel unchecked from Finland to Portugal .
If I have to show my passport because I am not a beef steer , I should like to know what the border guards think Mr Nassauer is to excuse him from showing his passport !
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
The information society
The next item is the debate on the report by Mr Wim van Velzen ( A4-0045 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission 's Green Paper on Living and Working in the Information Society : People First ( COM ( 96 ) 0389 - C4-0522 / 96 ) .
Mr President , the great European projects always have the same failing in that the social dimension seems constantly to lag behind .
Take European integration , the internal market , EMU or , now , the information society : the social issues always come low on the agenda .
After all the attention given to the electronic highway , the focusing of attention on the social aspects brought a breathing space .
However , my acquaintance with the Commission 's Green Paper has given me mixed feelings .
Not so far as the sub-title ' People First ' is concerned , given that it suggests lots of things that ought to please me . To read it , however , is to be disappointed .
The ' people ' are considered principally as workers , and the reports by the forum on the information society and the high level group , which could have projected a very full picture , are largely ignored . In actual fact , a large section of the report is taken up just by employment and training , and that is all right as far as it goes .
There is interesting information , for example , about the speed with which knowledge becomes obsolete and about modifications in organization . But in the final analysis I feel that the whole thing is viewed too much as an automatic process and that too few critical questions are asked , for example , about the driving back of the hierarchy and the broadening of organization and the repercussions of that with regard to the decline of the less skilled and less specialized work of which we in Europe have a tremendous need .
I have the impression also that the report suffers from over-optimism .
It ' should ' all turn out well if we introduce the information and communications technologies quickly and if we ' liberalize ' as much as possible .
In my view that does not make sense , and I can point to a report drawn up by the Commission not so long ago that declared , in fact , that expectations about employment could be positive after the year 2000 when there should be positive growth in new ICT sector jobs .
But in the year 2000 it is obvious that very many traditional jobs will be destroyed , more than a hundred thousand of them .
On account of the optimism , which is quite understandable , insufficient attention is paid , in my opinion , to what I will call the flanking policy .
If you start from the understanding that many more people will be unemployed , and , certainly , there will be the 20 million that are permanently with us , then an instrument that would shorten working time and make more use of the capacity in the tertiary sector would offer an exceptionally interesting strategy . Unfortunately , this is totally ignored in the Green Paper .
Furthermore , absolutely no attention is paid to what I will call the insider-outsider problem .
Discussion about the information society is focused only on people who have work , and thus all those people who are not in work , who are unemployed , or retired or not involved in the employment process for some other reason , are left out in the cold .
The way is therefore opened up to a dual society if nothing else .
I found the blinkered attitude regarding education particularly painful .
When I look at what is said about education I note that attention is paid only to people who themselves want to adapt to the ICTs rather than to something other than that : the application of new technologies to help solve actual problems of society such as unemployment , poverty , environmental pollution and the divisions in our society .
Education is more than vocational training .
Education is also the passport to a culture , the vehicle via which people are introduced to our culture .
That aspect is completely ignored in the Green Paper .
What is therefore necessary as regards the action programme that will be formulated here after the adoption and processing of my report is that in all circumstances it should have balance .
The Commission must avoid placing all the emphasis on employment . Coordination and societal factors must also receive attention .
At the moment the Commission is suffering , in my opinion , from serious over-heating .
Amidst the enormous flood of reports it is almost impossible to see what the Commission 's vision is , because in various ways those reports contradict each other .
The action plan for new legislation must be less diffident .
The Commission must not block new developments ; it must stop putting a brake on them all the time .
It must grant the time for them .
And there are new areas of weakness to prepare for , in connection with teleworking , the security and health of the population and the protection of employees , in which the Commission can set out the ground rules via directives .
The Commission must shake off its timidity and clearly mark out the rights and the responsibilities of the European authorities , and it must become more active than is now the case in the field of legislation .
Mr President , I am addressing the House on behalf of Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer , who is unfortunately unable to attend .
When we look at this document we can only say that it is the opposite of what is desirable - a flexibility derived from principles .
What happens here is that the principles are formulated first - as Mr Van Velzen has just pointed out - and then the opposite course is pursued .
Above a firmament of bright ideas and good intentions we then have a substructure , a basis of practically oriented historical materialism of the cynical variety , and the only thing left to politicians is to push ahead with adapting man to the new technology .
There is a fundamental philosophy here , which says : living means functioning , living means working , living means participation in capitalist competition .
So really only private entrepreneurs are living .
There is also the implied promise that the information society will open up these delights to more people , but I think Wim van Velzen was right here when he put the question another way , from the standpoint of the socially disadvantaged .
I think it needs to be put even more radically - as a question of power and supremacy relationships and the new opportunities for social and political emancipation , a question which is linked to the new technology and the new organizational concepts it has produced .
If we picture the information society , without any advance preparation , impacting on our present hour-glass society , where insecurity and the downward differentiation of wages are affecting more and more groups in society , then we get the effect of a huge new proletariat which has to be entertained by ' tititainment ' , as they say nowadays , a petit bourgeoisie of passive users and a new nomenklatura who hold the power and are the masters of the game .
Secondly , in a situation where communication is taking on totally new dimensions as a result of the creation of virtual realities and communities , we have the two sides of one coin , the culture industry , bringing passivity to the masses in the guise of activity , and the secret services , centralizing relevant information and screening information as a way of activating the elite , and this is made worse rather than better by the information society .
We in this House have very often criticized the Commission 's piecemeal tactics in the past .
Here we see something of those tactics surviving .
Mr Bangemann has already promised this House that he will do better .
There is to be a framework directive .
The report by the high-level group of experts suggests that the possibility exists of a more comprehensive approach .
The action plan we have been promised will , we hope , mark the end of this onesided procedure .
The role of government , too , requires discussion : is it to function as a residual parameter or is it to become a leader of innovation ?
We need greater clarification of what might be fair methods of standardization , whereby it would not be just to those economic groups which exert the most pressure that are able to impose their interests as general standards .
We need to overcome the previous lack of synchronization between technological , entrepreneurial and regulatory development , which time and again has thrown away opportunities for planning , and , if I may just add , ceterum censeo : the overdue socio-ecological reconstruction of Europe 's societies must not be put off any longer .
Even the possible transition to the information society cannot offer the slightest excuse for doing so .
Mr President , a European policy which hopes to claim by right that it wants to put man at the centre of the information society must see man in all his many different roles and interests .
It is about man as an employee , and it is also about man as a citizen .
In the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , the Green Paper takes too little account of the latter aspect .
As the draftsman of the opinion , therefore , I must emphasize the following requirements to be met by any future policy for the creation of the information society . The applications of information and communications technologies which make things easier for the citizen in his everyday life , in his dealings with the authorities and in his democratic involvement , must be enhanced , and more must be done to promote them .
Unfortunately , there is too little evidence of this in the documents available to date .
Unfortunately , too , we cannot help noticing that public services , such as legal information services , are lagging behind the private ones , and that entertainment pays better than useful information for the citizen .
A second central requirement of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights is that the information society should be provided with a stable legal framework and that a higher degree of legal security should be guaranteed for all participants .
We know that there are a great number of directives and legislative projects in preparation in this area , and we believe it is high time that some of them were implemented as rapidly as possible .
They certainly include the sector of distance working , but , equally certainly , they also include questions of consumer protection , questions of security in payment transactions , copyright and many more .
A third central requirement to be met by the future legal order for the information society is that it should take greater account of the convergence of the information and communications technology media , which will result in the future mediamatic society , to guarantee an integrated policy for all media and services , and - this is particularly to be regarded as an appeal to the Member States - the further discussion of a centralized European telecommunications authority .
Mr President , the period in which we are now living is often described as a ' crisis period ' , but it is , rather , a time of radical change in society .
This decade , in contrast to previous decades , is undergoing a process not of evolution but of revolution ; everything is speeding up , intensified by the effects of technological progress and resulting in globalization of the economy , with market forces predominating , while the position of people in the West , comfortably settled with their ageing technology , is becoming increasingly precarious .
Capital , information and goods travel at the speed of a computer signal ; we have entered the information society and its impact on daily life is growing , bringing with it benefits but certainly also numerous drawbacks , if we are not careful .
The rapporteur , Mr Van Velzen , has done his job well , and I congratulate him all the more warmly because I share his point of view .
It is true that , for the public , employment , work and training are not the only values on which the information society in the European Union should be founded .
Unfortunately , although the Green Paper proposes also to deepen the political , social and civil dialogue , it does not really take account of the everyday lives of ordinary people and the disruption to their way of life which will result from the information society , thus creating new forms of isolation and , probably , a two-speed society as a consequence of disparities between generations , social strata and geographical areas .
The Green Paper lacks a human and personal dimension .
The Union 's declared aim of supporting the job transformation process does not take sufficient account of the additional danger of job relocation to third countries as a result of teleworking facilitated by the new information technologies .
Retraining is the main focus of the planned measures to overcome workers ' lack of skills .
There is therefore a danger of a gulf appearing between the generations .
Not just the vocational aspects but also the social aspects of redeployment should be considered .
The question should also be raised of the cost to the family budget of using the new information technologies : licence fees , subscriptions , purchases of software , CD roms , diskettes or cassettes .
The problem in fact is that there are disparities between people 's purchasing power within the European Union and a consequent danger of creating a two-speed Europe .
From the cultural point of view , the Green Paper does not consider the increasing use of the new technologies in national libraries , museums or photo libraries , and therefore fails to do justice to their beneficial effects on knowledge .
Furthermore , though I have no desire to question the universal use of English in the computer world , this practice could impoverish that language , and if it becomes the common language of too many people it could diminish the use of the languages of the smaller countries .
Finally , caution is required : the information society must not set up barriers between the generations , between those who have the information tools and those who cannot acquire them .
Moreover , we should not underestimate the intellectual danger inherent in assimilating this information
In a word , I should like to call the attention of the Commission and the Council to the need to educate the various users who will be living in a society that their parents will not have been entirely successful in decoding .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Wim van Velzen , as I know what application and discipline he has brought to his work and the serious approach he has taken to the drafting of this helpful report .
In the face of the challenges and social consequences wrought by the ' information society ' it would be a good thing if the European Union were to plan ahead in order to set up a joint legislative framework suitable for regulating some of these consequences already mentioned : telework , privacy , linguistic differences , the effect on health , on schools , on teaching , the protection needed for users as such and as consumers , etc .
No-one can say at this stage precisely where the information society will take us because it is a future which is still taking shape , a future which is developing and which is constantly at the experimental stage .
But we must indeed move forward in order to avoid the most negative of the possible consequences : precarious nature of new jobs , greater inequality , new monopolies , uncontrolled networks , risk of cultural uniformity , more financial speculation , etc .
We must at the same time accentuate the positive aspects which the information society will bring , because we have before us a predictable new model for economic growth and as such it should have a positive effect on employment .
As a new model for economic growth it will have risks , different risks , some of which we know and others at which we can now only guess .
The spread of information society technologies will change the structures of production , demand and employment .
Although the technologies of this information society are creating new products and new services , they will produce substantial social changes , but in the medium and perhaps in the short term , new job opportunities might appear and we must be able to seize them .
Our objective should be to ensure that the information society does not accentuate the differences between our regions , but rather acts as an instrument for cohesion ; it should not swamp more people in the duality of our societies , but should favour social integration ; it should not merely encourage financial speculation , but should encourage productive investment ; it should not create new uncontrollable monopolies but should help to develop diversity and pluralism .
This is one of those debates we shall come back to ; it began because , as I said , the information society is at the development stage and is bound up with many aspects of our lives - amongst other things with a matter so fundamental as employment .
Mr President , I think that this an important report and one which , given the continuing bias towards technology and economics in the Commission 's thinking , is particularly apposite . I say that as a former rapporteur for the committee .
The great importance of information technology for Europe is fully acknowledged and stems from the strongly rising share of the sector in the European economy and from its function as a catalyst for other industries in Europe .
That , also , is a fact . It should be borne in mind , however , that in the information society people must eventually learn to work with the ICTs .
At present most people in Europe are still not equipped to make good use of the ICTs .
Given that situation , the call by Mr Van Velzen and Mr Pex for coordination is quite justified .
I feel that in the future the Commission , in its interaction with the Council , and the European Parliament must do much more to coordinate the various policy areas .
If Europe is to win through in the field of the information and communication technologies it is essential that action be taken to that end .
We must be prepared also to use our structural funds and action programmes for , among other things , new pricing methodologies and new eventualities .
Currently , the stipulated regions are suffering neglect because the structural funds are , above all , badly focused .
But in the future the result will be not only regional neglect .
There will also be neglect of groups . I call for that to be borne in mind in future policy .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Van Velzen , as well as the draftsmen for the other committees , for having presented a report which is constructive and certainly of great interest , despite being somewhat critical in places .
Your analysis and conclusions , Mr Van Velzen , show that the drafting process took a considerable period of time and required a detailed knowledge of the social aspects of the information society .
The Commission 's Green Paper , launched at a European colloquium in Dublin at the end of September 1996 , generated a debate throughout Europe on the many aspects of the information society , as also identified by the High Level Group and the Information Society Forum .
A clear consensus on the need for further action has emerged from a wide range of institutions , organizations and individuals : national governments , EU institutions , committees , trade unions , businesses , professional associations , health boards and , in particular , both national and European voluntary bodies .
This consensus is centred on the need to do more in a series of key sectors to create a greater awareness of the aspects of the information society : to encourage the development of an approach to learning at all levels of the information society ; to boost employment and stimulate job creation ; to modernize the institutions related to working life and legislative activity ; to develop human resources and overcome the skills gap ; to promote social cohesion through empowerment and social integration ; and to build on Europe 's cultural diversity in creating a European route to the information society .
Reaction to the Green Paper did also reveal concern in some areas , however : the compatibility between flexible work organization and job security ; the balance between what one might call the winners and losers on the employment front ; the relocation of production to all corners of the earth ; regional imbalances in terms of access , availability and adaptation ; the risk that equality of opportunity may not be guaranteed for all ; and sustainable development for all sectors of employment , work , life and democracy .
The Commission is currently preparing a follow-up communication entitled ' Prioritizing the human dimension : the next steps ' . As you will see , its three main objectives are well balanced : coordinating the process of ensuring that the implications of the information society are properly understood and followed through in the social arena and on the labour market ; incorporating an ' information society ' dimension into all social strategies and actions , in particular at European level ; and identifying specific actions designed to promote the potential of the information society and take account of its relevance to the social policy area in its entirety .
I can assure the House that this communication will be compatible with and complement the other actions undertaken by the Commission in this sector .
On the detailed questions which have been raised , I would merely point out that the Commission is preparing a new communication on vocational training and the information society , which is to address itself to many aspects of lifelong learning .
This communication will complete the Commission 's action plan ' Towards a European education initiative : learning in the information society ' .
Mention has also been made of teleworking : the Commission will not be presenting a proposal on this topic as such before the end of the year , as requested , since the aspects relating to teleworking are to be tackled in a Green Paper on work organization to be published by the Commission within a matter of weeks .
The purpose of this Green Paper is to stimulate a debate , in the context of the social dialogue , on work organization as it affects teleworking .
As regards one final question of detail - on improving consumer protection - I would say that , to my knowledge , the Directorate-General responsible for consumer policy is in the process of drawing up a communication on ways of enhancing consumer protection .
I should like to end by congratulating the rapporteur once again on his excellent work : it is a most useful contribution to the communication which the Commission will be presenting very shortly to the House .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Lifelong learning
The next item is the report ( A4-0056 / 97 ) by Mrs Waddington , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission 's White Paper on Education and Training - Teaching and Learning - Towards the Learning Society ( COM ( 95 ) 0590 - C4-0597 / 95 ) .
Mr President , the Commission should be congratulated for initiating a debate on the need to create a learning society in the European Union .
The White Paper provides an analysis of the challenges we face in the global economy where new technologies are radically changing the nature of work and requiring a workforce that is highly-skilled , flexible and qualified .
However , the challenges we face in Europe are even greater and we must plan to create a learning society which recognizes the modern and difficult problems and provides opportunities for all our citizens to contribute to economic and social progress .
If these challenges are not met , the alternative is economic and social decline .
In my report attention is given to three additional challenges : firstly , the ageing of the population of Europe ; secondly , the danger of the growth in social exclusion , and , thirdly , the relatively low and , in some cases , declining level of public expenditure on education and training .
Analysis of these three factors suggests that more emphasis should be given to lifelong learning rather than simply concentrating on initial education and training , that the problem of educational underachievement and the need for particular groups currently marginalized to gain skills and qualifications must have a higher priority , and that a larger range of actors , including the social partners , must have a role , with Member States and the European Union , in examining the means of creating , sustaining and resourcing the learning society .
I will give a few examples .
Our workforce is ageing : in ten years ' time 80 % of the technology we use today will be outdated but 80 % of the workforce will be working on the basis of knowledge at least ten years old .
School failure is increasing : the OECD suggests that 15-20 % of European students leave school with no useful qualifications and the decline in demand for unskilled workers is resulting in a growth in long-term unemployment for those without marketable skills and flexibility .
Yet only 7 % of the unemployed are undergoing training , and this proportion is actually decreasing .
The percentage of total public expenditure on education and training has declined in 11 out of the 15 Member States in the last 10 years .
Both the USA and Japan spend more than we do .
The benefits of education and training have been well documented .
Empirical evidence points to a positive correlation between education and employment , higher earnings , productivity , economic growth , equality and quality of life , greater social cohesion , improved health , reduced crime and enhanced environmental awareness .
This evidence , documented during the 1996 European Year of Lifelong Learning , and the results of the very wide consultations carried out on the White Paper , strongly suggest the need for further action .
The motion for a resolution includes a number of concrete proposals in addition to those proposed by the Commission , in particular concerning lifelong learning , combating social exclusion and the development of partnerships for resourcing a learning society .
We are asking for the budgetary authority to increase funding and the Commission to undertake research and pilot programmes and to mainstream education and training in Community programmes .
Action is certainly needed and we are inviting the Commission to review its current plan for action and prepare a more comprehensive and detailed proposal and to reconsult this Parliament on its revised plan .
This report , with its critical evaluation of the issues and its suggestions for improvement , will be a positive contribution to the creation of a European learning society .
The significance of education and training , both for work and for democratic life , requires this European Union to take fundamental steps to invest in the future of all our people , young and old , and to ensure that all our programmes and all our resources are devoted towards creating a society in which all individuals have the opportunity to learn to skill and to reskill at all ages .
I look forward to the view of the Commission on our proposals .
I very much hope that this Parliament will universally support these proposals and that we will shortly see concrete action proposals coming forward and be able to see , within the lifetime of this Parliament , clear and actual benefits from the work undertaken .
Mr President , if education is society 's main way to develop the individual 's physical , intellectual and moral potentials , training is the organization , provision and acquisition of the necessary qualifications , mainly for professional life .
Consequently , education and training assist the better development of the abilities of individual people and their participation in society .
Nowadays , in many of the European Union 's Member States , the educational systems are not well enough prepared to meet the challenges of international competition , technological change , company requirements , and the working world , so as to provide a workforce with a high level of specialization .
Bearing in mind the principle of subsidiarity , the Commission accepts that the Member States have primary responsibility and has proposed activities that they should undertake and measures for the support of those activities at Community level .
Our opinion is that education and training should be viewed from a more cohesive standpoint , and should aim to promote and encourage original thinking and to offer a sufficiency of qualitatively trained human resources , especially in the areas of research and technology .
To promote such a dimension in education and training , it is essential to have more effective coordination of national and Community action in research , technological development and education , and greater cooperation between programmes for innovative initiatives , research activity and industry .
Mr President , I now want to mention a number of factors which I consider important :
As for Objective 1 , in other words encouragement of the acquisition of new knowledge , we consider that the creation of a centre for information resources and mobility for students , researchers and academic staff should aim to promote interdisciplinary approaches in new sectors .
The Commission should also include in the recognition of key skills , research ability in sectors at the cutting edge of technology .
The production and use of educational IT multimedia appropriately adapted for the education systems in the Member States and for their respective cultural and linguistic particulars , should also be supported .
As for Objective 2 , namely the development of closer links between the academic and industrial worlds , we call for the creation of communication channels between the two .
In the context of the SOCRATES and LEONARDO programmes , we also call on the Commission to ensure that the mobility of students , researchers and academic staff between universities , research centres and companies will include periods of recognized research and training activity in branches related to industry , and to support and develop information and consultancy service networks .
We call on the Commission , in cooperation with CEDEFOP , to promote the creation of networks for the exchange of information and the monitoring of experience in successful methods of lifelong professional training .
As for Objective 3 , the fight against social exclusion , we believe that the use of networks and multimedia in the field of education and training reinforces the effort to ensure equal access .
Finally , Mr President , so far as equal material investment is concerned , we call on the Commission , in cooperation with the Member States , to look into methods of providing tax incentives for companies and individuals which invest and participate in lifelong professional training .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the response to the White Paper has been for the most part positive .
Especially at this time of unemployment in Europe , especially among the young , the education debate has taken on a particularly serious significance .
Sue Waddington 's report , on which I offer my sincere congratulations and my thanks for the pleasure of working with her , is particularly valuable because it takes account of the EU 's latest studies of education policy , which indicate that even in the EU countries the standard of education leaves something to be desired , that public expenditure on education is falling , and that although better training does increase individual educational opportunities it is still far from being a guarantee of a job .
The conclusions of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media concentrate on three points in particular .
The first is finance .
Susan Waddington also touches on this point in her report , when she says that the cost neutrality referred to in the White Paper must on no account be allowed to set a trend , because the SOCRATES and LEONARDO programmes are already underfunded , and that additional financial resources should imperatively be made available .
Secondly , the committee calls upon the Commission to rethink its present action plan and to include other aspects , beginning with lifelong learning and extending to measures to combat social marginalization .
This certainly does not relate only to the school of the second chance , but especially to basic and further training programmes , integration models , active learning , consideration for the disadvantaged , the role of teachers , and educational and vocational advisory services .
All of this must be included , as must the learning of foreign languages .
Our committee has given particular attention to this , and requests that not only the EU languages should be included .
Education and training cannot be left to the efforts of the individual but are a function of government .
The State takes the primary responsibility for them .
This is the only way of avoiding a split in European society between the informed and the ignorant .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for an excellent report .
Education is increasingly important , not least from an employment point of view .
If Europe is to compete on the world market in the future , it is imperative that our workforce is well-educated .
I believe that the competitiveness of Europe lies in advanced technologies and the accompanying well-educated workforce .
As mentioned by the rapporteur , a basic education is not enough .
In view of the rapid changes and advances in technology , we must adopt the concept of lifelong learning .
In addition , education plays an important role from a class point of view .
Class differences used to depend on the amount of property or money owned .
Today and in the future class differences will depend much more on whether you possess knowledge or not .
Hence the importance of education being offered to everyone and not just a few .
Currently it is often the case that people with a higher education background also benefit more from education during the latter part of their lives .
We must create a society where everyone is able to enjoy a good education .
Naturally prospects vary , but the objective of education is that it should be tailored to individual needs .
I say yes to a second chance , but not in a segregated system .
It is the mainstream education system which must give a second chance to those who need it .
I would also like to strike a blow for the integration of pupils who are disadvantaged .
They should be able to participate to the greatest possible extent in mainstream education .
Finally , as regards positive discrimination , we have at present a number of vocational education programmes , some largely attended by men , some largely by women .
Positive discrimination should be possible so as to achieve a more equitable balance between the sexes .
Mr President , I should like to turn the spotlight briefly on flexibility .
We all know that the working world has changed completely in recent years .
We can assume that most of those who are now going out to work for the first time will have to retrain three , four or five times .
In other words , flexibility is an absolute must , and lifelong learning - constant relearning - is a necessity .
Only those who really do offer that flexibility and are willing to learn more and relearn will have really good prospects of staying in work .
What politicians can contribute here is assistance to enable the individual to achieve this flexibility .
I believe that the European Union has done a good job here with the range of educational and mobility programmes it offers , such as LEONARDO or SOCRATES or all the programmes to be implemented in connection with the Structural Funds , such as LEADER or YOUTH START or NEW and so on .
All this is important as a way of giving the individual in the job market a real chance to absorb education and experience genuine mobility .
I believe these programmes are also needed because that same mobility helps to transfer innovations between the many small and medium-sized enterprises .
But the big problems that exist when it comes to implementing all this lie in the fact that there are major obstacles in , for example , the mutual recognition of diplomas awarded as a result of training in the various Member States .
Problems also arise with user information , and with the wide variety of national rules .
It is unclear , for example , what counts as paid holiday and what counts as working time , or what allowance is made for training .
What we need , therefore , is a package of measures from the Commission to ensure that all these barriers are pulled down as quickly as possible so that these programmes can help us to pursue an active employment market policy in the interests of those concerned .
Mr President , globalization of the economy , liberalization of the labour market and the information society , assuming , in our view , that its consequences are properly handled , are making lifelong learning a central concern for us .
Employees must be afforded regular opportunities for education and young people in training must learn how to handle new computer techniques as early as possible .
Entirely new forms of education and teacher training need to be devised .
The information society , which we have rightly debated , will , I believe , force the European Union to claim a steadily bigger role for itself in this field .
Exchanging information is no longer enough .
We must also embark on the coordination of national policy .
The European Union has a key part to play in attuning the differing education systems of the various Member States to the situation in order that Europe can be properly equipped for the world market .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for the impetus that she has provided in that direction .
Mr President , I heartily congratulate Mrs Waddington on her report , since as a result of the additions and the adoption of many of the amendments presented in the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment by various Groups , the Commission 's White Paper has been vastly improved .
This report places the accent on the Commission 's giving priority to the subject of education within its agenda and considers that matters such as social exclusion and sexual equality will be greatly improved as a result of education and lifelong learning .
The economic development which might be achieved as a result of education and training is qualitative and not quantitative and it is therefore necessary to regard this development as better not greater .
Educational changes on their own cannot bring about socio-economic changes but inequalities will disappear to a large extent with education and training , since they make it easier for people to obtain better jobs and thus promote greater equality .
We ourselves would ask the Commission to consider the matter of education and training within the framework of an overall project for social change linked to training of the workforce and to the other social and economic projects within this great scheme to build Europe - which is on everyone 's agenda .
Mr President , as in every sector - and especially that of the economy - we shall have a multispeed Europe in the social sector too .
I would congratulate the rapporteur on the hard work and commitment which have gone into her comprehensive report , and I share her view that the purpose of education and training is mainly to secure growth which creates jobs , to guarantee social benefits and to combat exclusion .
In my opinion , these aims can only be achieved if the Member States are encouraged to act independently , so that strategies and projects are coordinated by their own local and regional governments .
Like individual countries , Europe will become great if it can promote culture and employment for its citizens and teach its young people to become adults .
Teachers have a major role to play in this process , and that is why they should be obliged to familiarize themselves with the culture , language and traditions of the places where they teach : they should return to the classroom and be examined once a year as to their suitability for teaching , by panels set up by the local and regional authorities .
What is more , Parliament should set an example to the young people of Europe by reorganizing itself on the lines of a truly federal Europe , in which local and regional bodies have more powers , including the right to group together and negotiate agreements with regions in other Member States .
This would be a further incentive for the young citizens of Europe : a cultural commitment combined with stronglyheld democratic convictions would stimulate the building of a real Europe of peoples and citizens .
Mr President , I am grateful to the rapporteur , Mrs Waddington , as she has managed in her report to link the specific problems of various types of workers and social groups with the broader , more general issue of the need for new training systems .
This may well be the most useful contribution that the Commission has to look at .
Tension will inevitably be created whenever real life becomes enmeshed with projects , but the outcome of such tension is extremely beneficial .
The White Paper on the learning society makes one point which I believe is worth stressing : it accepts the challenge presented by change , and maintains that change and flexibility can be guided and moulded to suit the interests of mankind only if the question of training takes centre stage .
Training is the only way of achieving a form of flexibility which is positive for mankind .
The White Paper tackles this issue both in terms of culture in general - and it is interesting that , alongside technical know-how , not only is a reappraisal and deepening awareness of the humanities taking shape , but creativeness and experimentation are also undergoing a revival - and in terms of preparation for a working life in which there will be an increasing overlap between technical skills and social attitudes , theoretical knowledge and integration in the workplace .
All of this , however , requires that training should take place within a network . A single institution will be inadequate : cooperation will be needed between different institutions , schools , training centres , associations and families .
One question which attracted the attention of the Social Affairs Committee was that of a second chance to attend school .
We are aware of the need , but also the dangers .
Success depends on a thorough overhaul of a rigid , threatening system - flexible pathways between training systems , schools and businesses could indeed create new opportunities .
We also agree on the objectives .
In general terms , these objectives make a good deal of sense , at least with a view to provoking change : from a new relationship between schools and businesses to language proficiency , to training which is viewed as a major investment .
This White Paper has been criticized for not dealing adequately with social and human development .
I do not share this criticism , because it seems to me that social and human development is not only encouraged , but regarded as a precious personal asset in preparing for work - why else would the White Paper devote such attention to the proposed European Voluntary Service ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to applaud the Commission 's initiative in publishing the White Paper on education and training . I also commend the rapporteur on her excellent work , which has helped to improve the White Paper .
I should like to deal with two aspects : the first is the very close link identified by the rapporteur between training and one of the challenges faced by our society , namely the globalization of the economy .
On the one hand , the process of globalization is radically changing patterns of employment and creating problems of adapting to new social and economic conditions , but on the other , it can also offer major opportunities if it is accompanied by substantial investment in training .
I am referring here to training for young people to broaden their skills base , training in the sense of learning foreign languages and as a means of bringing schools and businesses closer together , but also training as a way of giving adults the ability to adapt to change .
In short , training - as long as it is expanded and upgraded - is the key to regarding the current changes and innovation as an opportunity .
For this reason , I endorse the rapporteur 's comments and her appeal to the budgetary authority for more funding to be made available not only in the individual Member States , but also at European level for basic training , lifelong learning and research .
My second point concerns women .
It is true that the education of girls and women has increased significantly in recent years , but some sectors still remain heavily dominated by men ; positive action is therefore required to encourage girls and women to take up education and training , particularly in scientific and technical subjects .
Mr President , many surveys have shown , and we do not need to debate it , that education and training contribute decisively towards the fight against unemployment , increasing employment and boosting the competitiveness of the economy .
It follows , I think , that what we should aim to do is combine general education with the cultivation of professional skills , so as to create an educational system whose aim will be to teach those in education how to learn , both now and in the future .
With that in mind , in the context of this report I would like to dwell on a number of points .
First , we must not forget that the instrument available to us as the European Union for the exercise of policy is the European Social Fund .
Here , there is much that we can do to improve effectiveness , first of all , and secondly transparency , so far as the activities - of the ESF , I repeat - are concerned .
Secondly , we should focus our efforts on dealing with the consequences of the information society which is on our threshold . It must not be an eclectic society , but one that involves everyone .
Thirdly , we should place particular emphasis on foreign languages , all the more so since we are involved in the single European market .
Fourthly , we should increase the resources earmarked for the LEONARDO and SOCRATES programmes , which are ones that create European added value in the sector we are considering .
Fifthly , I want to mention CEDEFOP , the Centre for the Development of Professional Training .
I consider that demands and developments in the sector of professional training demonstrate the need for the Centre to exist , but at the same time they stress the need to support and of course to mobilize the Centre , which by the way , has its headquarters in my own country , Greece .
Mr President , I should like to thank the various committees , and in particular the rapporteur , Mrs Waddington , and the draftsmen , Mrs Hawlicek and Mr Trakatellis .
The Commission 's intention in publishing its White Paper was to contribute to the debate on the future of our society , especially as regards the role of education and training in the face of current social change , with particular attention being given to ways of halting the tragedy of unemployment .
Clearly , this debate is very closely bound up with Europe 's chosen model of society .
It is a matter of offering European citizens common values and objectives , in particular the development of lifelong education and training .
Ever since the publication of the White Paper , the concept of the learning society has occupied a pivotal role in our thinking .
The opinion of the Committee on Culture , presented by Mrs Hawlicek , highlights this aspect and takes up a number of proposals made in the White Paper : raising the general level of culture , and encouraging creativity and critical awareness , as well as language proficiency .
Basically , the three main factors of change identified in the White Paper - globalization , the information society and the scientific and technological revolution - have not been called into question ; they are becoming more and more widely accepted as a basis for discussing educational matters .
That was not the case until recently .
However , both Parliament 's report and a number of other responses have emphasized that these three factors are too limited , and that two others in particular should be examined , the impact of which was somewhat underestimated in the White Paper . The first is demographic change .
Parliament 's report , like that of the European Trade Union Confederation , draws attention to this point .
The transformation in the age pyramid of the working population in Europe has too often been overlooked .
In particular , it has become clear that such changes are contributing to the considerable increase in the training needs of adult workers , and that the debate should not be restricted to young people .
It should be pointed out here that the Commission will very soon be submitting to the Council and Parliament the first European report on access to continuing training in the Union , which follows on from the Council 's recommendation on this subject in 1993 , along with the guidelines to be followed in this key area of vocational training policy in the Community .
The other point which has given rise to some reservations and even criticism concerns the role of the main players and protagonists , above all the social partners .
The various representatives of the world of work have a crucial role to play here , and Mrs Boogerd-Quaak and Mr Lindqvist have proposed making additions on these lines .
Parliament 's report also criticizes the lack of analysis of Member States ' education systems in the White Paper , as Mr Menrad in particular pointed out .
In this respect , it should not be forgotten that the purpose of the White Paper was to generate a far-reaching debate on social change , and not merely on education systems . Moreover , the Commission 's work programme provides for the drawing-up of a substantial number of documents on education systems , with key data on education and , for the first time , vocational training , a report on continuing training , and interim reports on Socrates and Leonardo da Vinci .
A clear response should be given to two concerns which Parliament 's draft report considers crucial and which were raised during the debates in both the Committee on Culture and the Social Affairs Committee : these relate to the question of funding .
Parliament 's report sets great store by the need to bring funding into line with the objectives of the White Paper and the creation of the learning society .
It should be borne in mind that the White Paper proposed a series of experiments which we have carried out under the existing Socrates and Leonardo da Vinci action programmes , within the budgets already earmarked for those programmes ; additional resources have been made available through the Structural Funds for second-chance schooling in particular .
The Commission is now working on a proposal for a decision on the funding of the Socrates programme for the next two years , and we count on Parliament 's support .
What does the Commission intend to do thereafter ?
Before the summer , it intends to submit to the Council and Parliament a communication setting out the results of the various debates which have taken place at local , national and Community level in the various Community institutions , within economic and social bodies and with experts .
The report will take account in particular of the suggestions which emerged from the thematic conferences organized by the Commission on the five objectives of the White Paper , and of the lessons which can be learned from the implementation of the objectives themselves .
This communication will not be limited to drawing general conclusions , but will explain - objective by objective - the difficulties which have been encountered and the lessons learned .
The timetable laid down by the Council decisions establishing the Socrates and Leonardo da Vinci programmes is helpful in this respect .
The Commission is to submit an interim evaluation report for each programme in 1997 and , during the first half of 1998 , its proposals for the continuation of these programmes beyond their expiry in 1999 .
In the evaluation report on the achievement of the White Paper 's objectives , the Commission will set out guidelines for a more broadly-based implementation of these objectives .
This report and the interim evaluation reports will enable both the Council and Parliament to hold initial policy debates in late 1997 or early 1998 .
In this way , the proposals for revising the Socrates and Leonardo da Vinci programmes , to be put to the Commission towards the end of the first half of 1998 , will be able to draw on these policy debates .
Here we share the House 's wish to see a special initiative to promote an apprenticeship scheme , without at this stage defining the instrument to be used .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Operation of aeroplanes
The next item is the report ( A4-0063 / 97 ) by Mr van der Waal , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Directive ( COM ( 96 ) 0413 - C4-0541 / 96-96 / 0209 ( SYN ) ) amending Directive 92 / 14 / EEC on the limitation of the operation of aeroplanes covered by Part II , Chapter 2 , Volume 1 of Annex 16 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation , second edition ( 1988 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , the amendment to Directive 92 / 14 represents part of our efforts to achieve greater compatibility between air transport and environmental protection .
It seems logical that , when environmental factors are taken into account , technical feasibility , and the economic consequences too , must result in exemptions , but care is needed to ensure that these exemption arrangements are not abused .
The Group of the European People 's Party therefore welcomes the Commission 's proposal and all the rapporteur 's proposed amendments , partly because they clarify terms such as ' air carrier ' and ' operating licence ' , which previously led to misunderstandings .
We also agree with the deletion of the aeroplanes from Saudi Arabia .
Quite apart from the fact that , for the purposes of the Directive , the exemptions are not supposed to result in everincreasing numbers , the way the exemption should be looked at in this case is that the term ' developing nation ' is difficult to reconcile with these privately owned aircraft .
The Group of the European People 's Party also welcomes the fact that the terms ' leasing ' and ' subleasing ' are explained in more explicit terms , so that more can be done to prevent them .
The procedure is simplified by the introduction of a committee , though we consider it important that this refers only to deletions and that further additions to the exemption arrangements should still be a matter for consultation with the Council and Parliament .
The Group of the European People 's Party will therefore vote for this report and all the amendments , and hopes that the Commission and Council will accept the amendments because in our view they all conform to the spirit of the Directive - a healthy compromise between environmental protection , or noise abatement in this instance , technological feasibility and economic consequences for genuine developing nations .
Mr President , please allow me to address the following hard question directly to Professor Monti who is responsible for the internal market and related stipulations .
The established airlines of the Community which carry passengers out of the Community are being placed at a disadvantage at the airports of the Union , which have stringent environmental protection and noise pollution requirements , on account of two aspects imposed by the Commission .
Firstly , access from third countries , from so-called developing countries : I refer you back to what both of the previous speakers have said .
Secondly , the admission of new entrants to the airports can only come at the expense of the established companies because you are opening up the market without retaining the slots reserved for the long-standing companies which have spent a great deal of money adapting their aeroplanes and engaged in substantial investment .
Then along comes a new entrant with a Chapter 2 aeroplane who has adapted nothing and who must , according to you , get access to the restricted noise space .
Is that what you consider to be a common market with a level playing field ?
I would like an answer from you personally .
Mr President , the report under consideration deals with various ways of reducing aircraft noise .
The proposal made by the Commission is beneficial in many ways , but it is important that it is supplemented by the additional proposals and amendments made by the Committee on Transport and Tourism . These , for example , give Member States the right to impose further restrictions on access for the noisiest types of aircraft and even to go one stage further and actually ban such aircraft which do not fulfil the criteria as set out in the annex .
I assume that the Commission does not object to dealing with the problem in this way .
I believe it to be vital that the work on reducing aircraft noise is something which is continuously pursued .
It is especially important that a substantially greater level of investment in research and development is made in this area .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I speak in this debate principally to mention a problem at a regional airport which is a perfect example of the problems that can arise in connection with this matter .
For a number of years now Ostend has been a haven for Chapter 2 aeroplanes flying in from , among other places , Egypt , Nigeria and Zaire , and for the noisy old aeroplanes of companies such as Africa International .
I have shown the exemptions list of Annex I of Directive 92 / 14 , and also the revised Annex in the new Commission proposal , to people living in the airport neighbourhood who have joined together to fight against sleepless nights and to make a stand for normal residential comforts .
They tell me that a great many more Chapter 2 aeroplanes are flying into Ostend from developing countries than the respective annexes allow .
Commissioner , there is surely something wrong with the implementation of these rules .
Although the competence lies with the Member States , I hope that the Commission can and will rap the fingers of those countries which are disregarding the rules .
Mr President , I should like to say that the Group of the Party of European Socialists does of course support Mr van der Waal 's proposals .
I believe that problems of this kind should always be viewed from the standpoint of the common good - the defence of local communities and of the public interest .
And , sometimes , there is a contradiction between the economic interest , the opportunity for every citizen really to be able to use this mode of transport , and the interests of the population living near the airports .
Contradictions of this kind have to be overcome with the aid of suitable democratic legislation .
Mention was made just now of the problem of Ostend airport .
The saga of Zaventem airport would take hours to recount .
On several occasions , the population have filed complaints about noise nuisance , especially sleep disturbance caused by night flights .
Several judgments have been given , but not always along the lines for which the locals hoped .
There is a problem here with the application of the legislation by the Belgian Government , and another problem with the evaluation of nuisance and the disturbance it creates for the population .
I will end with a question to the Commissioner : how can it happen that the idea of an exemption for private aircraft can be defended in this House ?
I believe this is a real problem for several airports , especially Brussels .
I cannot understand this approach .
Other airlines and other aircraft have to respect various limits .
It is surely not right that , on the pretext of additional economic benefits , some companies are governed by different rules .
In conclusion , people at Zaventem , and at Brussels more generally , are expecting solutions to these problems and we hope that the Commission will listen to what we have to say .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the House for including this item on noisy aeroplanes on the agenda for this part-session , and by congratulating the Committee on Transport and Tourism and its rapporteur , Mr van der Waal , for drawing up the report in such a short period of time .
I am well aware that the European Parliament is very concerned about the problem of aeroplane noise emissions .
In this context , it is justified for certain questions to be raised about the content of the Commission 's proposal to amend an existing directive on the gradual withdrawal of the noisiest types of aeroplane .
It might indeed appear contradictory to find in this amending directive on the limitation of the operation of noisy aeroplanes an increase in the number of aeroplanes belonging to developing countries which receive an exemption .
There is , however , a logical explanation .
When Council Directive 92 / 14 / EEC on the gradual withdrawal of the noisiest aeroplanes - the so-called Chapter 2 aeroplanes - was adopted , it was felt that account should be taken of the difficult economic circumstances of air carriers established in developing countries .
The directive therefore laid down the conditions under which aeroplanes entered in the registers of developing countries and operated by air carriers in those countries may be exempted from the provisions governing withdrawal from service , until the final deadline of 31 March 2002 .
At the same time , the annex to the directive listed the individual aeroplanes in developing countries which qualified for this exemption .
However , certain aeroplanes in those countries had not been notified to the Commission by the time Directive 92 / 14 / EEC was adopted , and are thus not included in the annex .
The main purpose of the Commission 's current proposal is therefore to update the list of aeroplanes in the annex to the directive , so as to avoid any legal uncertainty regarding the situation of aeroplanes from developing countries .
However , with a view to ensuring a uniform and more rigorous interpretation of the existing directive within the Community , the Commission also decided to introduce a number of definitions and changes of wording .
Application of the amended provisions should lead to a stricter approach to requests from air carriers for exemptions , and thereby improve the effectiveness of Directive 92 / 14 / EEC in terms of reducing noise emissions around airports .
Finally , the Commission deemed it appropriate to allow Member States to concentrate the operation of the noisiest types of aeroplane at the airport least sensitive to noise emissions of those belonging to a given airport system .
This provision will not detract from the balanced approach pursued in Directive 92 / 14 / EEC , which takes due account of technical , economic and environmental considerations .
Mr Wijsenbeek was kind enough to ask me a question specifically related to the competences of the Internal Market Commissioner rather than the ones I am representing here this evening .
In response to his question I would say that the additions to the list are aircraft which were already operating .
So they are not new entrants but were not included in the original directive because they had not been notified .
These new additions have now satisfied all the criteria laid down in the directive .
Their addition is therefore merely a technical change .
( IT ) In considering the amendments adopted by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I think it is important to stand by the balanced approach to which I referred a moment ago .
As far as aeroplanes from developing countries are concerned , it is essential to make the text as rigorous as possible , in order to avoid any abuse of the exemptions for aeroplanes currently operated by air carriers established in certain developing countries .
I am therefore pleased to tell the House that the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 3 and 7 , since they tighten up the conditions under which an exemption remains valid .
However , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 6 , since they would conflict with the balanced approach of the directive ; nor Nos 4 and 8 , since these would oblige the Commission to propose a further amending directive in order to include in the annex a limited number of aeroplanes operated by developing countries which could enjoy an exemption in the year 2000 ; nor Nos 5 and 9 , since Saudi Arabia is included in the official international list of developing countries , and its aeroplanes listed in the annex comply with the criteria laid down in Article 3 of the directive as amended by this proposal .
The amendments which we can accept will enable the Commission to tighten up the provisions relating to developing countries , whilst at the same time preserving the overall balance .
I would once again express my thanks to Mr van der Waal and the Committee on Transport , and would apologize to you , Mr President , if the complexity of the subject has caused me to go beyond my allotted speaking time .
Mr President , I have listened carefully to the Commissioner but I have not heard a reply to the rapporteur 's question about whether airports , casu quo the Member States , have the scope and the right to keep Chapter 2 aeroplanes out if they are finding it difficult to stay within the noise norms .
That , of course , is the question that is always being put to us by our constituents , by the citizens .
If the Commissioner cannot answer the question here and now can we expect a written answer ?
Mr Cornelissen , that is not exactly a point of order . It is a question which the Commissioner will be able to answer , but perhaps not at this particular moment .
Mr President , I believe that I can answer by referring to the approach known as global harmonization .
Three amendments , Nos 1 , 2 and 6 , seek to allow the Member States to impose limitations on the operation of Chapter 2 aeroplanes in individual airports .
Members may not be aware that such restrictions are subject to the procedure and conditions laid down by Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 2408 / 92 on market access .
Since the purpose of Directive 92 / 14 / EEC is global harmonization , taking account of the technical , economic and environmental impact , the Member States are not allowed to impose more restrictive measures , for example a total ban on the operation of a Chapter 2 aeroplane before it is 25 years old .
However , without prejudice to Article 9 of Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 2408 / 92 on market access , if serious environmental problems arise , Member States may impose operating restrictions - not a total ban on operation , but operating restrictions - such as a night curfew for Chapter 2 aeroplanes , provided that these do not result in a total ban on the operation of such aeroplanes .
What is more , Member States may levy higher landing fees for noisier aeroplanes .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
Closing of the session
I declare closed the 1996-1997 session of the European Parliament and announce that , in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty , Parliament will meet at 9 a.m. tomorrow , Tuesday 11 March 1997 .
( The sitting was closed at 8.20 p.m. )
Opening of annual session
I declare the 1997-1998 session of the European Parliament open .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I would like to point out that I was present yesterday . I am not on the attendance register .
I probably forgot to sign in but I took part in the roll-call vote , which you can check .
Mr President , Mr Pasty is not on the attendence list for the same reason that that my name and the names of at least fifty people are not on the list today .
I have discovered that I appear under a different name : Mayera Ortega .
But that applies to most Members .
For example my good friend Mr Falconer appears as Falconero ; my colleague from our party Mr Dührkop Dührkop is down as Donnerp Dührkop .
The President of Parliament has come out half intact as Gil-Roblee instead of Gil-Robles .
Mrs Bennasar Tous is down as Bazinrsar Tous and Mr Cohn-Bendit is down as CoatesBendit .
I have the impression , Mr President , that some wicked virus crept into the attendance list yesterday .
Mr President , I am now called ' Marcet s ' .
Mr President , it is simply that I do not find my name anywhere , despite the fact that I signed in .
You had better check the lists as well , please .
Mr President , this business is even more bizarre .
I have just seen in Wilfried Martens ' Minutes , i.e. , in the Dutch edition , that my name is listed , although spelt rather oddly , but it is listed .
Let me state quite explicitly that I was not present yesterday , did not put my name down on any list and am not claiming the daily allowance !
Mr President , just to say that unlike Mr Poettering I am not listed , yet I am absolutely sure I signed in and took part in the debate .
Mr President , my name was not misspelt , for the simple reason that it does not appear in the Minutes even though I was not in two places at once and was sure I was there yesterday .
Mr President , I was present too but am not on the list .
Mr President , in my case , Mrs Guigou and Mrs Guinebertière have been cloned , so she should come first and I second !
Mr President , my name is listed too .
Perhaps someone thought it is Theatos in Greek .
I am actually called Theato , but I was not present either .
Could you please have my name deleted .
Mr President , I was not only present , but am sure that I signed and I am not on the attendence list either .
Mr President , I have a proposal to make .
In view of this complete mess , it would be best if we declared for the first time that all the Members were present .
That would settle the matter .
Mr President , let me start with the good news : my name is on the attendance list .
But it is also mentioned in Item 14 , in the debate on the information society , whereas in fact the speaker was my colleague Wim van Velzen .
Perhaps this could be amended .
Mr President , I am not mentioned in the list of those present , but I am listed among those who took part in the nominal vote .
Yesterday 's voting list is correct and the names have been corrected .
The matter could therefore easily be rectified by using the voting list .
Mr President , I was present .
I signed in and I voted in a roll-call vote but my name is not there .
Ladies and gentlemen , I note the problem , which is one that affects many Members .
We will prepare a revised version of yesterday 's attendance list , to deal with all the problems that have arisen .
This , of course , is the first time the new computer program has been used . We will see how it turns out once it has settled .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Decision on urgency
I have to tell this House that the Committee has decided to vote against this urgent procedure , that is it does not accept the urgency requested by the Council because it does not find that reasons put forward by the Council to be well founded .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
Mr President , the Committee is in favour of the urgent procedure and already reported yesterday that the subject could be debated in the plenary session .
( Parliament approved the request for urgent procedure )
Cloning animals and human beings
The next item is the debate on the statement by the Commission on cloning animals and human beings .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the new developments as a result of the experiments in cloning which have been carried out in Scotland raise a range of new questions of law and ethics , which have to be considered with great care and attention .
This is the first scientific success of its kind in the world for it is the first time an adult mammal has been cloned successfully .
It is a major leap ahead in the field of basic science and our understanding of living beings .
It opens up real prospects in the medical and agricultural fields .
Yet this new technique also gives rise to a great many questions and anxieties , as shown by the mobilization of the press and the number of letters sent to the Commission .
You were keen to include this subject in today 's agenda and I welcome that initiative .
This is a most important event and the European Union must on no account disregard its effects .
As you know , the Commission reacted immediately and consulted the Advisory Group on Ethics and Biotechnology , an independent Commission body .
That Group is due to submit its opinion in May .
We do indeed need to consider in depth the ethical implications of cloning in general , in the light of the recent experiments .
The Advisory Group has decided to organize a round table on the subject .
It will include Members of the European Parliament and the Commission 's services , senior researchers and the parties concerned .
The Commission is actively encouraging the Advisory Group in this project , which ensures dialogue and transparency .
Furthermore , the Commission services have been instructed to examine the possible implications for Community policies and consider what action it is in our power to take .
It should be pointed out that these experiments raise an entirely new set of problems , in relation to the transfer of genetic information from an adult mammal into a receptor cell which is an unfertilized ovocyte - which had been thought totally impossible until now .
Following this surprise result , we need to give ourselves the time to consider how far existing legislation at both national and Community level covers this kind of practice and whether there are any legal loopholes .
It is important at this point to distinguish clearly between cloning animals and the potential cloning of human beings .
For obvious ethical reasons there is at present a consensus within the international scientific community on banning research into human cloning .
In this context , the Commission 's Fourth Framework Programme specifically excludes this kind of research , following a resolution tabled by the European Parliament in 1993 .
Some Member States have also specifically banned it .
The question is whether we need a strict moratorium at international level , in forums such as the United Nations and the Council of Europe .
Turning to animal cloning , we need consider the ethical implications in greater depth , especially in relation to respect for the principles of animal welfare and biodiversity and , of course , the possible risks of extending this technique to human beings .
At the same time we should not underestimate the potential benefits of this discovery for human health .
It is clear that in the light of all the on-going discussions and , in particular , the opinion to be delivered by the Advisory Group , the Commission will adopt a clearly-defined position and take the appropriate measures within its powers .
It is evident at this stage that the proposed Fifth Framework Programme of Research and Technological Development will take account of today 's debate and ban any research that does not respect ethical principles .
For the time being , it is important for us to allow room for an analysis of the possible repercussions of this discovery .
In that context I believe we must emphasize the need for structured dialogue based on entirely reliable and objective information , leaving aside the legitimate feelings this event has inspired .
I think that is of capital importance in a field such as this , which has profound philosophical implications and touches on everyone 's most deeply-held beliefs .
Mr President , Commissioner , ' Dolly ' would no doubt have been a good subject for a Robert Louis Stevenson , H. G. Wells or Aldous Huxley novel and our colleagues in the Green Group have cleverly reminded us of that with the sense of drama typical of them today .
The subject of cloning is fuelling the irrational speculations that tend to find their way into and sometimes cloud our debates whenever we address questions of bioethics .
As responsible politicians it is our duty to keep a cool head , to look at and evaluate the scientific risk , without which no progress is possible for mankind , while initially upholding a few basic principles and elementary precautionary measures - no doubt there will be other reactions later .
My group is in favour of affirming clearly that all human cloning must be banned .
In fact I note that we go even further in the Rothley report where we propose banning the patenting of any intervention relating to reproductive genetic cells , which goes beyond cloning as such .
So we support the Commission line in this regard .
We clearly affirm the principles of the dignity and integrity of the human body and must reaffirm them here this week .
We believe that the Advisory Group on bioethics , to whose work Mrs Cresson just referred and to which I pay tribute , needs to be transformed into a genuine European Union committee on ethics in order to give the politicians a clearer choice , without however taking their place .
This is no trifling matter , for our diversity of our traditions and cultures becomes manifest when we come up against bioethical questions ; yet this is a necessary progress .
Mrs Cresson raised the question of a moratorium , although this does not apply to interventions with the human body where we have to impose an immediate ban .
Perhaps one solution could be to impose an initial , limited moratorium on animal research .
Finally , we believe we need transparent and effective information to guarantee that the debate remains calm , to avoid any panic reactions or deadlocks that could prejudice the future of mankind .
Mr President , I appreciated Mrs Cresson 's speech and I agree with Mr Cot .
This really is a very delicate matter , and a clear distinction needs to be made between cloning human beings and cloning animals and plants generally .
Obviously cloning presents problems in this latter area too , but they are different problems .
I believe cloning of human beings should be totally banned and that is nothing new , because it was already the position of the European Parliament on 22 November 1993 , and indeed in 1989 , and it is already the law in some of our States .
Here it is also right to recall that every committee of inquiry set up by the governments and parliaments of our countries - the Warnock Committee , the Benda Committee , the Santosuosso Committee , the Palacio Committee - has recommended a ban on cloning of human beings , for obvious reasons .
The human species must be protected against the risk of damage to principle of equality - cloning could put those with political or economic power in a position to manipulate the human species to discriminate against individuals . But above all , as regards human beings , the person must be protected from risk , as an essential nucleus of freedom and individuality .
As Mr Rothley pointed out in his 1989 report , freedom is also dependent on the fact that a known and definite future is impossible .
It may seem a mysterious concept , but that is freedom too !
I believe respect for human beings demands a clear ' no ' .
I believe Parliament must uphold this ' no ' , and I believe the Commission must be supported in this aim .
The Commission says we should go even further ; well , let me go even further and repeat what the European Parliament already called for in a decision addressed to the Council of Europe last September : ' no ' to cloning , but ' no ' to experiments on human embryos too , because that is where cloning begins !
We must say ' no ' , for the sake of human dignity , respect for the species and the principle of equality .
I would be delighted if we said ' no ' unanimously .
There are problems of protecting biological diversity and safeguarding the environment in the animal and plant worlds too .
To the extent that research is directed not to scoops for the newspapers , but to improvements in the human condition - thinking of all the research on medication - it cannot be stopped .
We must not be against science .
Instead we must be more cautious and demand strict and , above all , enforceable rules , because the fundamental problem in this area is enforcement .
For all these reasons , I hope Parliament will immediately incorporate my remarks , which are in line with Mr Cot 's , into a document and that the Commission will also promote an international agreement so that the human being is inviolable not only in Europe , but throughout the world , and that any manipulation of nature is done in the service of the human being .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a clone is a collection of cells all born from the same parent cell ; their genetic stock is totally identical and gives them the same appearance .
In the case of plants , reproduction by cloning is a natural process .
In the case of animals and humans , the real twin , known as a ' homozygote ' , which is the result of the splitting of a single egg , represents a natural clone .
There is nothing disturbing or shocking about all that .
However , are we allowed to manufacture artificially human clones by fusing the genetic stocks of two parent cells in order to reproduce identical individuals , given that individuals are by definition different one from the other since every human being is unique ?
Why does our Western society feel so strongly about this ?
A team of researchers in Scotland has just managed to produce a cloned sheep from the single somatic cell of an adult , parent sheep , i.e. , without any sexual reproduction .
The possibility of producing an individual that is entirely identical to its precedent , without any fusion of the parental gametes , is an assault on biodiversity , on the hazard of birth , which makes each of us a unique being .
It is becoming possible to apply it to human beings , which opens the door to all sorts of aberrations .
Yet we must not diabolize a technique that can bring progress if used on animals for the preparation of vaccines and medicines that are useful if not vital to human beings .
In the United States , despite the proposals of the political leaders , some scientists are reluctant to advise a moratorium .
One such is Professor Harold Varmus , Nobel Prize winner and director of the NIH .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is in the nature of scientists always to doubt , but the politician who is aware of the vagaries of human behaviour must , in his capacity of legislator , attempt to evaluate them more closely .
Here in Europe we must consult the bodies responsible for bioethics , the Council of Europe , Unesco , the United Nations , and proclaim that we must ban all cloning of human beings , whether directly from the nuclei of embryo cells or indirectly by whatever method of asexual reproduction , using ovocytes from which the nucleus is removed as vectors and the nuclei of somatic cells as the basis of the genetic patrimony .
So we must forbid any financing of this kind of research on human beings .
That means we must set up the necessary monitoring system so that we can apply dissuasive and even penal measures , which could even include economic sanctions .
These would be imposed on any states linked to the European Union that embark on this road , which is a minefield of risks and traps .
Mr President , ever since the cloning of an innocent little animal has been so widely publicized in the media , we have plunged into the most breathtaking simplifications , as shown , incidentally , by the fact that some of our colleagues rigged themselves out in extremely misplaced and even grotesque masks a few minutes ago .
People are referring to the monstrous experiments carried out fifty years ago without pointing out that it is not warped scientists who produce totalitarian regimes but quite the reverse .
A democratic state has the means to protect society from abuses in every area and to ensure respect for the rights and freedoms of the individual , in biotechnology as in other research fields .
In our view , research on living beings is a source of progress .
Tomorrow we will have eradicated genetic diseases such as mucoviscidosis and phenylketonuria .
Tomorrow , transplants of animal organs - a field in which cloning can in fact prove useful - will enable us to make up for the shortage of human organ donors .
Given the rapid progress of this kind of research , it is important for the state to define the limits of and monitor rather than block this research ; it must monitor the effects of this research on health and monitor respect for the integrity of the human being .
At national level , scientific and medical ethical committees would act as guarantees in every research centre .
At international level , as has been said , a number of conventions , from the 1946 Nuremberg Code to the 1996 European Convention on Bioethics , have already banned any useless genetic manipulation that conflicts with our concept of the human being , such as cloning , implanting a human embryo in the uterus of a different species or vice versa , and so forth .
All we need do is to introduce systematic bans , within limits , under an international convention or under agreements with other countries such as the United States or Japan , where genetic research is very advanced .
Ladies and gentlemen , on the eve of the third millennium let us not give way to the irrational fears of the first millennium in face of research which can have its dark side but which can also promise a future to men and women afflicted by disease .
Man 's greatness resides in his constant desire to know the world around him and to know himself .
Mr President , the cloning of Dolly the sheep has opened a Pandora 's Box .
What can in practice be done with mammals will soon be done to humans .
It seems that the nightmare of human beings as a stock of spare parts and a reserve of children stored in the cold box is becoming a reality .
In cloning mammals we are taking the first step into Huxley 's Brave New World .
To clone people would be horrific , a violation of human dignity , an attack on the individuality and integrity of man .
Man would be degraded into an object , into biological material .
This breach of ethics must be prevented .
But ethics cannot just begin with our own species .
Cloning animals is also reprehensible .
It degrades animals into mass products , living conveyor belts .
Live animals are regarded as mass-produced goods , as machines , which will give a boost to the intensive stock-farming that is so cruel to animals .
Today we are all talking about ethics and the risk of breeding humans .
But the individual and unique quality of life does not just begin with humans .
Dolly and other animals are also living beings .
We agree on calling for a ban on cloning humans .
But how do we as the European Parliament stand on the cloning of animals ?
We must ban that too .
We must not simply become accustomed to the plague and warn against cholera .
The cloning of mammals already represents a shift of ethical boundaries .
The cloning of animals and humans must be taboo .
This insidious ethical breach is a step into a future that fills us with horror .
In 1993 , following Jerry Hall 's experiments in cloning human embryos , the European Parliament called unanimously for a ban on cloning .
Yet nothing happened .
The statement by the Commissioner and the position of the EU Commission are pitiful .
It has refrained from taking comprehensive political measures .
Today the Commissioner merely said that it was considering taking action .
EU money continues to flow directly or indirectly into ethically dubious projects .
Although cloning infringes a basic ethical consensus in our society , the EU Commission delegates the question of cloning animals to the Biotechnology Advisory Group .
What a demonstration of political impoverishment and eyewash !
The advisory group has even been instructed by the Commission to ensure that gene technology gains acceptance .
Society must set ethical limits for science and not the reverse .
Shifting the ethical discussion to committees that have no democratic legitimacy is merely at attempt to tranquillize the public .
We must not remain silent on the matter of the economic basis for this either .
To ban cloning while at the same time permitting cloning and cloned living beings is absurd !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I appeal to you to discuss this matter a little more calmly and to try to differentiate between what we agree on , namely to ban human cloning , and what we perhaps do not yet agree on , namely our position on other cloning in nature .
When I listened to the Commissioner a moment ago , I was rather taken aback to hear her refer to a surprise result .
For if we were honest , we would admit that of course we realised long ago that we would be facing this situation one day .
This is a clear sign that there is no dialogue between the political and the research level .
But we must have one in future .
Our task , your task , Mrs Cresson , and ours as the European Parliament is to discuss this matter with the researchers : what do we want , what is the purpose of research , what is the ethical responsibility of research in our society ?
And that is just what we are discussing today .
That is why I am convinced that we need to have a world-wide moratorium on the cloning of animals , and that does not mean I am convinced that there will be no more cloning of animals .
Nature does it by itself .
Nature reproduces itself asexually and clones itself without our intervention .
I am also convinced that in individual cases cloning can be ethically valuable and very important for people ; but we must define the limits of the usefulness of experiments .
We must clearly define where they could be useful to humans .
To what extent are they morally and ethically acceptable to society ?
It is our task to establish that .
A round table between the Commission and the European Parliament is not sufficient .
What we need is a world-wide round table at government level .
That is why I would ask you , Mrs Cresson , to urge the governments of North America , Canada , the United States and Japan to send responsible representatives who would then also have the authority to issue directives and take decisions .
We must be able to state clearly what our views are , what moral responsibility we must assume and where we draw the limits .
And then laws will have to be decided .
We will then have to pass laws that apply throughout the world .
At present it is not a question of saying what we lack in the Union but of saying where our ethical limits are in the world .
I ask you , Mrs Cresson , to assume your responsibility in relation to this question for the European Union , together with North America and Japan and the rest of the world .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , modern biotechnology offers us great opportunities .
This afternoon we will be discussing the Trakatellis report on the use of micro-organisms for producing medicines and other substances .
I am in favour of being very liberal about this because we have to support the undertakings in making advances here .
But now comes the big ' but ' . When it is a question of applying this to human beings , of manipulating human beings , I think we cannot be strict enough .
Mrs Cresson referred to a consensus against human cloning .
This consensus still seems to exist .
But unless we are very careful , it will very quickly be eroded and I have already heard some disturbing statements made .
Just as in the case of seed manipulation , people will argue that surely exceptions can be made in many individual cases , so that in the end we will no longer be able to avoid an ethical breach .
And let me openly ask this : why should a society have the power to stop cloning once and for all if it is not in a position to stop parents in Europe from aborting their child if it is a girl and they wanted a boy ?
This is intolerable and shows that we have already gone too far in many areas .
That is why I agree with those speakers who say that we must act very quickly and very strictly now , using every available means at European level and at UNESCO level .
What we are discussing now is not progress for human dignity but a threat to human dignity , so we have to take very strong action .
A final comment on the Advisory Group on Biotechnology and Ethics .
It has been said here that it should deal with the question .
If my information is correct - and this is my last question - the situation is that this advisory group will only be working until June and that it has a whole lot of other jobs to do too .
Then it is to stop for six months , after which it will be set up again .
I do not think we can allow ourselves that at this stage .
The group has to continue working and if it is to have a new membership , perhaps this can be done at the same time .
But then Parliament should also be involved in the appointment of its new membership .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the subject is not a new one , and has not suddenly descended from the skies like a thunderbolt .
We have known about it for 15 years .
At that time certain restrictions were imposed , but they have not proved sufficient to halt this uncontrolled advance .
This raises a number of questions :
Who has been financing this research ?
Governments , or the private sector ?
Who monitored the research protocols , especially those funded by governments , so that today we can say with certainty that those experiments were carried out only with animals ?
Nobody has so far been able convincingly to disprove information that such experiments have also been carried out with human beings .
Neither has anybody so far disproved what we all read the other day in one of the United Kingdom 's major newspapers , that there is a four-year old child in Belgium who is the product of cloning .
And we , ladies and gentlemen , are still sitting here and talking at the theoretical level .
Very well , the Committee will be formed , and I favour its formation . However , Madam Commissioner , I have not heard what sanctions we as the European Parliament will be imposing in the event that researchers exceed the permitted limits and the experiments are extended to human beings .
Will those penalties be theoretical ?
Will they only be penal ?
Or should there be huge financial penalties , especially when the experiments are funded by governments ?
I very much fear that the same thing may happen as in the case of BSE .
We will debate , debate , debate , and when the tragic outcome of experiments in human beings appear before us , then like the foolish virgins in the Bible , we will shed tears over the ruins that we ourselves , through our own incapabilities , will have created .
Mr President , a clear ' no ' to human cloning is emerging from the debate ; but I believe that an unequivocal ' no ' to cloning of animals is needed too , because where there is cloning of animals , there is almost bound to be cloning of human beings as well , and we really ought to be wondering today how we ever came to be talking about cloning .
Here we must stress the link with the development of genetic engineering and the links with the patenting of transgenic animals .
The consequence will be series production of living beings outside the laws of nature , and instead of animals being bred by natural reproduction they will be produced non-sexually , like plant cuttings .
The laws of nature are clearly being overthrown , just as they were with BSE .
The purpose of such techniques is not scientific knowledge , but industrial production of a commercial product , for example , animal organs to be used as spare parts for human beings .
But human beings and animals are not machines whose organs can be automatically replaced by organs adapted from other animals .
As regards scientific knowledge , we have already known a great deal about cloning for fifty years , so the technique is well known ; but it does not mean everything that is possible has to be done .
That mistake has already been made by applying knowledge of the nuclear structure of matter to make the atomic bomb .
Freedom of research cannot be confused with the free will that led man to use that deadly bomb , that led to Chernobyl incident and BSE .
How many more incidents have to happen ?
Experiments in cloning may have succeeded in establishing a new frontier in bio-genetic research , but they have opened up the problem of the limits that should or should not be set on experimental scientific research .
In fact , while cloning represents an important scientific achievement , in a society where there are great needs to be met by scarce resources , it is ethically necessary to study , classify and regulate such experiments .
So in our view a high-ranking scientific committee should be set up to study the ethical and legal implications and the possible scenarios opened up by genetic cloning .
We should also support the conclusions of the European Council 's resolution of 16 March 1989 , as well as the results of the first Convention on Bio-ethics , approved in December 1996 , which banned both human and animal cloning , and we should work to impose limits on the scientific process that respect ethical values and serve to shield the human being from possible manipulation by science .
Mr President , there is no limit on the curiosity of scientists .
There is nothing they do not want to know but there has to be a limit put by society on that curiosity .
Fifty years ago or more there was no limit and we know what the results were of allowing scientists to discover anything they wanted to .
There is consensus this morning amongst us from fifteen different countries that there has to be a limit on the cloning of human beings until we have thought about it .
There has to be control on animal cloning .
I come from the country where this experiment took place .
In the United Kingdom there are limits , there is legislation and there is a regulatory body but the average citizen of the United Kingdom was not aware that this sort of work was being carried on .
The average citizen must be aware of what work is being carried on when we get near to the frontiers of what is acceptable and in some cases beyond those frontiers .
The European Union exists partly so that we can work together and give value and share our experiences .
Therefore I am delighted that when we look at the fifth framework programme , as we looked at the fourth , we from all those fifteen countries say : ' That is enough .
You may be curious but you are not going to work on that subject . ' The consensus this morning amongst most groups shows that the Commissioner is quite right to take further the regulatory body that she has in mind and she has seen that there is a wish to have that strengthened .
I can assure you that the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy will be looking very carefully at the ethical dimensions of the fifth framework programme .
Mr President , I am glad I can speak in this debate .
I suspect that , including the Commissioner , I am the only person taking part in the debate this morning , who has actually been to the Roslin Research Institute .
I went there in November with Mr Martin , Vice-President of Parliament .
I must say that one of the things wrong with this debate is that nobody has paid tribute to the talented research team at Roslin which has conducted these experiments .
It is time somebody did so .
It is also time that some people read Brave New World by Aldous Huxley .
The point of this book is that it is the brainwashing that matters , not the cloning so I wish people who refer to it would read the book .
The technology is important .
It brings benefits : it brings problems .
There is no question about that .
There are implications for science and implications for medicine and we would be well advised to recognize that there are ethical problems in using the technology .
There are ethical problems in not using the technology as well .
Both sides of the argument need to be examined .
I am aware that under the Commission presidency of Jacques Delors the Biotechnology Advisory Group was set up .
I took part in discussions leading to it being set up and I am pleased that Mr Delors at the time took that brave new initiative .
But the problem with this Group is that it does not have a high enough profile .
Most people in this Parliament do not know of its existence .
They do not know who are members , how people become members , what its agenda is and how that agenda is set and they have not seen its reports .
If we are going to take this whole question of ethics seriously , we need to give the Biotechnology Advisory Group a much higher profile .
We need to know all these things .
We need to know who the members are .
We need to know how they are appointed .
We need to read their reports and we need to give them the responsibility not just of investigating the ethical problems but also of making recommendations for the future conduct of this kind of science .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt and others made reference to the fact that there are international implications .
Of course there are .
We cannot assume that because we have something under control in the European Union it is universally under control .
It is not .
Therefore , when Mrs Roth-Behrendt suggested that Commissioner Cresson should have responsibility for promoting discussions among the Americans and Japanese and so on , she is absolutely right .
How quickly that can be done is another matter but I have no doubt whatsoever that we need a global solution to what is a global problem even if it has all arisen from a nine-month old sheep that is living in the equivalent of a sheep 's Hilton Hotel at the moment .
I should like to assure Mrs Breyer that there is no cruelty involved in Dolly .
She is a very happy sheep and probably rather happier than are Members in this Assembly .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have listened to you very carefully .
Firstly , everyone agrees on the need to ban human cloning , which is hardly surprising .
We must reaffirm this and make quite sure this ban is not overturned .
So we must take very strict measures to ensure that .
Let me immediately reassure those who asked the question .
The European Union certainly did not finance the cloning of Dolly the sheep .
This was financed at local level .
Furthermore , in relation to the rather risky comparisons made with mad cow disease , let me remind you that BSE is not s much a scientific but more of a commercial and financial problem .
Nor is it a research problem ; rather , the problem lies in the lack of strict veterinary controls and the laxity of some of these controls .
This is not at all a research problem .
A number of you spoke of the Advisory Committee on Ethics and Biotechnology .
That committee exists , it has been set up , it is extremely active and has done some very thorough work .
That said , I do admit that this work should be more accessible .
I quite agree that the ethical committee 's work needs to be publicized more widely and that the Members of the European Parliament should have wider access to it .
Furthermore , as I said in my opening statement , I agree that MEPs should take their due place at the round table side by side with the ethical committee and high-level scientists , to ensure that this is a democratic debate .
There are indeed scientific issues on the one hand and issues of democracy on the other .
What was said a moment ago is quite right : the aberrations we have witnessed during certain periods of our history , and which we are of course right to fear for the future , are due to an absence of democracy .
Science is obviously an issue , not just science however , but also the social and political system in which science evolves .
That is why this social and political system has to be extremely careful about scientific advances and why scientific advances must be publicized in such a way as to ensure that they can be monitored and if necessary anticipated by imposing bans such as the ban on cloning human beings .
That is how to prevent and stop any prejudicial philosophical and ethical excesses .
Before drafting any international agreement , which would indeed be entirely desirable , I think it is important for us to reach agreement at European level .
Quite apart from the question of cloning , I find that the ethical principles in the field of biotechnology are not the same in the various Member States .
I have always regretted the fact that we do not have an ethical committee in every Member State , as I have often said to the Council of Research Ministers .
Some of the major European Union countries do not have an ethical committee , probably because they have not managed to define certain basic principles .
If every Member State , like France for example , had an ethical committee that brought together scientists , philosophers , specialists in biotechnology , jurists , magistrates , humanists , in short a committee of this kind chaired by someone with an unblemished reputation , that would be a good step forward .
I am not suggesting that all our states would then agree on everything , but I am saying that we should agree on a platform and that would be a big step forward .
We would then be in a much stronger position to discuss these matters with the Americans and the Japanese and to establish principles .
After all , we must not be blinkered : for instance , if we ban certain scientific practices in Europe , then European researchers , especially those working for major laboratories , will go and do their research in the United States .
So it is entirely in our interest - and you are quite right here - to reach agreement with our major international competitors .
But if we are to do so we must first reach agreement among ourselves .
Today , however , there is every indication that aside from extreme cases such as human cloning , on which everyone agrees , we have not yet quite managed to do so .
I would therefore hope that such national ethical committees will he be set up very rapidly and that you , who relay what has been said here to your own Member States , will plead the cause of these national ethical committees at home too .
That would give the ethical committee set up by the Commission , under President Santer , far more influence .
It would also give far more influence to an ethical committee that is chaired by a person of unblemished reputation , Mrs Nöelle Lenoir , who also works for the Council of Europe and who has a very wide following , even outside Europe .
So we must underpin this structure , improve its image , not just in Europe but internationally .
That is one measure to be taken by each of our Member States .
Thank you for your extremely useful contributions to this debate .
Once again , I am entirely in favour of the European Parliament taking part in the activities that will commence in the next few weeks .
The debate is closed .
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 of the Rules of Procedure .
The votes on those motions will be taken on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Closing of the Renault plant in Belgium
The next item is the debate on the statement by the Commission on the closure of the Renault plant in Belgium .
Mr President , the announcement by Renault to close its plant in Vilvoorde has caused shock and consternation .
This is a reaction that I fully understand .
The loss of 3 , 100 jobs is a disaster for the workers concerned , for their families and for Vilvoorde itself .
The decision by Renault has also provoked outrage because of its abruptness and its apparent lack of concern for the rights of the employees .
Renault management , in a manner which I can only describe as irresponsible , did not comply with its obligations as regards information and consultation of workers ' representatives prior to its decision .
In this respect the provisions of the European Works Council Directive and the Collective Redundancies Directive have been completely ignored .
There are many calls for new European legislation .
I understand this .
But we must also appreciate the present situation is fully covered by the two existing directives .
The relevant national measures contain machinery to ensure their enforcement .
However , there has to be a serious question mark over whether the scale of sanctions envisaged under national law is sufficient to act as a real deterrent against non-compliance .
In this regard it is useful to recall that in 1992 the Member States rejected the Commission 's proposals for tougher sanctions on noncompliance by companies with the worker consultation and information procedures .
I believe that we have now reached the situation where we need to complement the existing Community rules with more general rules to make information and consultation compulsory on a permanent basis for all relevant aspects of the management of companies at national level .
In this context , the issue of adequate sanctions for non-respect will be a crucial one .
I will propose to the Commission that we proceed in the coming weeks with the first-stage consultation of the social partners at European level on this issue .
I sincerely hope that we are able , through this action , to strengthen the protection of workers .
I know that the European Parliament has been asking for such rules for quite a long time , and in your recent report on the Commission Communication of 14 November 1995 on worker information and consultation you again supported this idea .
So I can count on you to help to obtain this objective .
But the most important lesson to be drawn from the situation concerns the credibility of the European process .
The Vilvoorde case shows that we still have some way to go to strike the right balance between corporate and economic needs on the one hand and the social requirements of workers and society as a whole on the other .
Getting that balance right is crucial to ensuring popular acceptance of the integration process .
This is why I believe that the incorporation of the social protocol in the Treaty is vital in this respect : to ensure that social legislation applies and is implemented across the territory of the Union as a whole .
Without this the internal market will not function .
This case raises other issues too : questions regarding the need for tighter monitoring of state aids , closer coordination of fiscal and social charges .
These are very sensitive issues .
The Commission will examine them attentively to see what can be done .
It is ironic , however , in this respect , that Renault was one of the first companies to conclude in 1993 a voluntary agreement with workers ' representatives in anticipation of the implementation of the European Works Council Directive .
I believe that Renault 's conduct in this matter may do much to poison the position and hinder the hitherto non-legislative approach to implementation of the European Works Council Directive .
We all know that companies are called upon to make hard commercial decisions , but if industry loses its ability to make those decisions as transparent as possible and fails even to attempt to explain the reasons to the workforce , or to seek to negotiate alternatives to closures , then the very core of our social consensus is under attack .
Such an attitude would be reprehensible enough within one country , but when the issues are transnational in nature , then the need for openness and consultation is even greater .
The threatened closure of the Vilvoorde plant is a huge blow to the workers and their families .
I can only hope that out of this tragedy might come a renewed awareness of the need for adequate social measures to accompany the internal market and a renewed determination to implement those measures in an effective way .
If this is so then all will not have been in vain .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Renault , which for a long time was nationalized and which served as a social show-piece , was recently privatized . Most of its capital is owned by private investors and it now faces competition from world markets and has to adapt its industrial plant , which is too widely dispersed and diversified in Europe .
Hoover and JVC in fact did the same recently .
We must look at the decision to close the Vilvorde site in this context , not as an isolated measure or a sanction but quite certainly as a strategic industrial decision that will enable Renault to cope with the fact that European automobile market has declined more than expected from the Commission 's forecasts - based on the fact that in 1996 less than three million vehicles were sold - and , in the long term , to protect the jobs of 140 000 Renault employees who would have suffered the consequences if this decision had not been taken .
In the eyes of public opinion , it is indeed difficult to see why a French undertaking should decide to close down one of its sites outside its own country ; but this decision , for which the Renault management is entirely responsible , was certainly encouraged by a relative and comparative analysis of the production costs .
That is why this decision , which disturbs us so much , must induce all those who are responsible for the future of Europe to realise the need to create a European social area .
It was indeed in that spirit that Jacques Chirac submitted a memorandum to our European partners more than a year ago concerning the adoption of a European social model .
The creation of a European social model and a European social area is as important as social dialogue .
Pending that , the heads of undertakings must , however , apply the instruments at their disposal properly ; for in this situation of merciless competition they cannot , for economic reasons , not observe the rules of the game in relation to human beings .
Unless they do so , revocation action will have to be taken in the absence of agreement or dialogue .
At the same time , in the framework of the intergovernmental conference , it is important for the social protocol to be incorporated in the treaty .
Mr President , the brutal and unilateral decision taken by the management of Renault to close its subsidiary in Vilvorde profoundly shocked European public opinion .
This attitude , which reflects the most savage form of capitalism and which I cannot accept , has thrown 3 100 workers and their families on the streets .
Yet Renault was one of the first companies in Europe to conclude voluntary agreements on worker information and consultation , as the Commissioner pointed out .
So why did it infringe the directive setting up European works councils and the one of collective redundancies ?
Do the laws of the market in themselves justify the shameful dismissal of skilled workers , the victims of globalization and pitiless competition ?
I am a liberal , but I cannot tolerate the law of the jungle .
I have always been in favour of an economy in the service of man and not vice versa .
Today the people of Europe no longer understand and , in particular , will no longer tolerate unjustified closures of companies and the lack of solidarity between the Member States of the Union .
Europe cannot progress unless the governments that make it up demonstrate a genuine social and collective conscience .
This crisis , one among many , one too many , will , we hope , be the long-awaited spark that will fire the creation of a social Europe .
The solidarity of the Renault workers , be they Belgian , French or Spanish , will have set a good example to everybody .
It is up to us , and above all to our heads of government , to do their utmost to incorporate the social protocol and the provisions on promoting employment in the coming treaty .
I believe in Europe , in union among our peoples , in our human resources , which constitute our wealth .
Let us not sacrifice them on the altar of pure profit .
Mr President , I have little time so I will confine myself to a few comments .
First , regarding the Renault decision , clearly the method is unacceptable .
An undertaking or a company cannot decide the social and economic collapse of a region without any kind of consultation or redevelopment programme .
Renault did not respect the two directives , on collective redundancies and on works councils .
What do we conclude from that ?
Of course the Commission has no way of enforcing respect for these directives .
There is no provision for sanctions .
However , it could ask Renault to review its decision and , if it does not , to refuse it and other firms that pursue the same practice access to a whole range of potential benefits .
I am thinking of access to Community programmes , to R & D programmes and to any structural fund assistance .
Turning to the structural funds , my first comment is that it is unacceptable for undertakings to apply a specific method that consists of aggregating the advantages offered by the use of the structural funds or the cohesion fund and delocalizing in relation to this cohesion fund and these structural funds .
In short , it is unacceptable to play on social disparities .
Of course , this calls for action by the European Union at the current intergovernmental conference .
My second comment is that it is essential to encourage an extensive economy and to discourage an intensive economy , just as we are against intensive farming .
Let me point out in this regard that the OECD is currently considering a multilateral agreement on investment , which promises us lots of new Renault cases .
I think we must be extremely careful here .
Mr President , the announcement of the closure of the Renault plant in Vilvorde has aroused very strong feelings .
3 100 workers will lose their jobs , a modern factory that cost 8.5 billion in investment will be put up for auction : this is an intolerable waste .
Yet the same day Renault shares soared by 13 % on the Paris stock market .
What kind of symbol of French and European policy is it to give precedence to finance and show contempt for people , sacrificing employment and industrial plant to dividends ?
Lives destroyed , prospects gone : the financiers could not care less , provided they earn money !
Redundancies , more redundancies , to reduce the cost of labour and become more competitive : that is the sole recipe of the European single market and single currency .
It is not just inhumane , it is also an economic disaster .
The share of wages and salaries in a Renault car fell from 23 % to 12 % between 1980 and 1995 .
Over the same period , Renault 's market shares fell by one third , both in France and in Europe .
Since 1986 , Renault has made profits of 40 billion .
What did it do with them ?
But the workers , the people , will not necessarily go on accepting being sacrificed for much longer .
There are signs of increasing protest , reaction and solidarity .
The first European strike on 7 March made that very clear .
This morning , a rally in Boulogne-Billancourt will reflect this and there will be a number of other actions .
Let me pay tribute here to the determination and courage of the Vilvorde workers and to the combative spirit they have shown , as also to their French colleagues , who have also been affected by dismissals and who have , by their action , defeated the management 's attempt to create divisiveness in order to impose its plan .
Our group demands the withdrawal in its entirety of the Schweitzer plan and the opening of negotiations with the trade unions .
The Renault management must be made to choose other options .
For instance , we must object to the 2.6 million in financial levies in order to improve purchasing power , reduce working hours without any fall in wages and finally give a say to the workers by giving them new rights .
Through our proposals , our actions , our solidarity with the Renault workers , we want to do all we can to help build a Europe that is genuinely social and democratic , unlike the Europe of today .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , ten days ago more than 3000 workers fell victim to capitalist terrorism .
What else can we call Renault 's decision to close its plant at Vilvoorde ?
Even specialists in the car-making sector have been absolutely stunned by the developments , since Renault Vilvoorde was regarded as a model plant .
It was modern and productive , and its workforce had been extremely cooperative , accepting greater accountability , more flexibility , longer working hours and above all lower wages .
It all goes to show just how scandalous this decision is , and Vilvoorde has become the latest in a long line of plant closures .
In 1986 , we had a debate here in Parliament about the tyre manufacturer Michelin , which had made its workers collectively redundant on the last day before the summer holidays .
That must never be allowed to happen again .
Ten years further on , pitifully few of the promised social improvements have actually been made .
What good is Europe for the millions of unemployed if it does not recognize the right to work as a basic human right ?
What good is the Union if it cannot even ensure that its own legislation is properly enforced ?
The planned closure of Renault Vilvoorde actually contravenes two directives , the 1984 directive on works councils and the 1975 directive on collective redundancies , as well as Belgium 's implementing legislation .
The second of these two directives was tightened up after what happened at Michelin , but by no means enough , since it simply introduced sanctions for anyone failing to comply with the European legislation .
In 1991 , Parliament adopted a text which would have made collective redundancies by multinationals invalid if they did not follow the provisions of the directive , but once again the Council of Ministers refused to follow our lead .
So now the multinationals have carte blanche , but the fact is that even the European multinationals could not care less about the Council , the Commission or the European Parliament .
For them , the only voice they need to listen to is that of their shareholders .
Nobody else .
And who holds a 48 % share in Renault ? The French State .
That is why I propose that the French Government should use its position of power to force Renault to hold an extraordinary general meeting as soon as possible , with only one item on the agenda : the reversal of the decision to close Renault Vilvoorde .
The French Government claims that it is serious about Europe , so it should use its share ownership to force Renault to obey the European directives .
The Renault decision has proved that the unanimity rule in the Council needs to be abolished .
The Amsterdam summit must change things so that decisions with social implications are taken by a qualified majority , if the Treaty is finally to be taken seriously .
Today , social Europe is an empty vessel .
Over the last 21 years , only three European directives have been introduced on works councils .
Two of them are involved in this issue today , and both have been flouted .
Seven other directives have been held up in the Council for years .
The Commission too needs to do more than just keep an official record of how directives are transposed , and the motion for a resolution which I have tabled on behalf of my group puts forward a number of practical proposals in this respect .
Ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow marks Europe 's fortieth anniversary .
We have now had ten days to consider Renault Vilvoorde 's problems , ten days in which we have seen just how little progress has been made in those 40 years .
Mr President , let me say at the outset that it is always a tragedy when a workplace closes or moves to another country , not least for the employees .
In this particular case , the closure of the Renault plant at Vilvoorde in Belgium , the EU Commission has shown an enormous amount of interest .
One might wish that such interest were always shown when a workplace closes or moves , and perhaps especially when the reason for the closure has something to do with money from the EU Structural Funds .
I would like to inform Parliament of a concrete case in Denmark .
It concerns the American-owned Boston Scientific Corporation at Stenløse , where 258 employees will be put out onto the street at the end of 1997 , because the firm is moving to Ireland with support from the EU Structural Funds .
It is quite unreasonable and does not constitute a proper use of EU funds .
Money from the Structural Funds should not be used to switch unemployment from one Member State to another .
That is surely a distortion of competition .
Mr President , there is more to this whole question of who is responsible for thousands of Flemish workers at Vilvoorde being made redundant without even the slightest attempt at consultation .
It is all too easy just to point the finger at the Renault management , but in fact the European Commission and the Belgian Government must also take their share of the blame .
Firstly the Commission , whose indignation at the closure of the Renault plant had a very hollow ring , in my opinion .
It is the Commission which is always saying that the car industry needs to be moved to cheaper countries such as Spain or Portugal in order to put up stronger competition against non-European producers .
It is the Commission which grants billions in subsidies for these relocations .
And it is the Commission more than anyone else which turns a blind eye to unfair competition from third countries .
So if it is true that Renault is to transfer a large proportion of its production to Turkey and Brazil , we should now be asking ourselves what measures the Commission intends to take to prevent many other companies from doing the same in future , leaving Europe an industrial graveyard .
Do not think that I am in favour of out-and-out protectionism .
I am simply saying that there is absolutely no point in making European firms , which pay their workers relatively high wages and are subject to all kinds of rules and regulations , compete with countries where social legislation , environmental regulations and so forth are virtually non-existent .
This is not free trade , it is suicide .
Blame must also , and above all , be laid on the shoulders of the Belgian Government under Jean-Luc Dehaene , which has allowed our wage costs to become some of the highest in the world , which for years has scorned our demands for more firms to have their financial and economic base in Flanders , and which has sold out practically the entire Belgian economy to exclusively foreign and French interest groups .
It is also the Belgian Government which has meekly accepted the Walloon socialists ' demands and has prevented the Flemish economy from bringing its wage costs down .
We are now counting the cost of this policy .
The fact that Dehaene knew about the closure days in advance and chose to make monkeys out of the Vilvoorde workforce shows just what sort of a man he is .
It is as well to know these things about someone whose ambition it is to become a member of the European Commission .
Finally , I have to say that the manner in which Renault is carrying out this closure is also absolutely scandalous .
We know Mr Schweitzer to be a typical example of the French socialist apparatchiks .
So this is the human face of socialism !
Mr President , unlike Mr Vanhecke , who has just given us a laughable account of who he thinks is to blame for all this , I should like to thank the Commission for its severe condemnation of the sudden closure of Renault Vilvoorde , and for its commitment regarding the measures which it has just announced .
Commissioner , I hope that you will act on what you have said , and that Renault Vilvoorde and the international solidarity we are currently seeing will give new impetus to progress on social Europe .
I agree with you that Europe 's credibility is at stake here more than ever , because how are we to explain to people that the Commission can intervene to prevent firms from receiving government aid , but not to prevent closures where even the most basic rules of worker consultation have been flouted ?
That is why I am particularly pleased that you are proposing to tighten up the directive , and I hope that you will press on with this as quickly as possible .
I would urge you not to leave it up to the Member States to decide on the sanctions to be introduced , but to establish them at European level , because everyone knows that if you leave it up to the Member States , it will simply lead to more competition in terms of attracting investment .
I would also urge the Commission to establish instruments which it can itself use in future to intervene in cases where legislation is as blatantly flouted as it has been with Renault Vilvoorde .
I also expect the Commission to use all its political and legislative powers to enforce the existing directives , to force the management to reverse its decision and to seek alternative solutions such as shorter working hours , which have already been proposed .
I hope that all the government leaders and politicians who are now so indignant about the Renault Vilvoorde closure will refuse to accept a revised version of the Treaty which does not focus on employment and social policy , and will force the negotiators to arrive at a new agreement .
Mr President , let me say one thing at the outset .
While we all deplore the absence of a social Europe , it is worth pointing out that , apart from the statement by Mrs Green , this debate has so far been entirely binational .
I think that is a pity and shows that within this Chamber there is still a lack of European spirit .
Speakers were right to criticize the attitude of Renault , which decided to close the Vilvorde plant for no clearly explained economic reason , without any prior consultation with the organizations representing the workers and with no flanking social and reconversion plan for the workers who will be left high and dry .
This has been said and the Commissioner has shed tears , sincere ones I believe , about the fact that Renault has infringed or ignored the spirit if not the letter of the European directives .
Yet I think it is perhaps a sign of a certain collective hypocrisy to suggest that the problem would have been resolved if the announcement had been made under better conditions , if there had been consultation , if there had been respect for the procedures set out in the European directives .
I think anyone who believes that the problem created by Renault 's brutal decision could have been resolved simply by adopting a more severe approach , however welcome that might be , and imposing certain social rules is making a big mistake .
This business obviously reflects a lack of solidarity , the lack of a social Europe , but there is also a fundamental economic problem , namely that at present the automobile industry is faced with a 30 % surplus capacity , with a 7 % annual increase in productivity and a 1 % rise in demand .
In other words , unless we take measures , we will automatically create a rise in unemployment of 6 % a year .
That is the economic reality facing us .
What approach should we take ?
We should certainly not take state capitalism measures and make the tax-payer pay for the loss of productivity ; on the other hand we should certainly pursue a concerted policy of boosting demand and take support , reconversion and flanking measures , making more use of the structural funds , as was done for the mining and shipbuilding industries .
Ladies and gentlemen of the Commission , do not confine yourselves to deploring the lack of solidarity or social correctness .
What is needed here is economic action .
You cannot escape the need to take serious economic action in this sector .
Mr President , Renault 's sudden decision to close its Belgian plant at Vilvoorde is seen by many people as a double failure : the failure of Europe and the failure of the liberal market economy .
But I see it as neither of these things .
If a major European employer and producer inflicts the consequences of its company strategy on the community as it has done here , then that community is entitled to examine the company strategy and question whether it is sound .
Until two years ago , Renault was a state-owned company and the French State is still a 47 or 48 % shareholder .
So if Renault represents the failure of any form of capitalism , it is state capitalism .
But there is more to it than that .
A liberal market economy is not a licence to be short-sighted .
We have known about the problems of Europe 's car industry in general , and that of France in particular , for years now , and I cannot help thinking that the Renault management , having spent far too long carping and complaining , has now tried to find a way out by suddenly closing one of its plants outside France , one of the most productive in its group .
In doing so , it is not only flouting two European directives , it has also dealt a severe blow to people 's faith in European solidarity .
It is doing Europe a very bad service , and that is a most regrettable state of affairs .
Mr President , we had the opportunity to hear the workers in question last week and we are amazed that they are so surprised at the decision of a company which shows a total lack of respect for their work , their effort and their future - and for the future of the region in which the company is located .
We are amazed , let me repeat , that they should be so surprised .
We agree with what Mr Santer said about the lack of credibility of the European institutions when a question such as this arises ; it is correct .
We spend months and months here discussing certain directives on the protection of workers ' rights and when the moment of truth comes no effective sanction can be taken to see that they are respected .
In a letter sent to the Group chairmen , the management bases its decision on competitiveness and I think we should start to reflect about where this zealous pursuit of competitiveness of European industries and of world industries in general is taking us .
We shall never be able to compete with the starvation wages and union rights of the countries of the third world and Eastern Europe .
This is therefore a race we cannot win .
The Renault factory has in the past six years increased its productivity by 200 000 units and has cut its workforce by 7 000 .
Now it seems that is not enough ; greater productivity must be sought ; greater competitiveness .
It seems to us that the European Union should manage to get sanctions imposed against companies which do not comply with Community law and the Commission and the Parliament would be well advised to demand the revocation of a decision which so clearly runs counter to Community law .
We do not think this will be the last case ; strong measures need to be taken requiring negotiation with the workers , as called for in the European Works Council Directive and the Collective Redundancies Directive .
Mr President , Vilvorde is a textbook case .
This is indeed the end result of the ultra-liberal policy that a majority of EU governments support and that many of the Commission 's services also pursue .
It is no use raising the alarm after the house has burnt down .
There is no use crying over the ruins or criticizing the brutality of certain announcements of plant closures , involving mass redundancies .
We must draw all the necessary lessons from the Renault affair if we are to avoid this kind of economic and social disaster .
It is time , indeed , to be firm and , above all , to show imagination and also to condemn the hypocrisy of certain management circles .
There is much talk of a social Europe , but which Europe are we talking about ?
A social Europe is not a Europe of unemployment , of insecurity , of exclusion , in which established rights are trampled underfoot , in which millions of citizens suffer poverty .
A social Europe must be one where everybody has the right to work , to a job , to continuous training , to a rise in their standard of living and to social protection .
No doubt such progressive objectives would upset the customs and habits of certain management circles and politicians , imprisoned in an economic and monetary system that encourages the profit race and tends to crush the individual .
We must react immediately if we do not want to risk the despair of the people of Europe .
I think it is now vital to consider how to distribute social powers between the states and the European Union , but also to consider how to formulate a European industrial strategy .
It is imperative for the social protocol , which should be incorporated in the Union treaty in 1997 , to include a specific article on the arbitrary closure of industrial plant .
First it should be clearly established that the workers must be consulted , via their representative organizations , at least three months before any final decision is taken on restructuring .
Moreover , it seems clear to me that any plant with a recognized technological potential and workers who have been adequately trained cannot be closed overnight .
It is scandalous for an undertaking to receive Community and national aid without giving anything in return , for example a commitment to remain on a site for at least ten years .
If it did not respect this commitment , the multinational would receive no more aid from the European Union .
Finally , Mr President , the closure of Vilvorde is not just a one-off case . The workers have every reason to oppose it and my group supports them in their fight .
Mr President , the sudden announcement of the closure of the Renault plant at Vilvoorde in Belgium , where 3100 people are to lose their jobs , is a tragedy , particularly since - contrary to the European directive - the workers have not in any way been consulted .
Given that Renault is a multinational , some sort of action is obviously expected from the European Union , and it is understandable that Commissioner Van Miert should launch an inquiry into Spain 's plans to provide government aid for the Renault plant there , and that Commissioner Flynn should review the rules on the consultation of workers .



But could the Union be doing more ?
It has been suggested that Renault , as a French firm , was always far more likely to close a plant in Belgium than one in France .
Be that as it may , it is absolutely clear that workers must be given the same protection , no matter which Member State they are in .
Any closures must be accompanied by a carefully considered social programme , and that is what is lacking here .
However , do we not also have to accept that a multinational firm which is forced to make cutbacks for economic reasons is perfectly entitled , in the single market , to concentrate production wherever costs are lowest ?
Mr President , the ominous decision by the French government , of which Mr Schweitzer is merely the executor , to put not just 3 000 but 6 000 Belgian workers out of a job confirms France 's resolve to join the United Kingdom and Germany in the club of nations that expect only advantages from Europe , without accepting the constraints involved in elementary solidarity between our nations .
This is not a new situation .
The workers in my country , Belgium , have frequently been the victims of intraCommunity delocalization over the past 15 years .
The first salvos were fired by the English when the United Kingdom repatriated British Leyland 's motor vehicle assembly line , which had previously been sited in Wallonia .
To cite only the automobile industry , let me remind you of the successive closures of the Tudor battery production units , then of the Champion sparking-plug producers and the serious threats looming over the Volkswagen factory workers in Forest .
This situation gives rise to several comments .
Firstly , the intransigent attitude of the Renault bosses should give some food for thought to a few francophile politicians who dream of attaching Wallonia to France .
Secondly , I am thinking of the inevitable retaliatory measures the consumers will spontaneously take by boycotting all products made in France which , in the final analysis , are far from irreplaceable .
Finally , I think the time has come for Belgium to claim back from France the three billion new French francs stolen from Belgian savers in 1994 , when the French public company AGF took over the Belgian insurance company Assubel .
Three billion French francs is more than enough to secure the jobs of the Renault workers in Vilvorde , and also of the Clabeck workers in Les Forges .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that is what could and should have been avoided if Europe had taken the necessary solidarity measures for the workers of Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today Vilvorde has become a kind of symbol , and a revealing one .
If we look closely at the situation , we will have to examine the responsibilities of all concerned .
What was the strategy adopted by a state that held 48 % of the shares , i.e. , more than the blocking minority ?
Certainly it was not a posteriori disapproval .
Is the French government , by its inaction , trying by any chance to ruin the mixed economy ?
In face of the on-going industrial revolution , in face of the trend towards international capitalism , has Europe given itself the means of countering this by maintaining its social system ?
Europe has created a framework that encourages competition and deregulation , translated by the development of surplus production capacity ; it has established a competition policy that encourages alliances outside Europe and makes it difficult to form genuine alliances between Europeans , as a result of which employment is becoming the main variable of adjustment .
The social horrors that are the end result of competition , of run-away capitalism , render meaningless the Commission 's assurances that the primary and automatic means of protecting jobs is acceptance of maximum flexibility .
The closure of the Vilvorde plant demonstrates , if indeed demonstration is necessary , the risks of social dumping .
One reason this unit was closed was that labour costs there were 25 % to 30 % higher than in other sites .
Tomorrow , if we do not act , other dramas will open our eyes to the risks of fiscal dumping , of environmental dumping , right inside the European Union .
The Europeans will turn against Europe unless it formulates a genuine industrial policy that is in their service , provides public financing of research that matches up to the requirements , opens a social dialogue worthy of that name .
How could we not agree with Jean-Luc Dehaene who said that ' in the social sector , coordination at European level is the only possible response to the individual strategies of the multinationals ' ?
Yes , we must indeed incorporate the social protocol in the treaty and abolish the unanimity rule in areas where it still applies in the social area .
Some representatives of the right are now advocating a social Europe .
I feel like saying : ' I dare you ! ' .
Go on then , persuade your governments to adopt a real chapter on employment at the intergovernmental conference .
But I do see a glimmer of hope in this affair .
For years we have been lamenting the absence of a union movement able to face up to undertakings pursuing a multinational strategy .
As history teaches us , social dialogue and regulation are rarely granted .
They are obtained by struggle , by the play of forces .
If there are incipient signs of dialogue , all the better !
I hope it will become obligatory when the euro forces our Member State governments to adopt a coordinated European economic policy .
Once again , what we are suffering from is not a lack of Europe , but a Europe that is too liberal , that is too commercial , too intent on free trade .
We are suffering from the absence in Europe of an industrial strategy in the service of Europeans , from the lack of regulation and solidarity , the lack of a political and social Europe .
Mr President , I should like to cool the tempo of the debate a little , that is release a little steam to reduce the pressure .
We are debating a key bi-national question .
I do not want to introduce another country to produce a tri-national debate , but simply to put things into context .
The closure of the Renault factory is of course very sad .
It is a decision by the management of Renault and we express our solidarity with the Vilvoorde workers .
But what we must not do is to link this closure with the fact that the Renault company is wanting to expand production in Spain .
That is not solidarity , since Spain too is European union country which any company can move to provided it complies with the laws in force .
I think that in this case Renault is trying to comply with the laws in force and will make use of the economic , social or fiscal options permitted under those laws .
I do not understand how the two subjects are being mixed together here and I am sorry that I had to speak because I think these are two totally separate subjects : the Vilvoorde closure is one thing and the expansion in Spain is another .
What the European Union needs to do - and here we are trying to build it and we have not been engaged for many years on the project and things cannot be achieved all at once - is to have social and fiscal legislation on all matters which is homogenous throughout all countries .
That would prevent factories in the European Union from moving from one country to another , since similar costs would be incurred .
Neither would the multinationals then be so inclined to move from one European Union country to another , as has happened in Spain , or to third countries .
There is just one more question - would this debate have taken place had not Vilvoorde been the Commissioner 's home town ?
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to stress once again in this debate that the basic problem is that the Renault management has broken a number of national , European and international regulations .
The issue is not whether Renault was right to close its plant at Vilvoorde on economic grounds , although I wholly agree with the severe criticism which has been levelled against the Renault management .
But I do not agree with those who are taking advantage of the situation to launch an attack on Europe or to target the free market economy .
I would point out to my Belgian colleagues that the Catholic-socialist coalition , which always presents itself as the stalwart defender of a social Europe , actually opposed the Commission when it proposed to tighten up European legislation on this subject .
On the other hand , the approach adopted by Volkswagen in Germany shows that it is possible to deal with such cases properly even without stricter legislation .
More jobs are soon going to have to disappear , not just at Renault in France but in the European car industry as a whole , since overcapacity is currently running at 20 to 30 % .
The most important issue in this whole debate is the need to create an industry-friendly climate in Europe with lower labour costs and greater work flexibility if we are to arm ourselves against worldwide competition .
Mr President , first of all the loss of 3 , 000 jobs at Vilvoorde is an absolute tragedy for the workers and their families , and a tragedy for Belgium , the country which is experiencing this social tragedy and justifiably feels its commitment to Europe has been betrayed .
A tragedy , but sadly nothing new : the whole of the ' eighties and these early years of the ' nineties have been littered with such tragedies .
Even today similar tragedies are taking place in other European countries : at Sorces de Clébecq 2 , 000 steel workers , 1 , 000 of them Italian , are threatened with redundancy , the German miners are likewise threatened , Philips on the outskirts of Milan has just announced the closure of the factory which will be transferred to Poland , where the Danzig shipyards are closing .
Tragedies , but nothing new .
What is new is the struggle of the workers , European unemployment , the meeting today in Biancourt , the development of an initiative .
This is a Europe being born , but unfortunately it is also a denunciation of a political and economic Europe which is not there and which is guilty by its absence .
This Europe needs to be discussed in depth .
There are political reasons for the current episode .
Europe does not have a social policy , it only has Maastricht monetarism .
So Europe is suffering from social dumping from the outside and the consequences of its deflationary policy on the inside .
There is no industrial policy , there is no policy to reduce working hours , there is no policy of public control over the multinationals .
Commissioner Flynn , you spoke of dismay at the closure of Vilvoorde ; I speak of dismay at your communication .
The powerlessness this Parliament and the Commission are demonstrating in this case is utterly indecent : either Europe succeeds in recovering a sense of itself , or else events like this condemn not Renault alone , but the inability of this Parliament and Europe to respond to the problems of the workers and the unemployed .
Mr President , in a few decades time , when historians and students of our times try to unravel their mysteries , the word Renault will be a key .
Through Renault , they will find out that there was a time when labour was made more flexible and precarious , when social rights were reduced , when modernisation took place , and when workers thought they were going to have a fair share of modernisation and all they got was unemployment and social exclusion .
Through Renault , they will understand also how it was that in the beginning of 1997 a multi-national company in the automobile industry shut down units and threw thousands of workers on to the dole queues just because they were having difficulties - and at the same time their shares rose significantly in value on the Paris stock exchange .
Through Renault , they will even have an illustration that just as European construction between equal Member States was taking place , some of them were more equal than others .
Because what happened in Setubal , in Portugal , only merited a pious resolution with no consequences whereas what happened in Belgium aroused strong reactions of solidarity , demonstrations , strikes and even the Commissioner did not hide his Belgian origins .
This should not necessarily be denounced but it should be remembered , given that other situations and postures meant that a European Commissioner was obliged to give up the defence of national interests , in the case of the Portuguese .
I will be strange for those historians and students of the time in which we live that on the same day as this debate , in the same European Parliament , another debate on the restructuring of the automobile industry - based on a report by a very high-up member of the PSE - did not focus on social problems or even refer to them .
Whoever has the job of writing today 's history will find some very strange and incomprehensible matters .
I hope that the position of the European Parliament on this issue is going to be comprehensible for them , in terms of its social content and its consequences for the future .
Mr President , it is difficult to understand the attitude of the management of Renault in announcing from one day to the next the closure of a production plant in a European country ; but it is not right to involve other countries in this problem and to point to Spain in this context ; let us not confuse the issues .
This closure is not bound up with the opening of new factories in Spain and this decision by Renault does not appear to be linked to new production centres in other European countries .
The only people responsible - and they must be answerable - are the Renault bosses .
No-one else is responsible .
This calls in question not only the scant nature of social Europe , but the very idea of Europe .
If such things take place in a Europe we would like to regard as a joint Europe and we do not worry about them , then there is something seriously wrong with the very edifice of Europe .
Intangible concepts such as the market heartlessly and mercilessly dictate plant relocation or closure and concentration .
If the market , capital and immediate profitability are not neutral , then neither should be the defence of jobs and union rights .
Renault should not only respect Community legislation , but it should also bow to European public opinion .
Unfortunately it is not the first factory to be closing and we must be aware that industrial strategies do sometimes entail these sad consequences .
But here we are faced with a surprise decision with no respect for the minimum rules of the game required without consultation and without negotiation .
If we simply stand by and watch these problems we shall be guilty of ineffective resignation .
It is not a problem of thousands of Flemish workers .
I should prefer to call it a problem of thousands of European workers , and we express our solidarity with them .
Dialogue between both sides of industry is the best instrument for settling labour relations .
This is a specific case in which such dialogue should be used to channel a very serious problem .
Renault must accept that industrial and labour relations do have their purpose .
Talks between the management of Renault and the workers ' representatives should find possible solutions to this problem which is on a European scale and there must be solutions if such dialogue is possible .
I have received one motion for a resolution , under Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , I wish to thank all those who have contributed to the debate this morning .
It has been a worthwhile debate and it is only right and proper that the House should deal with the matter , for at least two good reasons .
Firstly , there is the right we have to show the depth of our feeling concerning the decision taken by Renault on this closure .
It is also right that we show solidarity with those people threatened with the loss of their jobs , and with their families , who are going to suffer distress .
Both Parliament and the Commission have put employment right at the top of their political agendas .
It is extremely difficult to accept the laying-off of good , well-trained , professional workers at what was and is understood still to be an industrially and economically efficient plant .
This plant had the most flexible workforce one could contemplate in this sector and it is very difficult to understand the decision to close it down .
Secondly , this particular closure raises a number of important issues of European Community policy .
There can be no questioning the right , or indeed the necessity , to make commercial decisions affecting investment , location , operation and even closure of industrial plants in these increasingly competitive times .
That is always clearly understood .
But rights and powers , of course , bring matching responsibilities .
The question here is very well stated by Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens when she says that Renault have broken the rules .
They have broken the rules and it is for others to pursue this matter under the national implementation legislation .
That is what is contemplated and that is the way it should be addressed .
The internal market provides an arena without internal frontiers - the biggest of its kind in the world - where business can prosper , where capital and goods move freely , and where competitiveness and industry is encouraged .
But no business can prosper without the goodwill and the commitment of its workforce , and those that purport to be multinational companies cannot renationalize whenever it suits them .
It was very clearly stated in the communication on this particular industry some while ago that social dialogue is an important aspect in dealing with the structural arrangements that would be necessary for its development .
You cannot disregard that , as has happened on this occasion .
That is the message that should be sent .
I would say that there is good point in condemning the action by Renault .
It was wrong , and it is unacceptable to deal in such a cavalier fashion with the rights of workers as they are enshrined in law .
And it is for those who consider these rights infringed to take up the case in their jurisdiction where necessary .
That is why the social and economic dimensions are always cited as two sides of the same coin .
In my opening statement I set out the situation of existing legislation in regard to the laying-off of workers in situations such as Renault in Vilvoorde .
I pointed out the weaknesses in the matter of sanctions and I have indicated my intentions with regard to filling these gaps and the strengthening of Community measures on information and consultation of workers .
I would say to Mrs Van Lancker : the law is there and should be implemented ; and before seeking new legislation as an immediate and quite understandable reaction to such situations , we must always remember to test the existing legislation .
If it is found wanting , then there is a good case for seeking its amendment .
But I would sincerely suggest that the existing legislation is strong and should be pursued ; and , if and when any aspect of it is discovered to be in need of amendment or extension , then I would not hesitate to come back with such a proposal .
But others , of course , must also play their part .
Industry must take a fresh look at its responsibilities in an internal market which encourages its competitiveness and its prosperity .
In this particular case Renault , and indeed the government which holds a 48 % share of the company , must abide by European and national law , both in the letter and in the spirit .
The government - all governments - must ensure that in a people 's Europe which is to be worthy of that name , social and economic dimensions must be given balanced attention with equality of treatment and protection rights right across the Union .
I believe that the Intergovernmental Conference will provide an opportunity to do just that .
A disastrous closure like this shakes confidence .
It is important now - as it was at the time - always to mobilize all our forces and energies to restore investor and consumer confidence that will bring growth and increased employment .
The role of social policy as a productive factor is a key element in this equation .
We must not lose sight of that fact in our preparations for the final stages of the IGC discussions and the Amsterdam Summit and in the ongoing initiatives we are taking with the social partner .
In the immediate future I will be coming forward with some important proposals in the social area , particularly on social protection and new methods of work organization ; and there will be , as I stated in my opening remarks , the proposal on information and consultation at national level .
I would like to use that instrument in the proposal , to fill any gap that might have arisen or appear evident following the run-through in this particular case insofar as it is pursued at national level .
A successful conclusion to the Davignon Group would also unlock the company statute proposal and be a considerable boost to the internal market .
We have also to look forward to the successful outcome of the negotiations between the social partners on part-time work , and this too would be extremely useful .
Finally , I wish to say that , in my opinion , no company , irrespective of its size or influence , is entitled to dismiss its workers and to disobey the law in the cavalier fashion we have witnessed in this particular case .
It is contrary to law and to the spirit that we thought endowed all the actions making up the integration of Europe and the internal market .
The united response that we have here will do much to indicate to all those who have responsibility in this matter that it is not acceptable to act in an irresponsible fashion such as we have seen in this case .
Workers ' rights are enshrined in law and they must be respected in the spirit as well as in the letter of the law .
That is the basis on which agreement is reached in the first instance , and to disregard that basis is just a recipe for industrial relations chaos .
Damage to the building of Europe has been caused on this occasion .
Let us be clear about that .
So I wish to stress again that the social dimension is vital if we want European integration to succeed as a precondition for the support of European citizens for the European ideal .
We would look forward to a better response in future from those who have responsibility in this regard .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Let us hope that this debate will have the best possible effect on the situation facing Renault workers .
Industrial competitiveness
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0052 / 97 by Mr A.J. Donnelly , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions ' European Automobile Industry 1996 ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0327 - C40493 / 96 ) ; -A4-0040 / 97 by Mr Langen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on the Commission communication on an industrial competitiveness policy for the European chemical industry : an example ( COM ( 96 ) 0187 - C4-0273 / 96 ) ; -A4-0036 / 97 by Mr Katiforis , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission 's communication : ' Shaping Europe 's maritime future - a contribution to the competitiveness of maritime industries ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0084 - C4-0211 / 96 ) Draftsmen of opinions : Mrs Estevan Bolea , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy Mr Pex , on behalf of the Committee on external Economic Relations Mr Belleré , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism Mr K. Collins , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection ( ' Hughes ' procedure ) .
Mr President , I would like first of all to start by discussing the three reports collectively because , as you said , this is a joint debate on industry policy and I think it is very timely given the earlier debate we had on Renault and the very helpful response given by Commissioner Flynn that we look collectively at these three industries because , while of course the automobile sector , the maritime sector and the chemical sector are three clearly different industries , it is very clear to me that there are very similar characteristics in the way in which we have to try and provide an environment for those industries to operate within the European Union .
They all face similar challenges of intensified global competition and rapid structural change and I think it is in that context that we need to have this debate this morning and I am sure it is in that context that Commissioner Bangemann will respond on behalf of the European Commission .
Given that over 3 , 000 workers have just lost their jobs following the Renault decision I think it is also very important that we give some thought to the links between competitiveness , productivity and employment because we talk too much in this House and in the European institutions about competitiveness but we do not link it to the issue of productivity and employment .
Competitiveness in itself is not an end , it must be a means to an end , and that of course is to try and improve productivity and to try and improve employment opportunities .
We have to get out of this orthodoxy within the European Union of assuming that competitiveness in itself is the answer to all of our problems .
The issue of restructuring , transfers and plant closures is creating a growing atmosphere of insecurity among workers and the public in general , and it is essential that the European Commission come forward with proposals that can deal comprehensively with this issue .
We accept that it is a complicated and complex matter in terms of industrial planning when you get transfers , restructuring and plant closures taking place .
In that context if it is complex then we need a series of ideas and initiatives and solutions to ensure that we can try and take away the terrible feeling of insecurity that now exists within the European Union .
Insecurity leads to demotivation , and that is part of the problem that the European economy is facing .
I hope the Commissioner , when he responds , will take account of these issues in the general debate on industry .
I want to use the rest of my time to talk specifically about the car industry , because this is Europe 's biggest industry : it represents almost 2 % of the gross domestic product of Europe , it employs directly about 2 million people , it contributes to the revenue of the European Union over ECU 220 billion .
It is an extremely significant industry and , frankly , if we continue as we are going today in the way in which this industry is planning for the future , we are going to see substantial job losses in Europe .
We have got the problem at Renault , you have seen the problems at Enfield in London and at Halewood in Liverpool in the Ford company .
We are going to see further pressures on this industry unless we can try and devise a plan for the future .
So the first thing this House calls for is for Commissioner Bangemann , with the Parliament , to convene a meeting of the CEOs of the major car manufacturers in Europe with the components industry sector and the trade unions to see if we can put together a high-level grouping that can plan for the future of this industry .
We want to see greater support given to the ' car of the future ' initiative .
It is an excellent initiative but it needs more resources and more support .
We want to see greater progress made on the issue of international harmonization of standards .
It is crucial if we are going to have a global market and a globally competitive market within the European Union that we move forward on international harmonization .
And then specifically , on a number of initiatives , we need to make sure that the vehicles we produce are the sort of vehicles that will be acceptable , not only in our own market , but in the United States and in the other markets around the world , and the sort of product that the consumer wishes to purchase .
That means we need to look at new technologies in the field of emissions and fuel consumption .
We need to look at motor electronics , further improvements in vehicle safety , electric and hybrid vehicles , lightweight vehicle structures and materials , optimizing of production techniques , and systems for the recycling of all vehicles .
I recognize that we already have something like 56 directives on the statute book as far as the car industry is concerned .
We cannot simply , as legislators , pursue this agenda without consultation with the industry and so what I would appeal to in the spirit of consultation and collaboration is for us to move forward rapidly to look at this new agenda in consultation with the industry , the trade unions and the research sector so that we actually look forward to a secure future for Europe 's biggest industry and we can stop the present decline .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the chemical industry is the second-largest sector of manufacturing industry in Europe .
It provides 1.6 million jobs and has the highest export share of all .
The largest chemical companies in the world are located in Europe , so their basic situation is almost comparable .
Like the automobile industry , the chemical industry has to react to global market changes .
The annual turnover of ECU 350 billion , which is equivalent to between 3 % and 4 % of total European GDP , offers a good basis for the future .
The Commission communication on the competitiveness of the chemical industry is almost a model project , because it was drawn up on the basis of dialogue with the industry .
In this connection I must definitely praise the Commission , which is so often criticized here !
Commissioner , if you have deserved praise , you should also accept it !
However there is one point which could have been improved on : participation by workers ' associations was inadequate ; this could do with improving .
The radical structural changes and increasing globalization have led to a lasting regional shift in markets and production centres .
Some of the reasons are the growing strength of new competitors in the Asian and Pacific region , the opening up of the Eastern European countries and their increasing integration in the world economy and the more intensive competition in the European internal market .
The global structure of the chemical industry will have to adapt to the changing regional structure of the world chemical market .
For instance , competitors in Asia , the Middle East and Eastern Europe are already able to offer many chemical products , especially standard products , at substantially lower prices than European companies , despite an entirely comparable product quality and reliability of supplies .
In these standard areas the chemical industry has also forfeited its technological advantage because these technologies are available worldwide .
The globalization of markets and the siting of new production plants in the growth regions - which is often criticized but is necessary to the companies ' survival - meant that employment in the chemical industry had to be cut by 25 % in recent years , to a workforce of only 1.6 million today .
One of the future tasks of the chemical industry therefore - given the need for more market-oriented production - will be to protect employment in the chemical sector on a lasting basis and to offset the loss of jobs in traditional chemical branches by the creation of new jobs in forward-looking technologies .
Here , Commissioner , biotechnology and genetic engineering , active substance and natural substance chemicals , environmental technology , new materials and the development of complex system solutions can do much to replace unprofitable product lines .
That is why I also believe it is important , as the committee noted in relation to research projects , for the chemical industry to be involved more closely in the task forces as a multi-disciplinary industry rather than being marginal , for it can make contributions to the car of the future , to the traffic system , to synergetic solutions that go far beyond what the Commission has suggested to date .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has given profound thought to this .
We organized a hearing .
We took account of the views of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , and the end result was a report that met with broad approval .
Given the difficulties of the task , in connection for example with ensuring a minimum level of environmental legislation while cutting back on environmental rules that act as an obstacle to the production of chemicals and to the position of Europe as a centre of chemical production , the 55 votes in favour and only 2 against are certainly gratifying .
This intensive consultation has shown that the Commission provided a good basic document but that our proposals can improve it .
So it will be up to you , Commissioner , to show you are prepared to accept our good proposals , which have broad support .
We take the view that the chemical industry could be an exemplary area for the Commission and the Member States to promote the social dialogue on technological lines of development .
That would gain new product lines the necessary acceptance .
It might also mean that the much-discussed question of the CO2 tax , which the committee is rather sceptical about - we do not believe it is a solution for ensuring competitiveness - can be discussed objectively and without ideological bias .
The same applies to the development of the infrastructure , a pipeline network that would improve the transport of dangerous goods .
I believe that in this overall context the Commission 's communication is a useful one .
Let me conclude by thanking all those who have contributed , the Commission , the associations that played an active part and the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy ; I believe that all in all we can be satisfied with this report !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to follow Mr Donnelly 's example and introduce what I have to say about the shipping industry with a few more general comments concerning the problem of industrial policy in Europe .
The main factors that determine the course of European industry nowadays are three in number : its persistently low productivity , its essential failure to make the most of the potential of new technologies , and the pressures stemming from increased public awareness of environmental issues .
The combination of those three factors in today 's circumstances has a restraining effect , like a brake , on the progress of European industry .
With a new and creative combination , the brake could be changed into a driving force , and that should be task of industrial policy .
New technology can increase productivity , and that , in turn , can create additional wealth , part of which can be devoted to improving the environment .
The critical question is why the creative procedure is so slow in coming , and the only serious answer that has been put forward to that question is that the slowness with which economic activity is expanding , the relative recession that has been affecting us since the beginning of the 1990s , and even before then of course , and the relatively low levels of investment , are making it difficult to promote new technology .
More particularly , for the types of new technology that concern us now , namely information technology , other difficulties are amplified by the fact that the consumer public is not aware , and has not had sufficient opportunity to become aware of the potentials of new technology , so as to create the necessary large-scale consumption and production demand .
In the case of IT we must not only invest in equipment , but also in the creation of new markets .
Now , so far as the shipping industry is concerned , despite the fact that it employs 2.5 million people , it has for a long time been considered a branch condemned to decline in the face of competition from countries with low labour costs and lax rules of operation .
The idea that Europe can counter low labour costs by making the most of its own comparative advantage , new technology , and lax rules with services of high quality , and that upon those foundations a new , modern , dynamic and competitive industry could be built , is precisely the creative idea that the Commission , and the Commissioner honouring us with his presence here today , as well as our common creation , the forum for shipping industries , have been promoting since 1991 with their initiatives .
Implementation of that concept can create a new , real industrial revolution in the branch , with incalculable gains for Europe , but none of this will become a reality without effort and constructive cooperation by all those involved in the branch .
Shipowners must take advantage of the fact that present fleets are quite old , and speed up the process of their replacement .
Postponement may gain them some short-term profit , but it undermines competitiveness and hence profits in the longer term .
Banks and financing organizations , at a time when employment among the productive workforce in shipping is temporarily restricted - and I say temporarily because the volume of merchant shipping is forecast to double over the coming 15 years - should transform flexibility of funding and low interest rates into a serious incentive for new investment .
Crews should strive for and demand from the Member States retraining in the new technologies .
They should also cooperate to establish flexible employment and crew composition systems that will facilitate the application of new technology in ships and throughout the branch .
Shipbuilding enterprises must be relieved of the necessity for State subsidies and must reconquer the position they once held in international markets .
Port authorities and enterprises have a key role to play , since they can interlink land and sea transport in ways that will multiply the present level of productivity .
But of course , it is the State and Community authorities which bear the greatest responsibility , because it is up to them to secure conditions of competition for European shipping , reductions of financial cost , and upgrading of the human resources .
Above all , however , they should review the general framework of employment in the economy because , Commissioner , without the acceleration this involves and without much fuller employment , I am afraid that the penetration of new technology and the new industrial revolution , and with them the restoration of Europe 's former dynamic status , will be postponed indefinitely .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the chemical industry is facing constantly growing worldwide competition , especially with all the companies that can produce at lower costs .
This has already affected employment in Europe .
It is an industrial branch that is export-oriented and should remain so for economic reasons , in order to give further support to the European economy .
This branch of industry provides high-grade jobs in chemistry and in related industries , such as the automobile industry and the computer industry , since it can offer solutions which it has developed .
So it is important if not vital for the chemical industry , as a highly innovative branch of industry , to promote new development in forward-looking disciplines , such as biotechnology , which can lead to new products and processes and also reduce the burden on our environment .
However , European companies responsible for these innovations should have the same protection under patent law as those in other parts of the world .
On the question of environmental protection : we must realise that modern environmental protection , as practised in Europe and all the other industrialized countries , is inconceivable without the chemical industry - we need think only of the catalytic converter .
There is a great environmental potential here .
So we should support the chemical industry in its endeavour to resolve environmental problems .
Special attention should be devoted to small and medium-sized chemical companies .
Often it is they that develop and apply the new technologies that lead to definite improvements in existing products .
Quite often this also creates new jobs .
Such companies should be granted start-up aid by suitable measures such as the provision of risk capital .
Above all , their lives and survival should be made easier by deregulation .
The chemical industry is one of the few industrial branches in Europe that has on principle not required state aid because it was always able to restructure by itself and to adapt to the constantly changing situation on the world markets .
Our political aim must be to support it in this in future and not to hamper it by over-regulating .
Finally , many thanks to Mr Langen for his very good report and for accepting the proposals of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at least I have one thing in common with Mrs Heinisch and Mr Langen , namely that we are all aware of the special responsibility of the chemical industry .
Otherwise , we do not really see eye to eye .
Let me make a few comments in this regard .
I am convinced that the chemical industry - and the Committee on the Environment shares my conviction - has a special responsibility for healthy , environment-friendly products and for healthy , environment-friendly production .
The conclusions the Committee on the Environment draws from this - Mr Langen is shaking his head , but luckily he said this in his statement too - are different from those drawn by Mr Langen , the chemical industry and Mrs Heinisch .
For in view of the tensions facing the chemical industry we must do two things , on the one hand to generous with the chemical industry but on the other hand be strict with it .
What does that actually mean , to be generous and yet to be strict with it - and , incidentally , also with the Commissioner ?
Mr Langen interrupted by saying something the others did not understand .
I shall have something to say on that in a moment .
Nor will I try to dissect his report in detail , although it would be easy to do .
If I did so I would sound like a primary school teacher .
To be generous with the chemical industry does indeed mean to give it the measure of reliability , of status , that it needs .
To be strict with it means ensuring that it produces products that do not damage our environment and our health .
So there are a few faults to find with Mr Langen 's report , which the Committee on the Environment does not support as it stands and which my group luckily will not support as it stands either - but I am saying this by the way .
We in the Committee on the Environment are currently working on a report on voluntary agreements , in which we attempt to clarify what voluntary agreements can achieve and what they cannot .
They can certainly not replace legislation .
Nor do I agree with Mr Langen that it is urgently necessary to reduce the number of environmental rules in order to offset locational disadvantages .
That is why I do not find it acceptable for the report to anticipate a result which this Parliament has not yet decided on .
Moreover , lower energy prices are not something this Parliament has emphasized in the past .
One last point and I shall finish .
For a long time this Parliament debated a CO2 energy tax without results .
I admire the courage of my colleague in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in talking about it , but saying so little also produces mistakes and therefore both I and the Committee on the Environment consider this part wrong .
The maritime industries have been considered dated , in decline and that is not true .
It is not true , ladies and gentlemen , because there are no obsolete industries ; there are obsolete technologies .
It is true that at this moment the European shipbuilding industry - to be specific naval shipbuilding - accounts for only 20 % of the world market , but that figure could be greatly increased .
Maritime industries include not only the building of naval vessels and ship repairs ; they include also the harbour services , the industries which use maritime resources such as fishing , the farming of fish , shellfish and algae and above all the industries engaged in extracting oil and gas from under the sea .
There is therefore much to do in Europe , but we must clearly make far-reaching changes beginning with training for those working in these sectors , first modernizing and updating our industries -and I want to mention oil tankers .
There are at the present time some 3 600 oil tankers navigating the globe - and 10 % of them need to be scrapped forthwith since they do not meet the requirements .
Europe has seen the most serious oil-spillage accidents , although only 30 % of oil passes through our ports .
In addition 10 % of capacity needs to be replaced .
That is 700 new double-hulled oil tankers need to be built incorporating electronic security systems for safe navigation .
The European Union , our industries , could build a large proportion of those 700 vessels .
Many more oil rigs could also be built and a new specialist industry could be built up for the scrapping of oil rigs .
We have over 40 abandoned oil rigs which need to be scrapped and I do not know whether we are prepared with the industry which that requires .
Finally , in the fields of research as well as of energy we have much work to do and we have put various requests to the Commission - and Mr Katiforis has been good enough to include our requests in his report .
These include ensuring that the existing directives are complied with so that vessels entering our harbours are safe .
Moreover we think that the Commission should draw up first a recommendation then a regulation on the replacement of obsolete oil tankers - and there are 700 of them , ladies and gentlemen , as I said .
The new ones must be doublehulled with twin engine rooms , dual propulsion system with separate cargo bay and equipped with the necessary electronic devices .
But we are also of the opinion that the European Union 's maritime terminals and other ports - and we have the power to make this compulsory - should have the facilities required to receive domestic waste , spent oil and waste water and thus to help to improve the environment as a whole .
Mr President , following on from what has already been said , I would stress that what makes the maritime industries special is their close involvement in the international trading activities of the European Union .
That is why the Committee on External Economic Relations has already done so much work on the maritime industries and shipbuilding in particular , such as the report which it drew up in 1995 on the OECD agreement on competitive conditions in the shipbuilding and ship repair sector .
Ninety per cent of our external trade and 30 % of our internal trade goes by sea , keeping two and a half million people in jobs .
The role of maritime transport is set to increase , especially in connection with the Mediterranean partnership and cooperation with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , such as Poland and the Baltic States .
It is regrettable that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has failed to take account of much of the work done by the Committee on External Economic Relations and many of the recommendations in our report , a fact which I find very disappointing .
It is extremely significant , I believe , that shipbuilding is doing very well in places which have been able to adapt to new technologies .
And where is it struggling ?
Precisely in those areas where competitive conditions are poor and there is unfair competition .
The biggest threat to European shipbuilding is that it is far too occupied with its own affairs , instead of working together to try to establish its position on the international market .
The entry into force of the OECD agreement will be vitally important for European shipbuilding , and I have to say that the position adopted by the United States , as the only country which has not yet ratified it , is very disappointing .
I think it is vital for us to have fair competition within Europe , and for us to try to encourage fair competition internationally through the OECD agreement .
Finally , reference has been made to the need to step up activities in the field of research and development .
I would add that this costs a good deal of money and must not be allowed to result in further differences in operating conditions for the maritime industry in Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in its 1994 communication on an industrial competitiveness policy for the European Union the Commission presented a strategy for a horizontal approach to a modern industrial policy .
Promoting immaterial investment , improving industrial cooperation , ensuring fair conditions of competition and modernizing the public authorities are still fields of action of strategic importance to the competitiveness of the industrial sectors we are considering today .
In its resolution at that time , Parliament laid strong emphasis on the importance of this approach but also drew attention to other points ; I want to address two of them .
The first point is that the guideline for industrial development is socially-oriented and environmentally compatible products and product innovations .
Secondly , we pointed out that besides the recognized growth areas , such as communications technologies , biotechnology , environmental technologies , in short hi-tech , great emphasis must also be placed on stabilizing and improving the competitiveness of traditional industrial sectors .
By this I do not mean old industries but existing sectors that must remain competitive by being modernized , taking competitiveness as meaning a high user quality and high environmental quality of the products in question .
In any case I regard the term ' obsolete industries ' as dubious .
In Germany an entire branch is currently being brought into disrepute by the use of this term , which is ruining not just that branch but also the net product chain including its modern technologies .
But that is what happens when auto-liberal waffle takes the place of modern industrial policy .
Nobody in the chemical industry or the automobile industry dreams of talking about obsolete technologies .
Rightly so !
For they are the two most important manufacturing industries with their 3.5 million jobs and the world market shares they still retain , which goes to show that they are key industries for the European economy .
In the case of the maritime industry Mr Katiforis indeed pointed out that it too was until recently regarded as obsolete .
Only in recent years did people begin to realise again that for economic and strategic reasons its decline must not only be checked but in fact transformed into a recovery .
So let me just indicate two aspects of strategic importance to the sectors we are discussing today .
The first is the importance of investment in education , training and continuous training , but not only with a view to improving technical skills .
It is just as important to promote and foster the creativity of all those involved in the production process .
In that sense , social dialogue has a key role to play in improving competitiveness .
The second is the need for the sustainable development of high-grade , quality products using clean technology , i.e. not environmental after-care when the damage has been done , but environmentally compatible products and processes .
Only then is it justified to use the term the Commission takes as the heading for its communication on the chemical industry : an example .
Mr President , during 1996 the number of newly registered cars within the EU increased by 6.5 percent .
However , this is a considerably lower figure than at the end of the 1980 's and the beginning of the 1990 's .
This is , in my opinion , a growing problem as the vehicle parc is simply getting too old .
It is a step in the wrong direction , especially in the light of the fact that all new cars on European roads are both safer and more environmentally friendly than a car whose next stop is the scrap yard .
Bearing in mind that nearly 50 , 000 people are killed every year on the roads of Europe and that vehicles , especially cars , are a major factor in our environmental problems , it is important to reach the kind of decision which will favour the development and wellbeing of the car industry in Europe .
In the light of the Donnelly report and the previous debate concerning Renault , there is cause for wondering whether we politicians really ought to try and influence the course of events .
Of course , there is no doubting the serious implications of the possible close down of the Renault factory in Vilvoorde in Belgium .
However , at the same time we politicians should move cautiously when it comes to interfering with a company 's plans for the location of its operations as our actions may result in the company establishing its business not in Belgium nor Spain or anywhere else within the EU for that matter , but outside Europe 's borders .
Then we will all have lost out .
In my opinion , it would instead be beneficial to turn the EU 's car industry into a leader .
I believe that we politicians have a greater opportunity for influence here , as parts of Europe 's car industry are already leaders , in areas such as for example increased safety measures .
Several companies are also making significant progress in research into hybrid vehicles or battery technology , for example , in order to find alternatives to the current internalcombustion engine .
This must , as I see it , be one of the most fundamental challenges within the environmental area .
It should be welcomed .
I am convinced that Europe 's car industry can succeed in taking up the challenge and developing an alternative which is both competitive and commercially feasible .
It may take 10 , 15 or 20 years , but the car industry will succeed provided that we do not put any further pressure on it .
My question to Commissioner Bangemann is whether the members of the Commission are willing to draw up and work diligently towards such an environmental target .
Mr President , a well-known European motor manufacturer recently received publicity in the French newspapers which demonstrated the defects of the motor car , reminding us that it causes pollution , and is dangerous and costly .
Nevertheless , that company and every other European company continues to produce cars and is trying to eliminate these defects every day , making the car safer , more accessible , cheaper , less polluting , and so on , because the car is our daily companion for recreation and , more importantly , work .
This effort is also called for by the rapporteur , whom I congratulate , and the Committee on Economic Affairs as a whole , in the resolution we are debating .
It is our duty to confront and overcome the problems of today 's motor car so that we have increasingly suitable vehicles tomorrow .
More generally , the economic , social and hence occupational role of the motor car is now being reviewed from top to bottom . The progressive automation of factories and the loss of jobs involve drastic changes in a sector which is suffering from a consumption crisis but which has directly provided some 2 million jobs up to now , not to mention the indirect jobs .
So we have two demands : the first is the acceleration of the renewal of the current stock of obsolete and polluting motor vehicles - particularly lorries and buses - in part through the fiscal measures and allowances envisaged .
I am thinking especially of Italy , where the government could finally extend the right of companies to deduct the VAT paid on the purchase of vehicles .
This would reduce the incidence of VAT on the overall economic activity of the firm .
This must take place by strengthening the internal market and placing clear conditions on the non-European market : we must confront the United States and Japan on the safety and efficiency of the car , as established in Washington in April 1996 .
The second demand is to develop the car of tomorrow and transform the current European task force so that it takes on a strategic and pro-active coordinating role , using its resources primarily to protect the environment and develop the skills of those who work or might eventually work in the sector .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing taken together three sectors which are of enormous importance in the European Union 's production system : the chemical industry , the automobile manufacturing industry and the maritime industries .
They all have problems in adjusting to the great challenge which the European Union itself accepted with the GATT Uruguay Round and its effects for progressively greater commercial openness at world level .
Our competitors are no longer , as was traditional , the United States and Japan , but in addition to those countries the emerging economies with cost structures which make them very competitive on the international markets .
It would be very negative if we were to allow the difficulties of some companies in these sectors - which have become particularly apparent over the past week - to lead us into a protectionist position , trying to protect certain markets and avoiding international competition .
I think that what European industry needs to do - and the Commission needs to give guidance - is to increase competitiveness , as considered in the various reports , avoiding all temptation to embrace protectionism .
We must consider which are the most important aspects and try to strengthen the three areas mentioned in former President Delors 's White Paper , that is improving research and development , improving external markets - and , of course , international promotion - and improving education and training .
Mr President , in March the European Parliament adopted my report on industrial relocation both within the EU and worldwide .
Now the Renault case has given the Commission cause to take some of the measures called for by Parliament in that report .
The Commission proposes to investigate the ways in which businesses relocate to areas where they receive support from areas in respect of which no support is paid .
The European Parliament also called for the Commission to set up a monitoring unit to collect information on the relocation of businesses .
I should now like to know whether the Commission , spurred on by the Renault case , intends to set up such a monitoring unit to analyse the reasons for which businesses change their places of activity .
I give you the floor , Mr Blokland , for two minutes thirty seconds .
You will the last speaker and the sitting will then be suspended and resumed at 3 p.m.

Mr President , what has struck me about this morning 's debate is that the different views expressed have more to do with the nationality of the speaker than with the political background .
There are still differences in the way in which the industrial sector is regarded in the Member States .
In Belgium it has a positive image , while in the Netherlands it is more negative .
European industry is facing three challenges .
The first is sustainability , and the main question is how we can maintain our natural resources .
Energy and clean water are the biggest problem areas here .
Achieving sustainability requires around 50 years ' forward planning , and this is beyond the individual producer .
It is thus the job of governments and scientists to convince producers and consumers of the need for change .
It is striking that the chemical industry is not convinced that a CO2 tax would be effective and calls instead for voluntary undertakings .
This is a perfectly understandable position , but it is untenable in the long term .
One field where I do not welcome the market ideology is biotechnology and genetic technology , and I think the public is right to be concerned about the ethical problems and risks involved here .
The second challenge concerns research and development .
European industry is doing a great deal in this field , but not enough in comparison with the United States and Japan .
Governments cannot carry on using tax incentives to encourage innovation for ever , since there is so little room for manoeuvre .
What is most worrying is the fact that there is less and less interest in scientific research , which could mean that we shall fall behind in our levels of training and know-how , yet these are the very things that we need to keep up if we are to deal with other challenges .
Finally , there is the issue of cooperation , and not just industrial cooperation : the Member States must also make an effort to harmonize the various requirements which apply to products and semi-finished goods .
The differences in regulations are hampering trade .
Secondly , we must try to bring about the accession of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe as quickly as possible , which industry rightly recognizes as being in our interests .
It is disconcerting to see , however , that the Intergovernmental Conference seems so reluctant to get to grips with the fundamental restructuring of the European institutions .
Madam President , something very disturbing happened this morning : on a request for urgency on Italian fisheries - the conversion of certain fisheries activities practised by Italian fishermen - it was not possible to take the recorded vote we have regularly called for .
The UPE group was in favour of urgency .
Unfortunately we did not have the option of a recorded vote .
I asked for the floor in vain , I was not allowed to speak .
Unfortunately , because of this unpleasant incident , Italian fishermen were not able to make their voice heard in this Chamber .
The issue of the ' spadare ' is an emergency facing employment , vessels and fishermen in Italy . Unfortunately we were not able to deal with this sensitive issue .
I repeat : we were in favour of urgency because it could have solved an longstanding problem ; we could have given the signal Italian fishermen are awaiting from this Parliament .
The Council and the Commission were in favour , but unfortunately Parliament decided to reject urgency , denying us the chance of a recorded vote .
Mr Tajani , if you were treated unfairly this morning , I think you have now had a chance to express yourself very freely , speaking longer than the one minute allocated to you .
Mr President , I do not want to start a debate but only say that this Parliament decided to take that position because a serious Parliament must have the time to do its work .
So we voted to look at the matter in April , as we undertook to do in committee .
Votes
Madam President , I should like to thank those Members who have placed their trust in this report .
I should also like to say how astonished I am at the position adopted by the PPE Group , with whom we negotiated long and patiently to reach agreement as far as possible .
In spite of all our efforts , they still voted against the report , and I have to say that I cannot understand why .
Madam President , Mrs Van Lancker is quite right .
We did have various discussions to try to reach a joint position between our two groups .
A number of compromise amendments were proposed , but there were also a number of points on which we were unable to reach a compromise , particularly in connection with asylum policy and immigration policy , and it was for this reason , because the Socialist Group did not share our views , that we were obliged to vote against .
But Mrs Van Lancker was quite right , we did have a number of discussions .
Our Parliament is deciding today on a technical adaptation of a legal instrument , with the object of reducing aeroplane noise .
Under this directive , aeroplanes originating in developing countries will be granted exemptions in relation to landing rights .
Through the report by my colleague Mr van der Waal , our parliamentary committee is asking the European Commission to define the term ' developing nation ' .
Indeed we must not level accusations against a country like Saudi Arabia on the grounds of the exemptions granted for some of its aeroplanes .
However , we must also note that these are private aircraft and that to grant them excessive exemptions would restrict those that might be granted to the aeroplanes of national companies in developing countries , since the text provides for a limited number of exemptions for these countries overall .
Noise nuisance is a crucial problem for areas bordering on airports and a solution must be found that is acceptable to all parties concerned .
I hope the Commission will take account of our position .
I have voted for the report .
Certain developing countries cannot fulfil the requirements of a low noise level , making exceptions necessary .
However , the number of exceptions should not increase .
It is unacceptable that private airlines in ' rich ' developing countries such as Saudi Arabia and Lebanon should account for most of the exceptions while the ' poor ' developing countries such as Uganda and Zimbabwe are granted only a few .
This report is acceptable to the Green Group in the European Parliament because it allows the Member States the scope to introduce more sweeping measures to prevent noise from aircraft .
Amendment No 9 also removes the exemption for Saudi Arabia , which is hardly a poor developing country and where the aircraft are in fact privately owned .
However , these few technical measures are only some of what is necessary to reduce this increasing source of noise pollution .
The Commission 's Green Paper on noise and its communication on a strategy against noise pollution indicate that wider European restrictions , such as on night flights to all European airports , will have to be considered .
This should ensure that in the fierce competition between the neighbouring Euregio airports of Bierset , Beek and Cologne-Bonn , for example , flights are not transferred to the airport applying the least strict rules , in this case from Cologne-Bonn to Bierset .
Caccavale report ( A4-0010 / 97 )
It is important that consumers ' interests are safeguarded and strengthened on the consumer credit market .
However , the report goes too far in the direction of harmonisation towards a single European civil law that I cannot support .
As pointed out by the Committee , harmonised mortgage loans cannot be supported as these vary considerably in regard to the financial regulatory systems of Member States .
Van Lancker report ( A4-0014 / 97 )
Madam President , the Van Lancker report is based on a premise that has done considerable damage to Europe over recent years .
It suggests that questions of security or controlling immigration do not come top of the list and that the main thing is rapidly to abolish border controls in order to promote the merging of nations .
We are dealing here with the advance of an ideology that tramples the citizen underfoot .
The document before us regrets , for example , that the implementation of the Schengen agreements is geared mainly to restricting migration and to maintaining law and order .
Everyone with a grain of common sense is more worried that is doing the opposite .
Moreover , as usual the report calls for the abolition of all internal border controls , including checks on nationals of third countries .
It even encourages a new fad , the supposed need to guarantee a procedure for applicants at the external borders to appeal against refusal of access as though , over and above specific cases of the right of asylum , there was a general right for foreigners to enter the territories of the Union countries .
This position says a lot about the underlying implications and intentions of the European Parliament , which , let us not forget , is also calling for new powers in relation to immigration .
In this context , it is no surprise to find that the majority of this Parliament is in favour of relaxing the compensatory measures provided for under the Schengen agreements .
My group , on the contrary , would like to see them tightened .
During yesterday 's debate I already referred to fact that the system of declarations of entry into EU territory which nationals of third countries have to deposit is not working at all .
Let me add another example , drawn from recent French experience .
Our National Assembly has just adopted in second reading an immigration bill providing that any foreigner who leaves French territory must hand in his residence permit to the police services .
But what will he do if he leaves France via an internal Community border where , in principle , these checks would no longer exist ?
The chairman of our law committee agreed on the need to reopen negotiations with our Schengen partners .
That is therefore a new point to be added to the list of complementary measures .
It would be more useful to resolve this kind of practical problem than to reach for the sky by abolishing frontiers .
Madam President , I would like to give an explanation of vote both on my own behalf and that of the British Labour Members here .
We finally voted in favour of this report because there was a very great deal in it that we believe is right and needs to be said and should be supported by this Parliament .
However , I want to make it clear that there are some parts of this report on which we have grave reservations .
They relate in particular to the later paragraphs , from paragraph 47 onwards .
We cannot support and indeed voted against those paragraphs which call for the end of unanimity in Council on justice and home affairs issues ; we cannot support calls for total judicial control over free movement by the Court of Justice ; and we cannot support calls for communitization of third pillar issues .
These are matters which we and our party back home are clear on and we cannot go along with them .
But we voted in favour of the report as a whole because we believe that the many things it says that need to be said and the good in it outweigh our reservations about it .
I wanted to make those explanations .
Madam President , the EPP Group voted against Mrs van Lancker 's report because we are in favour of the Schengen process on principle , because we recognize that Schengen has brought more freedom of movement in Europe and has therefore also allowed many citizens to experience positive European developments for themselves .
We must also underline that the dismantling of internal border controls must go hand in hand with better protection of our external borders .
The Schengen process does indeed make provision for the need to make our external borders more secure when the internal border controls are dismantled .
We must also make quite sure that the Schengen report is not used as a pretext for interfering in any national asylum policies .
There have now been a number of changes to asylum law in Europe , mainly with the aim of preventing any abuse of it , and this endeavour must not be undermined via a Schengen report .
For all these reasons , and because we are in favour of Schengen , we decided to vote against this report , which does not take account of these considerations .
Madam President , I should just like to comment on what the rapporteur said about the discussions held between the Socialist Group and the PPE Group .
These were successful on a number of points where the report was improved , but there were also a number of fundamental issues which we felt were unsatisfactory , and we were finally obliged to vote against them .
I consider legal and illegal immigration to be a very important issue , and it is one of the major social problems facing our countries today .
Illegal immigration is on the increase , and it is even happening on an organized scale .
It is not a coincidence that hundreds or even thousands of people from Ghana should appear at certain periods .
It is not because the situation in Ghana has suddenly deteriorated , but because ' people-trafficking ' has now become big business .
The European Union , or the Schengen area in this particular case , must not be laid open to this kind of abuse .
In other words , I agree with what Mr Nassauer said : the fact that we have abolished our internal borders does not mean that our external borders can be left unprotected .
We cannot vote for this report .
We have a number of reservations about several points concerning the arrangement of the Schengen Agreement .
The possibility that Sweden as a member of Schengen would have to extend the list of countries whose citizens are required to possess a visa when visiting Sweden has met with criticism .
We have also expressed concern that this will , in various roundabout ways , result in a more restrictive refugee policy in our country .
There is also a question mark over whether Sweden as a member of Schengen will be able to determine independently the level of its controls at its " internal ' borders .
This question has also aroused apprehension in the debate in Sweden .
It has , among other things , been pointed out that Sweden may have problems with the future harmonisation of the drugs policy of the Schengen countries .
We do not yet know the implications that the removal of border controls between the Schengen countries will have on the younger generation as regards drug tourism .
The Schengen collaboration is an interstate co-operation .
This we believe is good .
However , it does mean that each country has a right to say yes or no to whether they want to participate in each of the interstate forms of cooperation .
We should of course open up Europe for its people , which for us means giving people the opportunity to travel freely without the need for a visa and to be able to work anywhere in Europe .
We do not believe that border controls aimed at preventing the free movement of drugs , weapons , crime , etc. conflicts with the principle of mobility for the people .
It is not a barrier to the mobility of people to have to show a passport at the border .
Under items 31 and 32 of the report , France 's border controls against Belgium and Luxembourg and the use of these to put pressure on the Netherlands to adopt a more restrictive drugs policy is being criticised .
We cannot support this report .
First of all , we believe that individual countries must be entitled to maintain such border controls as they deem necessary to prevent for example the inflow of narcotics .
Secondly , we believe that France is doing the right thing in applying pressure on the Netherlands to alter their irresponsible drugs policy .
' Yes ' to Schengen , ' no ' to a fortress Europe : that is the watchword of the report we discussed today .
That does not worry us , but we are concerned about Schengen acting as a brake on free movement and security , actually becoming a pretext for hermetically sealed frontiers accompanied by the establishment of new administrative controls which may attack individual freedom and the rights of Community citizens themselves first , and then citizens from third countries who are legally resident in Community territory .
The right to free movement and security must come under democratic control and hence the vigilance of the national parliaments , so that national legislation is adapted to the Schengen agreements in full respect of international conventions on asylum , protection of individual privacy and human rights .
But the limited duration of the agreement , the absence of transparency , the lack of parliamentary control over it , and the delay in replacing it with Community legislation demonstrate that the various Member States have little enthusiasm for abolishing controls at their internal frontiers .
In our view , the only thing that remains to be done is to get the most out of existing measures .
We believe that the information system , much criticized because it is currently used as a database for undesirable foreigners , should be geared to the need to prevent real dangers and specific crimes and therefore obey the technical requirements of security .
We concur with Mr Van Lancker in asking for the European Parliament to be informed about planned measures and decisions relating to all third pillar justice and home affairs matters , with a view to bringing that sector finally into the Community .
Finally , in our opinion , to debate issues inherent to the agreement like free movement of persons , asylum policies , external frontiers , legal information , the fight against the drug traffic , international fraud and organized crime , we need to open up a discussion which will end in the abolition of the unanimity rule in the Council .
Anttila , Lindqvist , Ryynänen , Virrankoski and Väyrynen ( ELDR ) , Seppänen , Sjöstedt and Svensson ( GUE / NGL ) , Gahrton , Holm and Schörling ( V ) , Bonde , Lis Jensen and Sandbæk ( I-EDN ) , in writing .
( SV ) We fully agree with Mrs Van Lancker 's criticism of the Schengen Agreement as regards the apprehension over ' fortress Europe ' , the policy for dealing with people seeking asylum and how SIS is used primarily as a data base for ' unwanted Third World citizens ' , etc .
Our list of criticisms of Schengen is very long .
We do not , however , share Mrs Van Lancker 's conclusion regarding the legal incorporation of the Schengen Agreement into the Treaty .
For this reason , we are voting against the report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Schengen agreements were initially intended to guarantee the free movement of the citizens and residents of Europe by abolishing internal frontiers while strengthening police and judicial cooperation at the Union 's external frontiers .
Today , however , the philosophy of Schengen has been substantially modified , to the advantage of ' Fortress Europe ' .
The application , monitoring and administration of Schengen are , at present , still obscure and essentially geared to security , for it has been diverted from its initial aims .
So where is the European spirit ?
The Schengen dimension has itself been distorted .
Moreover , France is not always prepared to abolish its customs controls with Belgium and Luxembourg .
This is bad in terms of Schengen 's image and , indeed , totally ineffective .
The situation is serious enough to deserve condemnation .
Certainly , we must consider the need to protect the Union from clandestine immigration , but does that mean we have to resort to uncontrolled procedures and multiply the administrative constraints which , in the final analysis , jeopardize human rights ?
I say NO .
As the rapporteur points out , the Union must live up to its ambitions .
If we want to combat clandestine immigration effectively , we will have to have common policies on the right of asylum , external borders and the fight against crime .
Once the third pillar becomes reality , we will manage to check the flows of migrations effectively and to combat all forms of crime equally effectively .
I hope therefore that the intergovernmental conference will reach conclusions in its debates and that the governments will take account of our recommendations and expectations !
We can hope and dream ... but the information we have so far on the progress of the current negotiations does not inspire much optimism .
I am always somewhat surprised by the way the European Parliament approaches the Schengen agreements and by its deep distrust of the endeavour to protect a fundamental freedom of the people , their freedom of movement .
It is without doubt essential to have genuine parliamentary and judicial control within the intergovernmental Schengen system .
In an area where fundamental freedoms are at stake , the people have to be protected against arbitrary administrative and police action , whether they are Europeans or third-country nationals .
So I fundamentally agree with the report when it maintains that ' the abolition of checks at internal frontiers must not be accompanied by the introduction of new administrative checks which would infringe human rights ' .
There is , however , a real problem : the rise in international crime , the growing sense of insecurity among the people , the inability of the national authorities to combat crime at European level by themselves , the need to act here and now in the interests of Europe .
Of course we can argue interminably about the powers of the national parliaments , the institutionalization of the CSA or the proposals to the IG on the third pillar .
For the people , however , what is most important is direct action in the field , to achieve results that will improve internal security .
. ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats voted against the Van Lancker report because it contains many points that conflict with Denmark 's reservations as regards cooperation on justice and home affairs .
The report expresses concern over the lack of democratic control of the Schengen arrangements , in which neither the European Parliament nor the Court of Justice are sufficiently involved .
There may be some justification for this view but , for as long as the cooperation is intergovernmental , it is the job of the national parliaments to exercise democratic control .
If the structure of the Schengen cooperation is to be changed , that must happen within the framework of the Intergovernmental Conference .
The report wants the Schengen Agreement to be integrated into general Community law .
The Danish Social Democrats take a sceptical view of this , since we wish to maintain the Nordic Passport Union alongside the Schengen cooperation .
On behalf of the Spanish Partido Popular delegation in the PPE and speaking personally also , I should like to draw attention to the following aspects in the Van Lancker report .
In general terms , the line taken by the PPE , the various public utterances of its members , both those who hold government office in the Member States as well as in particular those within the group in this House , have clearly shown that we are in favour of developing the freedom of movement specified in the Schengen Treaty and even more of the need to incorporate Schengen within the institutional framework of the Treaty on European Union and within the Community framework of the internal market - the development of the fourth freedom - the freedom of movement of persons - as laid down in Article 7A .
Similarly it is clear - and it goes without saying that the PPE as a whole and in particular the current Government of Spain of which it forms part and the Members on whose behalf I am speaking - have always fully defended the need for a joint approach on the part of the Community institutions to the great transnational problems facing the European Union in the realm of the third pillar and we are particularly keen to see the creation of a common area of freedom and security .
But we are against the partisan , partial and therefore methodological and legally incorrect use by any particular party of a resolution with the characteristics which emerged from the final vote .
In fact this is not the forum for debating asylum policy , still less to nod through requests so fraught with inappropriate consequences , such as the automatic suspension of resources in any asylum proceedings .
We are therefore clearly in favour of strengthening the principles which inspired Schengen : abolishing internal frontiers and instead having stronger external European Union borders .
Our final vote against the report must be seen in this light .
I want to voice my disagreement with certain sections of Mrs Van Lancker 's report , as a French MEP but also on behalf of Jacques Donnay , MEP and president of the Conseil général du Nord .
We should pay particular attention to problems linked to drugs , since this is , unfortunately , a serious matter for the Department of the North .
A few figures are worth repeating : over a period of four years , the number of drug addicts charged in the Nord - Pas-de-Calais region has more than doubled .
That same region has the highest rate of summonses relating to traffic offences and drugs use in the country .
This is no doubt related to the region 's economic vulnerability , but also to geographical factors .
Our proximity to states that do not apply the same policies we do in this respect encourages a traffic that has spread far beyond our urban centres and affects the entire territory .
In this context , we can only hope that temporarily at least some form of border controls will remain .
That is why I oppose Mrs Van Lancker 's report where it refers and alludes to drugs controls in France , notably in unamended paragraphs 5 , 31 and 32 .
Of course this border surveillance can only complement the policies we are carrying out in the field : the North has taken a number of measures whose effectiveness is generally recognized .
In any case , in all these areas I actively support closer cooperation with the Netherlands and Belgium in the search for means of reducing the damage caused by drugs .
We must join forces in order to become more effective in the area of prevention , treatment and research .
I believe everyone shares these concerns .
That is the purpose of the first Franco-Dutch meetings on drugs now taking place in Lille , with the participation of our Belgian neighbours .
Wim van Velzen report ( A4-0045 / 97 )
I want to draw particular attention to three points raised in Mr van Velzen 's excellent report .
The first is the importance of the universal service , in the context of liberalizing telecommunications , especially for certain peripheral areas , but also for certain population groups .
If the information society is confined to certain urban centres and socio-occupational groups this will lead to a two-tier society that is fundamentally unequal and unfair in terms of general access to the most up-to-date know-how .
Secondly , it is important to create legislation on the media which , by limiting their convergence , will help safeguard and stimulate pluralism of opinion and freedom of expression for all .
Thirdly , it is important to protect the consumer .
At present the information market is chaotic .
The ordinary consumer - I am not talking about the specialist - has to spend large and sometimes unnecessary sums on equipment .
The European consumer should therefore be offered access by means of an objective agency that will protect him against the dominant position of imports from Japan and the United States .
These considerations , the Green Paper , the report by the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , must rapidly lead to practical decisions with a view to rendering the information society more dynamic while also rendering it useful to all concerned .
We are voting for the report .
Decentralised and network orientated business organisations with flatter hierarchies are good .
The same goes for shorter working hours , teleworking , investment in small businesses with the whole population and all regions being given the same opportunity to participate in the development of the information society .
This should in principle be decided and put into effect by all the social partners in the labour-market and by individual Member States .
There is , in our opinion , no reason for the EU to legislate on this .
We are also against a collective fiscal policy within the Union .
. ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats voted in favour of the Van Velzen report on the Commission 's Green Paper on Living and Working in the Information Society .
The Commission 's Green Paper is strongly criticized for laying too much emphasis in its analysis of the information society on work , jobs and the competitiveness of the economy .
The report therefore calls for more emphasis to be placed on how best the information society can be organized to benefit the individual , so that all get equal access to the information society .
The report opens up a broad debate on continuing training , teleworking and parttime employment , which will have much greater importance in the future .
The Danish Social Democrats take a positive view of a broader debate on the consequences of the information society for the individual and therefore consider that Mr Van Velzen has opened up an exciting discussion .
However , the report contains certain points on which the Danish Social Democrats are sceptical .
The Danish Social Democrats do not think that there is any immediate need at European level for legislative action to regulate matters affecting working conditions as a result of the development of the information society .
The application of technological innovations , especially those that are certain to create deep rifts in the structure of society , can be justified on no criterion other than man himself , and his needs . Under no circumstances can innovations justify disregard for their human basis and subjugate man to technology and to the savage laws of the capitalist market .
We have in our hands a Green Paper on ' Living and Working in the Information Society ' , whose letter let alone spirit do nothing to advocate the priority of the human factor and respect for the rights of working people .
We have before us a draft for the conversion of man into a mere cog-wheel , and indeed one of the cheapest and most flexible on the market .
The proposals made and the measures promoted are dominated by the concepts of market cost and competitiveness , and intensify the effort to deprive working people of their rights and acquisitions , and to cripple and dislocate the very concept of labour .
The control of working people and citizens is becoming ever more effective with the disorganization of labour protection systems , working time , social welfare , health and safety .
Those measures are not a natural consequence of the rate of development and application of technologies , information and communications .
The driving force for this policy is the huge amount of finance devoted to the acquisition of vast and quick profits .
The Green Paper makes it clear with the most cynical frankness that ' the proposed social model is based on competition between enterprises ' and calls for a ' stable and dedicated nucleus of working people ' prepared to serve the needs of companies for rapid adaptation to market developments .
It is therefore quite clear where and how the new technologies are to be used : wherever and however they can generate greater profits .
The future of man in such a society is evident : uncertainty , insecurity , and conflict with his own needs , which will no longer shape his environment but be shaped by it , so as to serve those who determine that environment in the best , quickest and cheapest way .
Plans such as those of tele-working and the isolation of people from the social context are plans to lobotomize man and turn him into a cheap and pliable raw material for profit .
They are plans to create multiple-speed societies , societies of the one-third and the categorisation of citizens and working people , societies in which the unemployed , the aged , and the retired will be marginalized .
In clause 23 of the report the establishment of a ' European authority ' for data protection is proposed .
I do not believe that the citizens of Europe benefit from this continuous demand for new authorities under the auspices of the EU .
The probability is that this will create even more bureaucracy .
I believe that the problem is best solved through national authorities .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Industrial competitiveness ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on the reports by Mr Donnelly , Mr Langen and Mr Katiforis .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin my two minutes ' speaking time in the debate on industrial policy by repeating that it is imperative for us to have a European industrial policy based on voluntary agreement .
Our economic strength , our independence , our future , and above all our employment and unemployment rate depend on that .
This is true of the maritime industry , it is true of the chemical industry and it is true of the automobile industry .
In relation to the automobile industry , I first want to congratulate Mr Donnelly on the quality of his report and congratulate the Commissioner and the Commission on its responsible Communication .
Of course I am in favour of setting up a panel of representatives of the automobile and components industries , trades unions and user groups in order to define our future priorities and research strategies .
Research efforts are needed to reduce pollution caused by motors , of course , but also if not above all by fuels .
We must also continue with our efforts to improve safety .
There are still far too many casualties and fatalities on our roads .
All this is important .
But , ladies and gentlemen , above all we must protect the European automobile industry as such from unfair and unjust competition and social dumping and do our utmost to develop it .
This can be done by looking at all our European directives and decisions , asking the same question each time : will it promote employment , will it lead to a rise in production , consumption and market shares ?
Lastly , and this is what I regret most on reading the documents under discussion today , the human dimension , the social dimension is missing .
This morning 's debate on Renault made that clear and the scandal of delocalization is even more serious in relation to the building of Europe .
Without a political and social Europe , the rest is but crocodile tears .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Christian Democrats support the basic lines of the Commission 's communication on Europe 's maritime future .
Parliament also takes the view that as one of the largest trading blocs in the world the European Union needs a competitive maritime industry in the long term too .
But the broad outline is a little vague , Commissioner , and not likely to halt the decline in shipbuilding or the use of flags of convenience by ships from European shipyards .
We both know that the meetings of the Maritime Industries Forum which you initiated many years ago have not come up with any major new ideas in recent years .
There are a number of individual projects , but it seems we cannot expect much more in the way of general ideas from the Maritime Industries Forum .
And yet we , the whole Parliament , believe that we need a new approach based on intensive consultation between the Community bodies and the economic circles concerned , be they shipyards , shipbuilding firms , suppliers , port authorities , etc . , because only if the economic circles concerned commit themselves to voluntary agreements can we really secure a future for the European Community in the maritime sector .
Let me address another two or three points very openly and plainly . On no account will there be higher subsidies for shipbuilding .
People are still hoping that the OECD agreement will also be carried through in the USA and that shipbuilding subsidies can be abolished in general .
The shipyards simply have to maintain or achieve productivity and competitiveness through their own efforts .
And when I look at a country that I know well l find that the mediumsized shipyards are very much able to become competitive through their own efforts .
The only means of helping the shipyards available to us in the Community is , for example , to withdraw sub-standard ships from circulation through more stringent port controls and thereby indirectly to meet the demand for new ships .
Unfortunately the Commission has not taken up Parliament 's call for the EUROS register for maritime shipping .
Mr Bangemann , we must however reject the Commission 's current policy of allowing the Member States to apply different aid systems since this leads to distortions of competition within the Community and even carries the risk that EU shipyards will fly the flag of another European Union country if , for example , the fiscal system is more attractive in the Netherlands than in another large Member State .
Surely we cannot allow it in an internal market for shipyards to fly the flag of another country that has a more favourable tax system !
Apart from the framework conditions , which have to be uniform , the Commission must also pursue a consistent shipping policy .
We cannot have DG IV preventing or hindering alliances between European shipping companies , which are urgently necessary to the survival of these companies , by pursuing a misguided competition policy .
In that regard the Commission 's industrial policy must also encompass the right kind of competition policy .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , as a representative of a historic maritime region , Genoa , I would like to mention some of the concerns of seafaring folk who see their calling threatened by the transformation of the maritime sector .
I am particularly thinking of the employment difficulties facing young graduates of naval colleges and the fall in enrolments at naval schools .
I think we need proper competition policy on the Union 's external front , based not only on State subsidies but also on criteria for equilibrium , efficiency and protection of employees ' rights .
In this regard we are following developments in the CSCE agreements closely .
On the internal front and in terms of economic initiative , I want to emphasize some of the recommendations our rapporteurs have made : the contribution to harmonizing the maritime policies of the Member States , the investment in port infrastructure and safe traffic control systems within the framework of the trans-European networks , and the contribution to training seafarers .
I believe the Union should promote synergy through research and technological development programmes in research centres , universities and industry to generate innovation in an industrial sector which is becoming increasingly similar to aeronautics in terms of structure , equipment , control and communications .
The Union should cooperate with the Member States to promote a policy of sustainable transport , using fiscal incentives , supporting projects and completing integrated systems .
I propose specific inclusion of coastal regions undergoing transformation because of the changes in maritime transport in the structural funds intervention areas .
Finally , given the reorganization of international freight traffic , returning to the Mediterranean route via Suez for structural reasons , I invite the Commission to consider the need for a joint study with maritime sector operators of the requirements of these regions , both in terms of their strategic relevance to the Union and in the context of the new relationships of cooperation with Mediterranean third countries .
Thank you Madam President . I want to make my remarks in the context of today 's wider debate on Renault and the discussion now on industrial policy , and largely to make one basic point .
The role of Europe is to try to ensure that European industry can win a greater share both of its domestic European markets and of global markets ; and we should help to enable , not to enfeeble , European industry in the strategies we pick .
There is no doubt that unemployment is the major challenge that faces us in the next decade , and frankly in relative terms Europe is bad at creating jobs .
The problems arise in terms of the taxed wage - the difference between what people take home and what people pay them overall is a problem ; rigidity in the labour market is a problem ; and we cannot shrink from those problems if we want job creation .
What I welcome today in the Donnelly report and in the Commission 's earlier report , is that this is the type of strategy that enables .
It sets standards in environment , it sets goals for research and development , it helps to add something to the global challenge for European industry .
That is where we are best placed , and I hope we go on with that kind of policy , though not into a more dirigiste form of economic management .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in this whole cocktail of debates we are holding , I can only discuss the proposals on the chemical industry in the short time available .
First and foremost I would like to say that I do not quite understand the general attack launched by my Socialist colleague a moment ago .
Of course we Greens also voted against the Langen report as a whole , but it is not true , Mr Langen , that this changes nothing , and I want to make that quite plain here .
When we say that we take the view that economic instruments are a cost-effective means of tackling environmental problems , that is surely a step in the right direction , but of course that is not all we want to achieve today , at the end of the 20th century , in relation to the problems that chemical plants , the transport of chemicals and chemical products create in our everyday life .
That is to say , it is a small step but certainly does not mean that we and the Commission can stop there .
Let me add a few last words , and of course they are addressed specifically to Mr Bangemann , although I do not believe he will or can meet this demand during his term of office , but perhaps his successor can .
These words are as follows : if you want to formulate an industrial policy for tomorrow , you cannot focus purely on efficiency but must take into account that the environment always plays a very major and important role .
Madam President , I should of course like to thank the rapporteurs , Mr Bangemann and the Commission because in fact the Commission is presenting to us elements of European industrial policy from a sectoral point of view and that reassures many of us .
Nevertheless I should like to comment on industrial policy and consultation of the workforce on the basis of this morning 's debate which he attended .
I have since examined the reports as regards consultation of the workforce and actions speak louder than words .
We were discussing consultation at companylevel , the European company , but we have not discussed what the Commission can do for worker consultation by means of its industrial policy .
Of course the report does mention a high-level consultative group in the automobile industry and , as regards the maritime sector it mentions a task force and the European Maritime Industries Forum .
But my question focuses on the subject of the workers .
The ECSC Treaty is coming to an end and that Treaty was a good European industrial model over the years when the sectors it covered were developing .
It dealt with the various fundamental aspects : conversion policy , policy on technological innovation and social measures ( it appears that in the future social measures are to be reduced merely to the question of training of the workforce ) .
But that Treaty featured one very important aspect and that was the consultative committee of workers and management .
That model is no longer a valid model for the Commission .
Since Community industrial policies are constantly leading to the conversion and transformation of companies , how can we incorporate in this sectoral consultation the European trade unions ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , whether we are talking about the automobile industry , the chemical industry or the maritime industry , Europe is facing the challenge of international competition .
Some people think they can meet it by barricading themselves behind national protective measures , which is quite unrealistic and utopian , or behind European protective measures , supposing that were possible politically , which I very much doubt as things stand .
Economically , this kind of protection offers no prospects , given that the European economy is de facto integrated in the world market .
Both the Langen and the Donnelly reports have the merit of pointing in the right direction , which is to adapt to this challenge , in other words to make further research efforts to improve the products in question , further investment efforts to improve productivity and further rationalization efforts to improve competitiveness at world level .
On the Donnelly report , I basically agree with all his proposals .
I have but one remark to make , a critical one , on something he does not mention .
Not to mention certain things is rather like sweeping the dust under the carpet .
Not a word on the question of labour costs .
Not a word on the rigidity of the labour market .
Not a word on those useful points that Mr Cox made , and that are after all fundamental questions that cannot be avoided simply by disregarding them and emphasizing all the other things .
I know this is not a popular subject .
I know that your party does not like tackling it , but hiding their head in the sand never saved anybody .
So I believe we should have the courage to look things in the face .
I know these are measures that are not easy to take , especially now .
On the Langen report , I think most of what was decided is good and goes in the right direction .
I was very surprised this morning listening to Mrs Roth-Behrendt to hear her say that she believed the Committee on the Environment took an entirely different view .
This is not what transpires from the texts .
Either Mrs Roth-Behrendt was speaking in her own name only or one would have to suppose that the Committee on the Environment does not entirely endorse her views .
I do not know the background , but I did not see any major divergences between the documents submitted to us .
There may be some differences of emphasis , but that is quite logical and normal .
To conclude , Mr President , let me say this : we must remain consistent with ourselves .
Everything we are proposing today in the three reports goes in the right direction , as I said .
But we must also realise that if that is what we want , we cannot adopt other legislation tomorrow that goes in exactly the oppositive direction .
This Parliament reputedly disregards the consequences of its legislative measures .
We find we are no longer competitive , our costs are too high , our bureaucracy too ponderous , etc .
But not a week passes without us here in Parliament voting with more or less enthusiasm , depending on our position in the Chamber , for legislative measures which in each case represent further costs or serious handicaps for investment , for research .
So we should learn to control our tendency to legislate to an unreasonable degree .
The objectives we are pursuing in relation to the environment and social protection are legitimate .
We must concern ourselves with this ; but we must also concern ourselves with the general objectives , which are not always or not all equally reconcilable .
Madam President , I , like the other speakers , would congratulate the rapporteur and also the Commission for bringing forward this whole debate at the moment because we are at a vital juncture within the development of the European economy .
In particular I can , like Mr Herman , support fully the points laid out in the Donnelly report .
They are innovative and visionary and are an appropriate response to the changing circumstances in which we live .
The Langen report on the chemical sector is particularly important to my own constituency of Munster , and Ireland in particular , because in Ireland at the moment there are 18 , 500 people employed in this sector .
It accounts for over £ 5 bn worth of exports and contributes over £ 200 m to the Irish economy .
And advances in technology with new research techniques mean that the people employed in this sector are generally very highly qualified .
Over 40 % of all the people employed in this sector are graduates with third-level education .
It is important , when we are placing so much emphasis on one aspect of increasing education qualifications and increasing the opportunities for lifelong learning , that we provide a proper regulatory framework for employment creation in that area .
I agree fully with Mr Herman .
We must be logical .
We must adopt a flexible approach to ensure that Europe can remain competitive in the world market and global market in which we now live .
I would call on this House to ensure that we do not put in place any hindrances to the development of this industry , which is a vital sector for the economy and employment creation .
Madam President , free competition and free market forces are necessary to safeguard the competitiveness of European industry .
The Liberal Group therefore wants to ensure free competition in the European car industry and thereby also to secure economic advantages for us consumers .

Hence we have tabled two amendments , Amendments Nos 6 and 7 , with a view to tightening up Regulation No 1475 / 95 on block exemptions in connection with distribution and servicing agreements .
This is a Commission regulation providing for exemption from the rules on free competition enshrined in the Treaty of Rome .
I very much hope that the rapporteur , Mr Donnelly , and my colleagues in this Chamber can support these two amendments .
I also hope that Commissioner Bangemann will act on the terms of Amendment No 7 calling for the Commission to put a stop to the systematic infringement by motor vehicle manufacturers and importers of the Block Exemption Regulation .
I likewise hope that the Commission will take up paragraph 1 ( d ) of the resolution and set up a High Level Panel for the motor industry on which all interested parties will be represented , including the independent motor traders and , of course , the consumers .
At the same time I propose that this High Level Panel , as one of its first tasks , call a conference on the very important subject of the impending changes in the motor industry .
Madam President , I wish , like other speakers , to take the opportunity to thank the rapporteurs and , in particular , Mr Katiforis for his detailed analysis of the problems facing Europe 's marine industry , the comprehensive approach he has taken to tackling these problems and his conclusions .
However , there is a glaring inconsistency in Europe 's approach to the maritime industry .
Every year this Parliament approves millions of ecus for the KONVER programme to assist small businesses to diversify from the defence industry into civilian production .
But , at the same time , we penalize larger companies in the defence sector with over 230 employees that wish to diversify .
One of these industries is naval shipyards .
Due to the downturn in orders for warships these yards have to look elsewhere for work .
If , however , these naval yards tender for civilian contracts within the European Union , they are immediately at a disadvantage due to the fact that they do not receive the same subsidy as civilian yards .
How can we on one hand encourage diversification and on the other hand penalize firms which are attempting to diversify ?
It is the economics of the insane .
If we truly believe in diversification and changing from defenceorientated production to civilian production , then we must tackle this problem .
I , therefore , would ask and request that this House support Amendment No 4 .
Madam President , we are having a whole day on industrial policy today : human and animal cloning , the maritime industry , and now the chemical industry .
As well as congratulating the rapporteurs who have represented us throughout the discussions , I should also like to congratulate the Commissioner for taking such a serious approach to industrial policy .
I think this is important for Europe .
Our chemical industry is considerably more advanced than that of the United States or Japan , and we should be keen to hold on to this advantage .
It is a sector which could set an example for many others , and the best thing about this proposal is that it finally sets out in black and white who needs to do what to strengthen our competitive position , it being clear that the main responsibility in this respect lies with the chemical industry itself .
The Commission and the Member States must establish the basic conditions , such as by introducing clear environmental legislation and a framework for self- regulation , which could play an important part in making the industry more effective , cleaner and safer .
I therefore cannot agree with my colleague Mrs Heinisch when she says that the chemical industry could be deregulated .
Let us have clear and simple legislation by all means , but the industry is such a sensitive one that deregulation is really out of the question , in my view .
One category within the chemical industry which could do with a little more attention is the small and medium-sized firms .
Almost all the legislation is designed for the major companies , and the small and medium-sized firms do not have the manpower to meet all the requirements .
Let me give you an example .
In the European Union , firms are required to give details of the composition of their products on the label , and chemical firms must indicate not just the composition , but also the proportions of the ingredients .
Just imagine if you were a small firm which had developed a new product after years of research and then had to hand your recipe over to your rivals .
Mr Bangemann , you look like a man who likes to eat well : just try asking the head chef in a five-star restaurant whether he would be prepared to do this .
I think the answer would be no .
The Commission must of course provide clear environmental legislation and try to reduce CO2 emissions , but the environmental improvements being brought about here in the West would be of even more benefit in Eastern Europe , where their impact would be that much greater .
Madame President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to thank Alan Donnelly for his good and expert report .
The Renault motor concern has announced that it will be closing its factory in Vilvoorde in Belgium completely and will be making staff redundant in France as well .
At the same time it has the nerve to apply for EU support in Spain .
If Renault puts its worst-case scenario into practice , breaking EU rules , this will be a complete farce .
Is this an indication of how industry intends to get in shape for the euro ?
Euro could well become a dirty word among the unemployed , and no wonder .
Those who called for flexibility should remember that each unemployed person has shown 100 % flexibility on his own part .
Economic growth alone will not banish unemployment , and structural interventions will thus ultimately also be necessary .
The plan should be to move the priority from taxing labour to taxing added value .
This would encourage employment in the service sector and would at the same time permit the growth of the information-intensive sector .
Let machines do the boring work and let people serve other people .
I look to the Commission for initiatives in this sector .
In almost all the EU Member States the economy is being thrust into the straitjacket of the EMU cohesion criteria .
The problem is that the timetable for achieving the criteria is very fast and they are interpreted too strictly .
Everything is now happening in an environment of record unemployment and difficult social conditions .
The most serious shortcoming is of course that unemployment is not one of the criteria .
I therefore propose that two types of security should be included among the hard EMU criteria : economic security and social security .
Because monetary security does not appear to create social security or significantly to improve employment , Parliament should commit itself in particular to including social security among the EMU criteria , so that we can be saved from future Vilvoordes .
Madam President , I applaud the report by Mr Katiforis .
More specifically , the points he raises in the motion for a resolution are ones that I agree with .
I must say that the future of the shipbuilding industry and more generally the shipping industry parallels that of merchant shipping itself .
Shipbuilding was reduced by 82.5 % between 1985 and 1994 , and European merchant shipping also fell by 40-50 % during the same period .
Those are parallel tracks , and that should have caused us concern .
As for the shipbuilding industry , a long time ago the Community introduced legislation to abolish State subsidies , but at the same time it failed to propose alternative solutions , which could have led to development on the basis of private-sector economic criteria for the shipbuilding industry in Europe . Throughout that time , the Community did nothing at all for European shipping .
And all the proposals put forward - mainly on the European Parliament 's initiative , such as the report on the Euros register of shipping - essentially sank without trace and made no progress .
Consequently , - and I say this because Commissioner Bangemann is here today - with the exception of initiatives in some specific sectors of the so-termed ' para-maritime ' economy , in other words equipment , electronic devices , etc . , the shipbuilding industry has in general seen no interest , it has benefited from no interest on the part of Europe , while Europe itself , insisting on the abolition of subsidies , has essentially annihilated it and helped other shipbuilding industries in the Third World , as you must know .
Madam President , there are two things I would like to stress .
One is the situation we now have in Europe , with a constant proliferation of state aids and ever more ways in which competition is being distorted .
We talk about liberalization .
Parliament contributes substantially to this process .
But at the same time there are countries which are lagging seriously behind in the on-going process .
It is immensely difficult to get the European people to believe in what we are trying to achieve when they see firms moving out of their country with support from the Union .
It is difficult to get the European people to believe in our project when they see state aid going to various enterprises behind the Commission 's back and being approved after the event .
My colleague , Mr Miller , is proposing that shipyards be supported in switching their production from naval to ordinary merchant vessels : support for shipyard reconstruction .
Shipbuilding capacity in Europe is already huge .
This is an example of how regional interests come into conflict with one another .
I can well understand Mr Miller 's proposal .
But if I were to speak on behalf of the European shipbuilding industry - I do not , but if I were to do so - we would get into problems of excess capacity .
There was some talk of holding conferences .
We have had many of those .
But we have a problem of what to say to the people of Europe .
We constantly get into situations which run counter to the policy we actually want to pursue .
I therefore appeal to the Commissioner to focus the Council 's attention on these situations .
It is not just that a firm can get aid to move from Denmark to Ireland ; we also have competition in the field of taxation .
A company does not pay much tax for the first ten years after setting up in Ireland .
It does in the rest of Europe .
Hence we are not merely concerned with competition policy here ; we are also talking about fiscal policy and state subsidies .
Madam President , I would like to speak on the Commission communication on Europe 's maritime future .
I am sure you will agree , Madam President , that since ' all the nice girls love a sailor ' , it is important that we nurture and support our maritime industries and , in particular , the seafarers and their training for which I would like to think that the British Government has set a positive example .
I would like to throw down a challenge to Commissioner Bangemann and his colleagues today .
We must ensure a level playing field throughout the European Union .
I would urge the Commission to make sure that state aids to ports and ferry companies are phased out as far as possible .
Currently there is no transparency in the application of state aids .
I hope the Commissioner will agree that he must address this and that it cannot be right that , for example , Stena / Sealink are actually making British seafarers redundant because the Dutch government , as Mr Jarzembowski mentioned earlier , is choosing to protect its own seafarers by giving a preferential tax rate .
That has to be wrong .
I would refer the Commissioner and the House to Mr Belleré 's opinion and in particular paragraphs 8 and 9 in which we call for free and fair competition between transport modes with all modes of transport fully bearing their own costs including external costs and where we call for free and fair competition to be encouraged between the Community ports and between maritime shipping lines .
If the Commission does nothing else after today 's debate , I hope it will seek to establish a level playing field and seek to remove gross state aids such as those practised in Holland which I believe are grossly unfair .
I support Mr Belleré 's opinion and , indeed , Mr Katiforis ' report .
Madam President , congratulations are in order to the Committee and its rapporteur , Mr Katiforis , for the proposals presented , drawing attention to the arrangements and measures which could lead to improvements in maritime transport , in this case ( and I am going to focus on this particular case ) .
Accounting for 90 % of extra-Community traffic and 30 % of intra-Community traffic of goods , maritime transport is the cheapest , least congested and least polluting means of transport , all facts which means it should be given increasing importance .
In addition to what has been said , however , we must pay more attention to the articulation of maritime transport with other means of transport , in particular rail and road , as this is the only way of improving and giving a more complete coverage of European territory , including landlocked regions and countries , which are less favoured .
Along these lines , more importance should also be given to the use of small and medium-sized harbours and ports , which are able to accept ships which account for more than 60 % of Community traffic .
Apart from thereby avoiding congestion in large parts , something which is quite unnecessary , it also is an excellent way of achieving full coverage of territory , as already mentioned , in the interest of a more efficient network of supplies in all resources and improving the well-being of all Europeans .
I think that these were some of the points which had to be added to this debate .
Mr President , as one of the last Socialist Group speakers today I would like to clarify certain points which have arisen during the debate with regard to the report by Mr Langen .
The Socialist Group welcomes this report .
It shows a clear understanding of the problems facing the chemical industry in recent years .
The industry is in a state of constant change brought about by the development of global competition .
This means that we would support the majority of the actions proposed in the report to assist the industry to adapt to meet this competition .
However , there are still certain points of difference between the Socialists and the Christian Democrats that go beyond nuance .
There are issues relating to the liberalization of energy supplies and the deregulation of the regulatory framework as they apply to the industry , on which we cannot completely reach agreement with the Christian Democrats .
In particular there is the use of voluntary agreements in the promotion of a carbon dioxide tax .
The Socialists see voluntary agreements as having a complementary role to legislation , but not as a substitute for it .
As regards the carbon tax , we see it as almost inevitable that some Member States will introduce this .
So it must be sensibly prepared .
The future of the European chemical industry is in building upon the basis that we already have : high-value industry producing high-value products , with a well-trained work force that is well paid and rewarded for its tasks .
That is the future of the European chemical industry , not deregulation , and not an approach to competition which means cheapest is best .
Madam President , there is no doubt that Europe 's shipping industry is characterised first by a dramatic decline in the shipbuilding sector , and secondly by a decline and transformation of the great European fleet into a fleet of convenience .
In my opinion , the responsibility for this disastrous course of the shipbuilding industry is the policy of competition implemented by the European Union and its Member States for a number of years .
The shipbuilding sector has declined by 82.5 % .
The question is : is it possible for Europe 's shipbuilding industry to compete with that of the Far East under conditions of competition at the level of workforce remuneration and with full deregulation of the market ?
The answer is no , and I think it is time for a different policy .
Madam President , I wonder whether the policy , the direction which specifies ' training , education and up-to-date technologies ' for those who work in shipping , has any value at all when almost all of Europe 's fleets are governed by bipartite agreements and employ crews from the Far East , very cheap crews which even create dangers for the safety of shipping .
These questions are not answered either by the statement or by the report of our colleague Mr Katiforis .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Alan Donnelly and Mr Langen and Mr Katiforis rightly began their reports with a short description of the way they see industrial policy .
In submitting to Parliament a communication on individual sectors , on which Parliament then draws up reports , we are of course dealing only with small parts of a general policy .
In that respect they were quite right to do so .
I too would like to begin by telling you again how we see our industrial policy , which we have after all now been pursuing for eight years and , in my view , with some success .
The situation of departure was quite clear .
It was the time of the creation of the single market , i.e. , new conditions of competition were emerging on our own markets and even at that time it was apparent that the trend towards globalization would increase , that the Union 's external borders would have to be more accessible to its trading partners and that competition would increasingly become a principle of this global economic system .
Now , one can look at competition in ideological terms or , if I may put it like that , in a quite relaxed way .
Ideologically , competition can be damned or praised to the skies .
I do not belong to either group because I do in fact think that competition is an instrument , a condition , for achieving many other aims too .
Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer saw a contradiction between an efficient and a socially or environmentally oriented economic system .
That is only superficially the case .
For as a rule , and every example in history has shown it to be so , an inefficient economic system is neither socially nor environmentally compatible .
The difficulties that have emerged in , for instance , the new German Länder in relation simply to cleaning up the land on which the old industrial plants were sited and remedying the environmental damage they caused have shown quite clearly that this is simply not right .
But efficiency or greater competitiveness is also an instrument for achieving better and higher aims .
I will take the example of higher wages , which Mr Herman also mentioned .
Higher wages per se can of course have an adverse effect on competition .
It is quite clear that if I pay higher wages I have higher costs and that if I cannot absorb them , I will be at a disadvantage in relation to my competitor .
But I can absorb them if I become more productive .
That is one possibility .
So , as is the case in many Member States , I can finance higher wages and higher fringe benefits and therefore also social systems if my productivity allows it .
That means I simply have to be a bit better , a bit more efficient .
That is why it always irritates me so much - and I have seen it again and again in my political career - when people are against efficiency .
What is wrong with efficiency ?
Surely it is quite human to want to do something properly .
I cannot remember who gave the example of the head cook .
If I am standing in front of two restaurants and one serves excellent food because the cook is good while the other serves rubbish then of course I will go to the one with the good cook .
For the rest , all those people who are against efficiency will also go to the good restaurant .
That is just one way of acting against one 's own principles .
So I do not consider efficiency something bad .
We need it and it can help us make up for many of our disadvantages .
Let us take an example in the automobile sector .
I shall be returning to this question in more detail .
Different undertakings are in quite different situations in the Union .
There are undertakings with problems and others with no problems at all .
To take the question of surplus capacity : some undertakings have surplus capacity and have to reduce it while others take more than a year to deliver certain models , which are not cheap cars .
Once again that shows that the price aspect is not necessarily crucial , that the cheapest is not always the best .
You are quite right , Mr Bowe .
But nor should we pretend that whatever we produce , someone will buy it at some point .
That will not work .
That is why we always say in our industrial policy that we have to be a little better because we may well be a little more expensive .
But we can sort that out .
Above all , it requires flexibility .
In the programme we submitted two years ago - and I think Mr Rapkay mentioned that - we focused primarily on intensive training and further training of workers and employees .
For if we do not invest in human capital , we will not achieve what we all want .
It is on that particular point that we really should seek agreement .
Efficiency is necessary in order to achieve other political aims .
I now turn to the various questions , first on the automobile industry .
The Commission has no problem with all the additional proposals in this area .
We are quite prepared to accept Alan Donnelly 's proposals , in particular regarding the Forum , which is a permanent body in which we hold discussions with unions , undertakings and suppliers , i.e. , with the entire car industry .
Although I admit that I am of course always suspected of not being particularly keen on the unions , I would ask you to come and listen to what people in the Maritime Forum have to say .
Mr Jarzembowski is my witness .
I was almost the only one who managed by brute force to ensure that union representatives took part and could also play a part later in the high-level panel , i.e. , in the steering committee .
It is quite clear , and I am saying this again in relation to the case in question , that an efficient economic and industrial policy are impossible unless we have sensible social components ; worker participation in the decisions of a company is not just a question of social policy or justice but a question of the efficiency of that company .
The company will become more efficient if workers and employees have a say in important decisions .
My colleague Mr Flynn has already said how difficult it is to carry something like this through in Europe .
You are familiar with the drama of the Social Charter .
During the attempt to draw up a statute for a European company I myself saw how incredibly difficult it was to resolve even the question of co-determination .
That was the sole reason why the whole thing failed in the end .
Some people wanted nothing at all , others did not want to give up their particularly good systems and in the end nothing came of it .
Of course there is no sense in that .
So , yes to dialogue and also to the other demands .
Without a shadow of doubt the automobile industry will have to embark on structural change , but it is in a position to survive it .
I do not think , although some seem to believe I do , that it cannot manage this .
It will manage it with a certain reduction in capacity .
This will be possible in some undertakings because we have now become more competitive than we were even a few years ago .
There are no doubt several reasons for the declining market share of Japanese cars in the Union ; but no doubt one of the most important in this connection is that our car manufacturers now offer better products that attract buyers more than cars from Japan or Korea .
Someone said we should be consistent .
I very much agree .
Unfortunately , we are holding discussions with very different participants .
When we discuss industrial policy we are always dealing with the same people ; when we discuss environmental policy we are dealing with different people .
The same applies in the Council .
There is a Council of Ministers of Industry which discusses and then says energy prices have to be cut .
And then there is the Council of Environment Ministers that says energy prices have to be raised . The decision will depend on the inclinations of the presidency .
That is a nonsense .
We must keep to a consistent line and of course we also need a more common approach in Europe .
Mrs Peijs and others said that better solutions were found in the Netherlands and that is why people go there .
So long as we do not have a common policy , I regard that as the second-best solution .
In any case everything is far better in the Netherlands .
So let us all go to the Netherlands , why not ?
That creates a pressure which would actually bring about these joint solutions and I am the first to say we need that in the tax system , and the Commission will indeed be making a number of proposals here .
So , in response to what Alan Donnelly suggests : yes we will do so and transpose it very quickly .
I come now to the chemical industry .
That really is the first example of benchmarking .
We agreed with the industry that we want to develop a kind of model of how an industry can keep itself competitive while also responding to the social questions this creates .
As you can see from the most excellent report by Mr Langen , the chemical industry managed to do so .
For this really is possible , even in an industry where price does indeed play a decisive part .
It is still conceivable to say that if a car is more expensive it may be a bit smarter , a bit better ; but if you produce some kind of raw material , as the chemical industry generally does - leaving aside derived and upstream products - anyone else could in fact manufacture it too and it is purely a question of price .
Nevertheless our industry has managed very well to retain its position and I think that is an excellent entrepreneurial achievement and also a good achievement on the part of the unions , for in this industrial sector the unions are very open as regards structuring and restructuring and discuss it in a manner we could only wish other industrial sectors would imitate .
We are not discussing coal today but , Mr Rapkay , I would like to say to you that an industry in which every job is subsidized by DM 120 000 a year cannot survive , and those happen to be the facts and cannot be disputed ; every job costs DM 10 000 a month in public money .
After all , we cannot criticize the towns in the Ruhr area which have given up this industry and are looking towards modern , new prospects , such as Essen , which is the biggest services town in Germany .
If you talked to people in these towns or to the SPD there you would hear them say : ' why did we not do so sooner ? ' It is not a question of how it is done , whether in a socially compatible way or not , but you are talking as though this were a traditional industry with prospects for the future !
And the situation in the shipbuilding industry is the same .
And that is why we said we must clear up the misunderstanding about these traditional industries not having a future .
Indeed we have managed to do so because everyone now believes they do have a future .
Do not ask me how we can justify an industry in which inspite of subsidies German hard coal is DM 200 more expensive per tonne than imported hard coal from anywhere else , including freight costs .
I do not understand that .
That is where my understanding stops and I think we have to be open and honest with each other about this .
For years now , I think it is five years , we have had the Maritime Forum in the shipbuilding sector and I believe it has been successful .
I agree , Mr Jarzembowski , dazzling new ideas do not come up every year .
It is very rare for that to happen and if it did I would look at the person concerned with some anxiety for he would certainly not have his feet on the ground .
We are making very good headway in research and development .
One Member , Mrs Estevan Bolea , said that shipbuilding is more than shipbuilding .
If you read the report , and obviously you did read it because that is precisely what it says , you cannot use it as a criticism of the Commission .
For it is in that Forum that we said that we need ports , suppliers , classification systems , scientific institutes , oceanography , etc .
We need all that to establish a system that works .
So we had some success with that .
What is not included in this report , as was rightly mentioned , is the new situation that has arisen with the American refusal to ratify the OECD agreement .
At this point I no longer believe they will do so .
That faces us with the question : what now ? We have several options .
The first is to go ahead without the Americans .
That is possible and indeed quite reasonable for our most difficult competitors here are the Japanese and in particular the Koreans , not so much the Americans .
Or we can formulate a quite different new policy of our own .
The third option , which we are probably tending towards , is to do both .
We are trying to keep the OECD agreement alive without the Americans while at the same time formulating a new policy for the shipbuilding industry in the broad sense of the term .
Of course navy shipbuilding plays a crucial role here , for if we want our own security and defence policy then , as I keep saying to the defence industry , we also need a minimum capacity for the production of material , which also means ships .
It is quite obvious that cost is less of a priority in naval shipbuilding than in civil shipbuilding so that shipyards that can do both thus achieve a cost mix that is more advantageous to them .
We must also consider to what extent merchant shipbuilding is competitive in the EU .
That cannot be planned . We cannot set ourselves objectives here .
Someone said the Commission should do so .
That no longer has anything to do with a market economy .
But of course we can define the conditions under which such an industry can operate more clearly than in the past .
And we will do so .
I turn now to the question of subsidies and relocation .
We have discussed this on several occasions .
Here too there are two exaggerated and therefore misguided approaches and only one real way of tackling the problem .
It would be a great exaggeration to say that there is no problem , to pretend that all is well .
In that respect perhaps Renault has had at least one positive effect , namely to show that there is a problem .
The other misguided approach is to say that we must now introduce very strict rules : nobody must move , everybody has to remain where they were !
Nobody is allowed to decide on job losses or changes , that is not allowed !
That too would bring about the end of a competitive industrial structure , for some shifts make sense and of course some relocations can certainly be supported under certain circumstances by granting subsidies .
So that means - and this is the right approach - that we must check in every case whether there really is any point in granting subsidies from the regional , social or any other fund .
For here there is a contradiction between two objectives : first the objective of developing an industrial structure in a region , secondly the attempt not to create any surplus capacity .
The steel industry was mentioned , not without reason .
For after all , there we managed the trick of reducing surplus capacity , and in a manner which certainly created social hardship , but which was also accepted and understood .
Accordingly , we have a capacity that corresponds to demand , we have reasonable prices and , consequently , no problems .
We must check , not only in the automobile industry but in other sectors too , whether there is any point in creating new capacity or whether this would confuse the market and we end up with situations we can then only control by taking countermeasures , i.e. , by spending more money , which is of course quite ridiculous .
We have to do this .
In fact we have rules of this kind for synthetic fibres , where do not allow new capacity to be created because enough exists , or rather , we do not grant subsidies because if anyone wants to do so by themselves they can .
This could produce a good general approach and I hope , as this discussion has shown , that we will abandon the dogmatic approaches that keep being proposed , because in the case of economic problems there are always good , right and wrong solutions .
A fairly prominent SPD figure once said : ' There is no such thing as SPD economic policy or CDU economic policy ... ' - and I am not quoting a Liberal but an SPD supporter because I think the Member concerned would find him more credible , although now you do not seem to like this either - anyway , in my view this man quite rightly said : ' There is no such thing as SPD , CDU or FDP economic policy , there is only a wrong or a right economic policy . ' I like the sound of that man , he was right and that is precisely the line we want to follow here .
The question , of course , is who decides what is wrong or right .
The Commission always does that !
Sometimes not !
Thank you , Mr Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The information society , culture and education
The next item is the report ( A4-0325 / 96 ) by Mrs Morgan , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the information society , culture and education .
Madam President , the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media has always acknowledged the importance and significance of the information society for our future economic wellbeing .
There is no question of the fact that we loudly applaud the efforts to provide universal access to the new communication methods and welcome the great strides made in the infrastructure development throughout the continent with the help of EU finances .
Nevertheless , if we all pull together we will inevitably come to the point - perhaps not now , perhaps not in this century - some time in the 21st century where we are all linked to the information society .
But then what ?
Why would anyone want to use it ?
The Culture Committee was extremely aware that there had been a serious lack of focus on the content aspect of the information society and the need to concentrate both on educational and cultural opportunities and obstacles that the information society will throw up .
This is why the Culture Committee decided to initiate this report .
We are all aware of the speed of developments in this field and since the original draft we have been delighted to see that many of the report 's recommendations have already been implemented or are at least being given serious consideration .
It is interesting to note that even last night , it was not just the Commission that responded , but Jacques Chirac , in a speech , made a commitment to connect all secondary schools to the information society by the year 2000 and to reduce VAT on multimedia products .
I hope this is restricted to educational multimedia .
Before I go any further , it is important to inform you why I have introduced five amendments to my report , introducing a timetable calling for their implementation by the year 2000 .
Some Members have asked : ' Why the year 2000 , why not 1999 or 2001 ? ' The reason is simply because the comparative study , pilot projects and teacher training can all be accomplished by this date .
If we do not set targets in the timetable , we will not have a framework on which to base the propositions contained in this report .
For that reason I hope everyone will support these amendments .
The European Union must set benchmarks .
I have just heard that Mr Bangemann is very keen on benchmarks so I hope he will take up the idea of benchmarks in this report .
It is important that Member States across the continent reach these benchmarks .
Otherwise we will develop into an information-rich elite which will do nothing to help the social cohesion across Europe .
The first thing we should do is equip our children with the tools of this new trade but in order to do this we must equip our teachers first .
Member States should be looking at the introduction of compulsory IT modules within teacher training courses .
This must be supplemented with lifelong learning so they can keep abreast of new technological developments .
Parents should also be encouraged to take an interest in order to avoid a technical generation gap developing .
These technological developments are occurring at such a pace that it is important that we take a look at what is possible so that we adapt our educational institutions accordingly .
Computers can be made so small these days that pupils could easily hide them from both teachers and parents .
They could even hide them in their trainers .
Data retrieval will become second nature to many pupils .
Recently I visited a school in my constituency where the pupils were given an assignment which was to go and draw a picture of an atom .
One of the children came back with the latest picture from the home page of MIT .
That is the kind of level of education we are talking about .
They must therefore be taught how to analyse the information they receive .
We must ensure that they learn to interpret the data and assess it in a critical fashion .
Most importantly we must ensure that women take up the opportunities offered so that they do not become further marginalized in the 21st century .
There will also be opportunities for slow learners to develop at their own pace , and , crucially , for rural areas so that they do not feel marginalized .
We will always be confronted with the question of who will pay for the new technologies , particularly in the educational field .
It makes sense , therefore , to look at examples of best practice and see how we can develop public and private partnerships to provide and ensure quality for future generations .
The new technologies could change our whole culture and the way we run our lives .
But culture in the narrower sense of the term also needs to be addressed .
Where better to ensure access to culture than through our libraries ?
The effect of information technologies on our libraries could be enormous .
That is why we are delighted to see that the Commission has again responded to our calls for a Commission report on libraries and IT to be produced .
Finally but crucially , I am proposing the creation of a millennium archive .
This would be an archive in digital form of the EU 's fifteen Member States ' major national cultural collections .
Open access should be given to all EU schools , colleges and libraries .
But it is important that we act now .
There is a major threat that the sale of exclusive digital rights may go to the powerful multinational companies , thereby restricting members of the public from seeing their own cultural heritage .
Madam President , I wish to begin by warmly congratulating the rapporteur on her excellent report .
There is a great deal in this report , so much that in the allotted time I am going to find it difficult to pick out the real points .
For this reason , I want to concentrate on paragraphs 27 and 28 - the position and role of libraries in Europe - to which the rapporteur has just referred .
The existence of libraries is a mark of a civilized society : an educated and sophisticated society has good and easily accessible libraries .
By contrast , those who wish to distort history or suppress sections of society have often destroyed or suppressed libraries .
It is our role to ensure that the immense power of the information revolution does not leave out , damage or neglect our libraries .
They are crucial links to bridge the gap between rich and poor , to provide vital knowledge of other cultures and other languages - social cohesion , as the rapporteur has just said .
In the information society of the future - a society to which this report more than well refers - libraries must have a major role .
Eluned Morgan has just spoken of data retrieval , and electronic storage of and access to materials and information provide wonderful opportunities , mixing the physical realities with virtual roles .
This can be expanded , new opportunities can be extended to the benefit of millions and whole collections previously inaccessible to most people can now be made easily accessible at many different outlets - public libraries , schools , colleges and all educational establishments .
But these are opportunities that a free market will not provide .
A world where making money is the sole objective will not see this as a priority .
The role of the European Union therefore becomes more important than ever , to protect our culture and our heritage certainly , but also to open new doors to the millions not to the few - doors that will remain closed if we leave the market to its own devices .
This though is an area that has really only been touched on ; it is one that deserves more attention .
I support the call on the Commission to come forward with a green paper .
I am delighted that it has indicated its support for this and hope very much that it will move quickly so that the libraries are not left behind .
The rapporteur has presented an excellent report .
I congratulate her .
Cymru am byth .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to congratulate Mrs Morgan on the quality of her report , a report that calls for several remarks on our part , with which I am sure many here agree .
Over a period of some years now , many Europeans have become familiar with the new concepts of communication .
France indeed spearheaded this cultural revolution by giving every French household access to minitel .
Addressing the question of young people , President Jacques Chirac emphasized the urgent need to combat illiteracy and to give access to information technology to the greatest possible number of people , mainly by making it more affordable .
This is a vital issue for Europe .
The decisions we take must reflect this sense of urgency , for the new information technologies are advancing very rapidly .
Those extraordinary educational tools represented by the multimedia must be used in a targeted manner .
They must become the necessary accompaniment to traditional educational material such as books and the written word ; but under no circumstances must these various educational tools compete among themselves , for that would be disastrous .
We must also support our young people in deciphering this language so that we do not dehumanize it and we must also protect its content .
To protect does not mean to barricade ; on the contrary it means enabling each individual to express his or her vision , especially in cultural matters , on the basis of respect for all .
Needless to say , at a time when we are all shocked by news of terrible barbarities , we must protect minors more effectively both in the creation and the dissemination of software .
Once we have taken these precautions we can rise to the great challenge of promoting the establishment of networks and contacts between north and south , between urban and rural regions , tourist and industrial regions , in order to encourage our European co-citizens to carry out joint projects .
The sharing of common experiences and common know-how is an important factor in our fight against unemployment and more generally our fight against social division .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Morgan 's excellent report is welcome , because it is high time to stress the central position of education and culture in the information society .
Now is the time to redirect our resources towards developing content and improving quality .
The market in multimedia for education is a growth area in which there is a need for cooperation between producers and users and for the cultural and linguistic adaptation of products in order to encourage Europe 's diversity .
The INFO 2000 programme should contain more support to this end , and the research programmes should stress the development of multimedia and programmes with an educational purpose .
It is also essential for the Commission to produce rapidly for discussion its Green Paper currently in preparation on libraries , and open up the important debate on public access to electronic information , copyright from the user 's as well as the producer 's point of view , the place of books and reading and the professional profile of work in the library and information sector , and educational needs in the modern network and information society .
The problems have long since ceased to be quantitative even in terms of information , and are now to a far greater extent qualitative .
Its a matter of whether everyone manages to obtain the information which is relevant to them and whether they have the capacity to assess and select from this information .
Madam President , the Morgan report has the merit of focusing attention on the central importance of the cultural and educational dimension of the information society .
The new technology certainly represents an extraordinary opportunity but it also conceals extraordinary risks .
The two principal risks are exclusion and homologation .
It is obvious that the most disadvantaged strata of society risk further marginalization by not possessing the cultural and economic tools to gain access to information .
Furthermore , technology left exclusively in the hands of private initiative risks reducing culture to the banal , by progressively eliminating the individuality and expression of different local cultures .
That is why we think the measures and initiatives set out in the Morgan report are crucial , particularly as regards teacher training .
The Member States must commit themselves , amongst other things , to converting their national cultural collections into digital form to contribute to creating a European archive .
And the Commission could enter the vast heritage of our museums , art galleries and theatres into the network of available information .
Madam President , first let me voice a regret .
I think it would have been preferable to consider this report at the same time as the White Paper we discussed yesterday , for I find the difference of legal basis not just factitious but also detrimental to political coherence and effectiveness .
Turning to the report we are considering today , I want to congratulate Mrs Morgan on the quality of her work .
She was intelligent enough to avoid the two pitfalls of systematic rejection dictated by fear of progress and blind admiration for that progress .
The central issue in this debate is whether the development of these new technologies is synonymous with progress in the science of education , that is to say , whether it is likely to reduce inequalities .
For even if these new communication technologies enable us to effectively combat failure at school , we also know that the cost of the equipment is a source of inequality .
So we have to find a fair balance between the acquisition of these basic disciplines and access to the new technologies , for the keyboard , the screen and the mouse cannot become the only writing tools and exercize books of the 21st century .
Mrs Morgan 's report has many good qualities and courageously points to a number of dangers , while at the same time showing the potential for culture and education .
But I think it suffers from certain illusions in relation to family life , school life and culture .
The crisis facing many young people in their family and in society springs from difficulties with language and communication .
Mastery of a language and skill in using it to make oneself understood and more able to live with others comes mainly from time spent together , from the richness of interpersonal communication .
The tools provided by information technology are useful for people who are already in a structured situation and who will therefore benefit from the extra potential they offer .
The problem arises when this structure , in relation to language , in relation to education of the mind , and therefore judgment , does not exist .
In such cases , using machines is no palliative .
So we are faced with a number of illusions here .
The domain of school life and culture is also the domain where people discover a taste for making an effort .
To pretend that intellectual work , that culture , is easy , is in everyone 's grasp , is in a sense easy to consume , is a great illusion .
This taste for making an effort , for progress in seeking the good , the true and the beautiful , is very much dependent on the richness of interpersonal communication .
In information technology , the screen is omnipresent .
In fact the word ' screen ' should make us stop and think .
I fear that these tools are marvels only for those who are already structured , already well-versed in this general culture , which will enable them to profit from them , while they pose a serious threat if we regard them as a palliative .
Madam President , the globalization of trade which raises the level of knowledge , the arrival of the information society which will radically transform the nature of work and the organization of production , together with the acceleration of technical and scientific progress are the scenarios of the future , obliging the Union to reflect now on how it can respond adequately to the new demands of the world of work and education .
There are two possible responses on these issues ; upgrading education generally , which is the indispensable basis for acquiring new technological skills and developing student and worker mobility , but above all the implementation of a system which permits any individual to gain access to general education and develop approaches to work by adapting training methods to changes in day-to-day reality , due precisely to the globalization of the economy , the rise of the information society and the development of the scientific and technological society .
With the vast mass of messages immediately available in today 's information society , teaching cannot remain confined to the scholastic microcosm , but must train the citizens of tomorrow to be able to identify the best strategy for accessing what is most appropriate , useful and relevant in the mass of available information .
If we want to exorcise for good the demons that escaped from Pandora 's box when technological progress lifted the lid , our training systems must become the mirror of society , reflecting it in their methods and technology .
Europe is lagging behind in the information sector and this is a serious obstacle to defining educational policies and approaches that are right for the times .
Information is coming as a genuine shock involving change in the very concept of civilization , and that means we will have to change our educational culture .
In fact , a veritable metamorphosis is needed if we are to meet the obligation to train young people for the jobs of the future . The technology obliges mankind to think about nature , economic and social problems , management of space and time and the phenomena of decomposition of materials .
It will be an imperative to adapt the system to the new demands .
The Socratic philosophers themselves , always seeking truth despite their scepticism , would have accepted that education must be adapted to the new needs !
Madam President , the new information technologies are going to have an enormous impact on the fields of education and culture .
There are great opportunities as well as serious risks .
The information society provides an opportunity to reduce the educational and cultural disadvantages of the handicapped , people living in rural areas or those who for economic or other reasons do not have access to the traditional channels of education and culture .
But the reverse side of the coin is that the information society might also exclude large groups of the population , as in previous industrial revolutions opening up a chasm between those acquiring the knowledge and those lagging behind .
Because in the future society of knowledge those who have access to information by means of the most modern means and continue their training throughout their lives will get the jobs and a decent standard of living .
On the other hand those who do not have such training will remain marginalized and condemned to unemployment and low-skill jobs .
We are dealing then with a question of equality of opportunity , social justice and making the most of human intellectual resources , which are the main source of wealth in European societies .
The Member States must make an effort providing schools with the required computer equipment so that multimedia education is available to all , since many families , for obvious economic reasons , are not able to buy multimedia equipment .
At the same time teaching staff must be trained and informed so that the new technological instruments are introduced into teaching practices .
From the point of view of culture , our European cultural , national and regional heritage is available in digital form .
The multimedia products thus produced give easier distribution of and access to this cultural heritage , particularly for young people .
Museums , monuments , cultural sites etc can be recorded and educational centres and libraries given free access .
The RAPHAEL programme deals with that ; it lacks only financial resources commensurate with its ambition , just as a major injection of cash is required to provide schools with the appropriate funds .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there is scarcely another economic sector that is experiencing such a boom as information technology .
The EU Commission , and especially Mr Bangemann who is here today , are surpassing themselves in the production of documents , communications , green papers , etc . , but I am glad that Mrs Morgan 's report raises a painful subject , namely the lack of political measures in relation to the cultural and educational aspects of the information society .
The advantages of the new media are sufficiently well-known and we keep being told about them , and about the opportunities for the labour market ; but we must also look at the risks of the information society and try to counter them .
The global data networks are particularly difficult to control .
Many legal questions relating to copyright and combating international crime remain unresolved .
Nor will I conceal the fact that in individual cases they could lead to anonymization or to Internet junkies in need of therapy , as became apparent in the Netherlands last week .
Both the inexhaustible benefits that keep being cited and the unresolved adverse side-effects makes one thing clear : the European Union must rapidly take account of this headlong development .
But it must not just do so by giving support to technology but must ultimately endeavour to take educational and cultural measures .
We must provide our educational establishments , schools , universities , further education colleges , with adequate computers and network access . We must also interlink them .
We must include libraries in this network .
But we must also ensure that the teachers are adequately prepared and that they are always kept up to date , that they do no limp along behind the young people they teach in terms of their knowledge .
If they are to transmit the new technologies , they must also be able to transmit the means of using them properly .
It is important to ensure that everyone who is interested has a chance to take part in this high-speed development .
Above all , we must not make the mistake of regarding these means of communication as an end in themselves but must use them as meaningful aids , like the surgeon carrying out an operation who consults overseas colleagues or the pupils in our countries who get to know each other and their cultures via the Internet .
In that way we can do away with borders in the fullest sense of the word .
Nobody should be afraid of the human teacher being replaced by a virtual colleague one day or of the written book becoming a museum-piece .
Information technology is only a support .
We must aim to give it a meaningful educational and cultural content ; we must not just concentrate on technical questions .
I hope that the Morgan report has made that as clear to others as it is to me .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Morgan has given us a masterly demonstration of the very important decisions and deadlines that the information society represents .
It is fundamental that everyone should be guaranteed access to information so as to benefit from all the educational and cultural opportunities in the public and private sector which arise from the new technologies .
Particular attention must be paid to the developing countries so that they are put in a position to evaluate and adapt the potential of the information technology to their own experience .
The potential for using the new information and communication technology for executive purposes is enormous .
In fact it represents an opportunity to deal with problems of illiteracy and educational failure , the development of open and distance learning and adult education , linking schools and language tuition to the network .
It also represents challenges and opportunities for libraries through interconnection , thus promoting the economic , social and cultural life of the Union and access to the national cultural collections of every Member State , pooling Europe 's vast and precious heritage of sites , monuments , museums and visual arts .
We need to bear in mind that books , newspapers and the other means of communication based on the written word will remain extremely important .
The Commission must continue its initiatives to improve internal consultation in the information sector and draw up a plan of action for the future , creating a permanent working group to coordinate initiatives relating to culture .
Finally , we must continue to consider the cultural and educational aspects of the information society , the risks it presents and the benefits it offers , in a calm , just and balanced atmosphere .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we too consider Mrs Morgan 's report an excellent one , especially the section concerning technical and educational questions .
However , one problem of concern to Austria is being rather overlooked .
We have a nationalized telephone system .
In Austria it is up to the state to ensure that every pupil and every student obtains access to this information society .
This relates even to minor problems , such as a second home telephone line that does not cost more than an ordinary family can afford .
We are running the risk of producing a two-tier society of pupils and students , which conflicts with the old idea of general and free compulsory schooling .
If the state insists on continuing to control the telephone system , we must make it clear that we are living in a historic time in which the state has the responsibility to ensure that all pupils and students have the same access to learning and studying .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Morgan for the work that she has done .
The main objective for us social democrats is to fight against the devastating unemployment affecting millions of people , many of them young .
I am personally convinced that one way of creating new , lasting and environmentally friendly jobs is through the information society .
Information technology has already initiated an industrial revolution .
To accept this does not mean that we are allowing technology to rule our lives .
For me it means that I will work to ensure that information technology improves peoples ' lives and not create new divisions between social groups or geographical areas .
We need European computer programs for education : CD-ROM or Internet-based .
These are not intended to take over the role of the teacher , a role that will become ever more important with the increasing amount of information made available to students .
Technology must be introduced in the classroom at an early stage and teachers must be trained and supported to enable them to exploit the vast potential of information technology .
In addition , IT opens up new horizons for the disabled both as regards education and on the labour-market .
We must focus on democratic , social , cultural and educational interests , rather than economic and technological .
If you concentrate only on the infrastructure and the technology and not the contents of the services , the most important component in the information society , i.e. the human being , will be forgotten .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I consider the own-initiative report very important , for it emphasizes my view that culture and education are a major factor of innovation and growth in the new environment of the information society and that great importance must therefore be attached to them in the shaping of this society .
On no account must the new means of communication be looked at independently of the information that is transmitted .
The aspect of educational quality is fundamental , especially in regard to the introduction of the new technologies in the educational field .
It is also important to discuss the new concepts of teaching and learning methods .
Firstly , the teachers need to be trained adequately .
They have to learn to change their traditional role as sources of knowledge and make more and more use of the new technologies in their teaching and help the pupils to learn how to choose , so that they take a critical approach to the material transmitted to them .
Of course it is also vital to have continuous and intensive further training of teachers .
But this message goes to parents too .
They form the basis of our society , so that acceptance of the new technologies and the concept of the information society , and thus their success or failure , largely depends on them .
So I am strongly in favour of virtual parental education and of the creation and development of virtual libraries ; indeed I have proposed a project of this kind to STOA .
The aspect of lifelong learning is also very important .
The information society relies less and less on material resources and energy , but far more on human know-how .
I agree with the rapporteur that in the past the Commission 's measures to promote various multimedia projects were too diffuse and often confusing for the applicants .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's educational multimedia joint call , which is finally coordinating the various programmes more closely and therefore making them look more user friendly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too congratulate Mrs Morgan on her most important report .
After so many statements of principle and given that even the Commission sometimes seems to feel a certain multimedia euphoria , let me make a few comments on three practical questions in this area .
To what extent are the Commission 's multimedia activities actually integrated in the individual Member States ' educational policies ?
Is there a coordinated , overall plan ?
I very much doubt it .
The Commission says that all the schools in Europe should be networked .
But at present less than 5 % of European schools have access to the Internet or other networks .
So how can there be equal access to new media and therefore to new employment opportunities in an increasingly mobile Europe ?
Limited-time subsidies from Telecom or through the Commission 's pilot projects for schools are all very well and good , and I welcome them .
But of what use are they to committed teachers and trainers if the follow-up financing of projects is not secure ?
We must promote good , cross-frontier projects and additional modules in vocational training , in order to make foreign-language teaching more lively and effective .
They are all pending .
Another question that has not really been clarified - and here I am turning to the Member States - is how rapid and how comprehensive the teacher training and further training is in this area .
Let me point to one aspect : here it is also a question of the educational and social opportunities of schools to have a positive guiding and stimulating effect on young people in terms of their private computer consumption .
I need hardly mention that the halt in the recruitment of young teachers , who are after all computer literate and trained now , is having devastating effects .
Let me end by turning to the Commission .
Mr Bangemann , I would like to point out that unlike Mrs Heinisch I think the programme descriptions and application procedures for the European Union 's multimedia programmes are too remote from the people and lack transparency .
There is too much red-tape involved in the application procedures .
The procedure for the multimedia joint call last December is very confusing because it docks onto various programmes , as practical experience shows .
Given the variety of management committees each of which only takes partial decisions for a particular project , it is almost impossible for new applicants to participate flawlessly .
So I really would ask you to give this serious consideration and to create a programme that is transparent and also usable by newcomers .
Mr President , the Morgan Report is an own-initiative report of the Culture Commission . I think we had to stress the fact that without co-ordinated educational actions and without a cultural perspective , European information society would be an empty balloon .
Our generation , which invented the information superhighways , now has before it the greatest of challenges , either to turn it from a Pandora 's box into an Ali Baba 's cavern or to transform the danger of the pulverisation of information and the uncontrolled circulation of products into a marvellous area of knowledge and memory .
Since time immemorial , Europe has been the continent which has been aware of its long past and which has insisted on transmitting to others .
This is what distinguishes us from other world cultures , that of America , because it is so young and has such a short history , and those of Asia because , being so old , they were always selfsufficient .
Therefore , if possible before the year 2000 - and we cannot over-emphasise the urgency of acting in fields which could grow at rates of something like 40 % a year - I repeat that we must take essential measures :
Commission studies setting out all of its activities in this area , comparing measures and funding systems in the different Member States and assessing their relative effectiveness ; -compulsory training for teachers and young people , guaranteeing at the same time technical support accessible to everyone ; -strengthening the Community budget , setting up a sub-title in this area and the framework programme and transferring to the development of content some of which has already been earmarked for infrastructures ; -stimulating national inter-school and university networks , creating economies of scale ; -giving incentives to associations between enterprises and teaching establishments through tax breaks and other means to stimulate the quality of production and build this very important bridge between education and leisure.What we must do , Mr President , Commissioner , is make sure that the communication and information technologies - which we should now stop calling ' new technologies ' - should not be seen as an end but as a means for selecting and communicating knowledge .
I must congratulate Mr Morgan on having condensed into his report the essence of these concerns , which are concerns for us all .
Mr President , let me begin by thanking the rapporteur .
The report is very good and will help us in the work we have already started on .
But I also have a request to all those who took part in this debate : we are not just producing paper for the sake of it but are trying to make our contribution to showing where something still needs to be done and how it should be tackled , and we are also trying to bring together the various bodies that have to work together in this area .
It would be useful if the debates sometimes also took note of all the things we are already doing .
For it is not true that we have concentrated only on technology or on infrastructure .
From the outset we have emphasized the question of content , as it is generally called , and the fact that we are speaking in terms of an information society shows quite clearly that we have considered this sociological , social and of course also cultural aspect right from the start .
We have created a Forum for the information society which brings together all the forces , the unions , the creators of culture and those involved in the media .
This Forum has adopted its first annual report .
For the rest , Members were also invited to it and even those who did not take part can read up in this report how hard we are trying to come up with solutions , especially as regards schools and libraries , i.e. , generally accessible public culture .
For instance , this Forum has instructed two of the six working parties to deal specifically with these questions , namely libraries and the development of the media in general , and secondly , schools and learning and the related vocational training questions .
I am not suggesting that we have lapsed into some kind of blind enthusiasm , for that is not the case .
From the start I have always said that there is no reason to assume the world is coming to an end .
On the other hand there is no reason to assume that the world will now become a paradise . We have to use these new instruments in areas where they are meaningful and useful ; in areas where they are not , we can do nothing and in areas where they have bad results we have to do something about this .
Which is to say that in this case too we are taking a very pragmatic approach .
As the rapporteur has just done , I want to draw your attention to the report by the Task Force on Educational Multimedia .
You must not say that this is just another document .
You know that the task forces which Mrs Cresson and I set up are an attempt to make research policy more transparent but also more effective , because it can consider and try to resolve certain practical problems .
This task force has concerned itself specifically with all the questions raised in Mrs Morgan 's report .
I will not read this document out to you now .
You can of course obtain it from the Commission .
It is dated 1996 and is numbered SEC 96 / 1426 .
It describes everything we are doing at present , which is a great deal .
Incidentally , it also says that we must simplify the call to tender forms and the procedures that have to be gone through before becoming eligible for assistance , as you said , and I hope we will manage to do that .
However , it is sometimes difficult , for we cannot complain of any lack of interest .
I have just heard that we receive between 600 and 1000 applications for one programme .
On the one hand that is very pleasing because it shows the broad interest that exists , but on the other hand it shows how difficult this task is .
Let me just make two or three other comments on more general questions that have come up again .
I very much support what has been said about culture and creative work .
It should not be assumed that creative work can be democratized .
That is wrong .
The access and instruments required can be democratized and made generally available .
But to assume that will make us into a society of geniuses is wrong , because creative work will remain work , and presumably , if it is creative , if will remain the work of the few , of a minority .
We should not deceive ourselves that there will be any wide interest in this culture .
But what the information society actually can do is to create easier access to what is perhaps at times rather hermetically sealed data .
Here we should not reject new tools either .
For instance , if there is a problem we should not have to rely only on the book as the traditional means of gaining access to information but also have other , smarter , processing tools for looking at problems .
We know from our experience with schools that there are now many new opportunities for pupils who cannot come to terms with the relatively abstract system of the written word and do not find that way of thinking very easy but who think in a different way .
We certainly have to be innovative here .
So these opportunities should not be rejected from the outset but should be exploited .
But nor should we succumb to the error of thinking we can now live in what might be called an entirely different cultural world .
The other prejudice is to say that is what is done on the basis of public law is of higher quality , while what is done under private law is merely dirty money-making .
That too is nothing but prejudice .
In any case , if you look at what is actually being done in the Member States to connect schools - and the informal Council in Amsterdam adopted a report by the Swedish minister which showed how this is done in Sweden and wants to use it to formulate guidelines for the Union as a whole - then you will see that much of it is financed by private initiative , at least in the initial stage .
Of course this cannot be left to private initiative indefinitely , but at least the private sector has made a start .
And here I also want to say in favour of the large public telephone companies that they are being very active here , that they are cooperating with the school book suppliers and are processing the information that in practice already exists in school books and disseminating it in this new way .
So quite a lot is already happening , with the help also of the private sector .
People should not assume that things are always better if they are done by a public law institution .
We need only look at some of the television broadcasts produced by public broadcasters to see that they do not always match up to the high cultural standards these organizations require of themselves .
So here too I would ask you not to throw out the baby with the bathwater but to try to do what is necessary .
Incidentally , we have one other difficulty that I must mention . In these areas , often it is not the Member States that are responsible but sub-organizations of the Member States - such as the Länder in Germany - which means we have a double hurdle to overcome , but I am quite hopeful here .
To my surprise , at the conferences we have held so far the Member States did not keep telling us to go away and mind our own business !
On the contrary , they told us to work something out , to show us something !
Show us what we can achieve with this !
That can only be useful to us .
So once again my thanks to the rapporteur .
I hope that when we produce our progress report we find we have a considerably higher number of schools on the network by the end of the year and achieve this very well .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to inform you , at the request of the President of the European Parliament , that this morning , in the city of San Sebastian , the psychologist at the city 's Martutene Prison was shot dead , presumably by an ETA terrorist .
The killer was taken into custody .
Convinced that he was interpreting the feeling of the European Parliament , the President has sent a message of condolences to the victim 's family and the Spanish Government , lending his support for it to continue to fight all acts of terrorism with determination .
Genetically modified micro-organisms
The next item is the report ( A4-0070 / 97 ) by Mr Trakatellis , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Directive 90 / 219 / EEC on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms ( COM ( 95 ) 0640 - C4-0271 / 96-95 / 0340 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , one of the most important fields in biotechnology concerns the applications of genetically modified micro-organisms produced in laboratories by altering their genetic material .
Those organisms are among the most important tools of biotechnology , which by means of genetic modification , can cause a micro-organism to produce a useful substance , such as human insulin .
Those applications have an important influence on issues relating to health and disease , nutrition , environmental protection , agriculture and other important sectors of human life and activity , and consequently investigation of the potentials of genetically modified micro-organisms must go ahead , because it is a field full of promise .
However , we do not exactly know the nature and dimensions of the risks involved for man and his environment from genetically modified organisms , and it is precisely for that reason that work with such organisms must take place in areas appropriately designed to cope with every kind of risk .
Now that Directive 90 / 219 has been implemented for seven years , its positive and negative points have become clear .
That Directive must now be amended to respond to present-day developments and needs .
I consider that the demand expressed by universities , pharmaceutical companies , industries and SMEs for a simple , clear and flexible framework is both reasonable and logical , so that they can go ahead with their work and investments without uncertainty and lack of clarity .
At the same time , however , we must bear in mind the great importance attached by the various bodies and groups to the protection of health , the environment and biodiversity from dangers associated with genetically modified micro-organisms .
Precisely for that reason , the proposal to amend the Directive should strive for the greatest possible administrative flexibility , not at the cost of safety , but to create a framework that is simple , clear and easy for users and the responsible authorities to implement .
A warning bell must be rung here : flexibility and clarity of the framework must not conflict with the rules of safety .
The danger of an accident sometime in the future is all the greater because the field is continually expanding , and consequently , as we saw with the ' mad cow ' crisis , with its disastrous effect upon the beef market , a simple accident is enough to give a bad name to the industry of biotechnological applications and lead it into crisis .
Improved information for citizens residing in close proximity to areas in which genetically modified micro-organisms are used , but also more general transparency and information of the public concerning the new knowledge and applications of biotechnology , is the best guarantee for the safety , investment and development of this technology in the European Union .
The main elements which in my opinion should be modified in the Directive proposed by the Commission are as follows :
First of all the definition of what a micro-organism is , is complete as given in the old directive .
In contrast , the addition which the Commission proposes to make to that definition creates problems , and it is scientifically difficult to accept that animal or vegetable cells can be defined as micro-organisms .
The replacement of the word ' restrict ' with the word ' prevent ' is necessary , because whereas the first implies some exposure of man and the environment , even if restricted , the second excludes it .
And that is consonant with the treatment of wastes proposed by the Commission .
Thirdly , the classification of work and its associated risk is a step in the right direction .
However , we believe that it is certainly scientifically difficult to prove that all projects in category 2 are low-risk ones .
This is because they involve micro-organisms such as staphylococci , streptococci , diphtheria colibacteria and tetanus clostridium , which are recognised as fairly dangerous towards human health .
Furthermore , category 3 projects are characterized by the Commission as medium-risk .
That is an inconsistency , granted that Directive 90 / 679 already characterizes them as high-risk .
For example , the AIDS virus cannot possibly be considered medium-risk . It is of course high-risk .
The main problem with the Commission 's proposal is precise assessment of the risk .
That point is very unclear .
We have tabled amendments which define in a much better way how that risk is to be assessed .
The assessment will of course be based on estimating the risk to human life , to the environment , and finally , the combination of those two risks together .
It is important to allow the possibility of adapting the directive .
However , we consider that certain essential elements should not be capable of change by commitological procedures and we consider it unacceptable for such elements to be present in the directive 's annexes .
As we know , yesterday the Legal Committee discussed the extent to which the present directive should be based on 130 S , when we would have a cooperation procedure , as opposed to 100 A , when a co-decision procedure would be required .
I should like to stress two things :
First , this directive is directly related to the practical application of methods for the production of biotechnological products , hormones , vaccines , drugs and foods , and it is clear that the cost of research for the development of those products in the context of the directive , will be passed on in the price of the end products .
This is precisely where harmonization of the rules is needed in the context of the internal market .
But even where doubts exist about the extent to which measures are available for the internal market and automatically under 100 A , I would like to remind you , as a second important factor , of the decision we took recently in this Parliament on health protection issues .
Parliament 's decision on 19th February was clear , in that where health issues are concerned it wanted the co-decision procedure .
What I would like to ask the Commission is why there were two texts from different Commission Services during the preparation stage , and finally , which of the amendments will the Commission accept ?
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of my colleague Alain Pompidou , draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Research .
Today we are discussing the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms .
The objective is the dangerfree exploitation of the micro-organisms produced by this technology , which appeared in the 1970s .
This is not a new procedure but a procedure that is now well-known , correctly handled and in relation to which we must distinguish between objective and potential risks .
If a genetically modified construction , or the act of obtaining it , presents a risk , that risk can manifest itself in different ways depending on the characteristics of the operation .
The experience gained over the last 15 years has led to a review of Directive 90 / 219 , with a view to adapting the administrative provisions to the real risks of the operations and take more account of international technical recommendations on bio-safety , namely the protection of human health and the environment .
In relation to risk management , we must ensure that there is close correspondence between the level of risk defined by more accurate evaluation and the complexity of the administrative procedures .
Thus to each level of risk there correspond conditions of containment and experimental practices that depend on both the type of organism and the mode of use .
That is the purpose of the amendments for which our group will vote .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group I would like to welcome this report and thank the rapporteur for the immense amount of work he has done .
The proposal , as we know , sets out measures to protect human health and the environment from the risks associated with activities working with genetically modified organisms in contained conditions .
That means basic research in laboratories and institutions , but also industrial production : for example , brewing , vaccine production and some activities in the food industry .
It will certainly become an important part of the regulatory regime for the biotechnology industry .
We recognize that the present directive needs reform in the light of technical progress and experience gained in the last few years .
The Commission proposal is generally acceptable in principle but we feel we could go further in some areas by focusing particularly on those activities that pose the most significant risks : namely , activities using those organisms listed in Classes III and IV in the risk categories .
In addition , we consider that all the technical annexes to this directive are important and should be subject to adaptation by a technical committee that operates in a way that respects the modus vivendi and which we would hope to see developed into a true partnership between the Commission , Parliament and the Council in the coming few years .
A further concern of the Socialist Group is the issue of risk assessment .
This must be uniform across the Union .
We need to detail this clearly in the annexes to ensure that we have a uniform level of risk assessment across the Union .
In addition , we also think that the containment and control measures , particularly in some aspects of the technical annexes , could be improved .
These are detailed in some of the amendments that we will be supporting .
Finally , I would draw attention to the issue of civil liability .
This is an essential safeguard .
The Commission must accept the need for people carrying out activities in this area to accept legal responsibility for the consequences of any accidents .
We need the Commission to explain clearly its position with regard to this subject , and how it will advance the issue of civil liability , not just in this sector , but in other sectors where human health and the environment could be threatened by inappropriate activity .
In conclusion , I would ask the Commission to accept Parliament 's amendments and utilize them to improve the text ; to ensure that progress in this area takes place in the atmosphere of public trust and confidence which is necessary if the industry is to prosper .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with the proposal it submitted on 6 December 1995 to amend the implementing directive the EU Commission is taking account of more than twenty years of worldwide experience in the use of genetic engineering .
In line with current international scientific knowledge it has introduced new and clearer distinctions , providing for four classes of risk instead of the former two , as is already the case in many European countries .
The proposal also abolishes the distinction between research and trade , which was not very useful in practice .
The proposed changes therefore bring greater simplicity and avoid any unnecessary red tape , since they make the administrative procedure as tight as is possible without sacrificing safety and the industry supports them almost without reservation .
This kind of safe cutting down on red tape is most important to the position of Europe in biotechnology .
To delay these changes would give European research and industry disadvantages in competition , in relation particularly to the USA and Japan , for no practical reason .
I welcome the Commission proposal and the opinion of the Committee on Research and I thank Mr Pompidou .
He managed to improve on the innovations in the Commission proposal with a few very good amendments , without affecting or even putting at risk the simplification and clarification that have been achieved .
Moreover , Mr Pompidou has successful demonstrated the great importance of this directive for European research establishments and managed to induce the Committee on the Environment to accept many of the proposals .
I think the amendment calling for liability insurance in relation to environmental damage would be difficult to carry through in practice .
Moreover , the Commission is in any case intending to draft a white paper on environmental liability , which it will be presenting shortly .
It is doubtful whether there is any point , given this situation , to anticipate the Commission proposal and run the risk of the various rules conflicting with each other .
Mr President , I will concentrate on three points .
The first is the procedure for the proposal .
The second is the reason for amending the Directive , and the third is the content itself .
With regard to the procedure , I will not dwell on the particular legal arrangement by which the Directive should be covered .
Opinions may differ as to what is most appropriate .
But I would stress that it is highly unsatisfactory to have a proposal for debate here in plenary on which a compromise proposal has already been put forward by the Presidency in the Council dealing with points on which there is wide disagreement .
It may be claimed that it is because Parliament has been too long in discussing the matter but , whatever the case may be , it is not a satisfactory situation .
It also seems to show that the Commission and the Council are all too well aware that Parliament 's only real scope for action is to say ' yes ' or ' no ' to the proposal as such , while the Council and the Commission in reality can cock a snook at the amendments we put forward .
As regards the reasons for amending the Directive , the Commission maintains that there may be grounds , in an area in full spate of development , to look again at a directive which has its origins in the 1980s , although it was not adopted until 1990 .
The problem is that the Commission nowhere mentions the scientific results and experience in the light of which the Directive is said to require amendment .
We are thus expected more or less to take the Commission 's word for it and adopt the proposal without actually knowing who the Commission has consulted on this matter , who its advisers were and so forth .
As I have said , there may be grounds for amending the Directive , but the need for an amendment should be documented .
On the content itself , the key issue for us is that the level of protection must not be lowered . This leads me on to point out that , on the amendments regarding classification , the crucial shortcoming of the proposal is that there are no guidelines on how classification should be approached , hence individuals are allowed considerable latitude to classify as they see fit .
This means that we will be supporting a number of amendments in order to make the proposal more acceptable .
Mr President , our Group is in agreement with the excellent work done by Mr Trakatellis and with the additional material by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy under the guidance of Mr Pompidou .

Nevertheless in view of the well-founded state of public alarm , above all as regards genetic engineering , we have tabled two separate amendments pointing out the possible risks and thus preempting the consequences .
To be specific , we think that in the annexes , both in the assessment and classification and in the procedure for urgency , details should be given as to which biological chains , living species , could be affected and how to deal with the risk - because now it is possible to give that information .
Mr President , although the laboratory directive was not adopted until 1990 and has not yet been transposed in many Member States , the Commission has already made a proposal providing for massive deregulation and a drop in environmental and safety standards .
Let me refer to two points .
We need liability for the environment and for human beings , and here I would quite openly ask the Commissioner why the scientists themselves should not be held more responsible ?
If the situation is as the industry and science promise us , namely that biotechnology is safe , why are they so vehemently against liability ?
Secondly , authorization once a specified period of time has elapsed .
I think it is totally irresponsible for authorization to be given on expiry of a certain period of time and for that period to be reduced from 60 to 45 days !
Surely it is absurd that I have to wait longer for authorization to park my bicycle in a certain place than for the authorization of a research laboratory working with pathogenic , genetically manipulated organisms .
We do not need lower environmental and safety standards ; what we need is more environmental standards , more safety and above all more transparency !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since 1990 the European Union has had the strictest legislation on biotechnology anywhere in the world .
Some Member States have been even more stringent when transposing these European rules into their own legislation .
In my view this caution was justified .
But meanwhile we have gained worldwide experience in the use of biotechnology .
The stringent rules in Europe are increasingly proving to be an obstacle to Europe 's position in terms of research and applying the research findings .
Let me give a clear example : a European industrial undertaking , a chemical firm , has 26 research and development establishments , of which 6 are in the European Union , 20 in North and South America , South Africa and the Far East .
Genetic engineering is one of the most important key technologies for the next century and has broad applications in medicine , pharmaceutics , agriculture , food production and the environment .
Genetic engineering and its innovations will have a decisive effect on every country 's economic development in the decades to come .
The 1990 directive on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms was based on the scientific knowledge of the 1980s .
Our group fully supports the Commission 's aims in the proposed amended directive of reducing unnecessary bureaucracy - and I mean unnecessary - while at the same time ensuring the necessary precautions and safety measures .
That includes adapting the system of classification to existing international practice and revising the technical annexes , which are no longer up to date .
Instead of two there will now be four classes of risk , which will make it much easier to assess the risks and take the necessary protective measures .
My group considers it particularly important that the European Parliament will in future be involved fully in any major changes to the directive .
If the risks can be controlled , as has been shown in the past 20 years , I think it is also our responsibility as Christians to look into the chances offered by genetic engineering and to use this technology in a responsible manner .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , technology strides on , new findings mean that laws have to be adapted .
And that is a good thing .
But presumably it will remain a secret on what experience the Commission is basing itself here .
The development of this technology and the associated research has to go on for more than a mere five or six years before we can gain an overview of the possible results of the use of genetically modified micro-organisms .
For that is how brief our experience is with the directive before us .
That is why I consider two amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection most important .
Once concerns information to the public .
In the name of democracy and transparency , the safety measures must be made known .
In this area , public information is the real guarantee of safety .
So it is not enough for the public only to have access to information on emergency plans .
The information must actively be provided to the public .
That is one demand .
The second amendment is based on our recent experience with the Commission ; I am thinking , for instance , of the authorization of genetically modified maize .
This experience shows that we have to set very tight limits to the area where the Commission can make major changes and take major decisions by itself .
That is why it is very important to set very narrow limits to comitology .
That is the second major amendment we tabled .
Nevertheless I have serious doubts whether the necessary safety will actually be guaranteed even if all the amendments are accepted .
The future will tell , and I hope the story will not be a sad one .
Thank you Mr President . I very much hope that when the Commissioner replies she is able to give us quite a detailed position from the Commission on the various amendments put down .
I would like to ask her to circulate , before the vote tomorrow , a list of those amendments that the Commission is likely to accept and those amendments which it finds difficult to accept .
This has been done in the past and it would be of enormous help to us .
It is clear from the debate on cloning which we have already had this week that the usefulness of scientific endeavour in the genetics field has come under very close scrutiny - and I think rightly .
It is also clear that after the BSE crisis we have found it necessary to focus attention on the potential risk to human health from a hitherto unsuspected , possibly microscopic source .
In this context it is understandable that some colleagues are dubious about this proposal , which seeks to streamline approval procedures in a very sensitive field .
I am glad that the committee under Mr Trakatellis ' guidance has felt that it could support the directive , with some amendments to tighten it up .
However , I would like to draw Parliament 's attention particularly to Amendment No 22 to this directive , which has been put down not by our rapporteur but by the Energy Committee , and to draw attention to its importance .
I very much hope that the Commission is able to accept it .
There is a real danger for this Parliament and for the people who elect us that this will be one of our few moments of involvement with the draft directive , and indeed the final directive on the contained use of genetically modified organisms ; that once this directive is adopted - as I think it will be - we will no longer be able to exercise any supervisory role .
Amendment No 22 by the Energy Committee does make sure that the European Commission would submit to Parliament a regular report on what is happening as a consequence of this directive .
I recommend that amendment to the House and I very much hope that the Commission will be able to accept it .
Mr President , I must devote the first few seconds of my speech to a matter unrelated to the Trakatellis report , but bound up with collective ethics .
The President kindly announced to us a few moments ago the immediate response of the Presidency of Parliament to the latest ETA terrorist attack and I am deeply grateful , as a Spaniard , for the solidarity of the citizens of Europe ; but the citizens of Europe , whom this Parliament represents , should know that this feeling of outrage at each ETA murder is difficult to reconcile , from the moral point of view , with the retention of the right of asylum within the European Union for citizens fleeing Spanish justice in connection with these terrorist activities .
Thank you very much , nonetheless , for Parliament 's swift response , Mr President .
To return to the subject of the Trakatellis report , I must say that , in spite of the large number of amendments it contains - which might suggest that it is a very controversial and polemic report - I nevertheless think , as some speakers have mentioned , that irrespective of the amendments - very partial ones -which have been adopted or which are to be put to the vote tomorrow , the whole Parliament is agreed that this proposal for a directive is timely and necessary and that the report is an excellent one - my congratulations to Mr Trakatellis - and that most of the Committee 's amendments are aimed at combining prudence on the part of the public authorities , which we are , in laying down a legal framework with continuing to make use of the resources obtained as a result of genetic engineering .
Consequently , I think that everything has moved towards making the United Nations proposals on bio-diversity , which date from 1992 , compatible with one another ; in this respect , the upholding of the security and dignity of the human race is compatible with the industrial use and continuing research into this subject .
This directive has two objectives , firstly the safe use of genetically modified microorganisms and secondly to stimulate biotechnology research .
The Commission 's proposals need to be improved in two main areas : firstly in relation to damage liability , as has been said .
Anyone working with genetically modified micro-organisms must be liable for any damage that may occur if they are released .
Here I take a quite different view from Mrs Heinisch .
Secondly , there is the question of the legislative processes . Parliament must not be deprived of its right of codetermination in relation to any changes to the scope of this directive .
That applies to Annexes I and II of the directive .
For these are not , as might appear at first glance , technical rules but concern the core of the directive , namely safety .
It did not help us in trying to assess the Commission proposal that the Commission 's general report on the application of the directive is still not available .
Mrs Bjerregaard , you should see to it that it is made available .
In its reply to my written question the Commission announces that it will present its report at an unspecified date in the course of 1997 .
According to the directive it should have presented it last year .
I hope that with its proposed speeding up of the authorization procedures , the Commission will in future also provide the required information to the public and the European Parliament more quickly and at least keep to the prescribed time-limits , i.e. , penalize the Member States suitably for any delays in transposing the legislation .
In view of its negligence in relation to BSE , I think it is all the more necessary to draw the Commission 's attention to these renewed delays .
Mr President , I thank the rapporteur , Mr Trakatellis , and the rapporteur for an opinion of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , Mr Pompidou , for the thorough work that has gone into this report .
As we all know and as has been stressed in the debate here today , the regulation of the GMO area is a difficult matter , and it is high on the political agenda .
Directive No 90 / 219 is a horizontal directive , and it builds on the precautionary principle .
It is intended to ensure that the development of the technology does not endanger human health and the environment .
The Directive thus regulates the rules of play or the safety precautions that must be observed by laboratories conducting research and carrying out work on GMOs .
This Directive covers a highly technical area , which is in a process of rapid development .
It is a field which also has considerable implications both for employment in the EU and for industry .
Experience with the Directive hitherto has shown some weaknesses .
Let me name them ; they are : unsatisfactory classification of GMMs , inadequate guidelines on risk assessment and containment measures , lack of flexibility as regards adaptation to technical development , lack of consistency between notification and administration requirements on the one hand and the risk inherent in the activities in question on the other hand , and excessive administration in connection with low-risk activities .
The Commission 's proposal observes the precautionary principle , while at the same time setting out to solve the practical problems which have arisen in connection with the existing Directive .
The most important changes are that the administrative procedures and notification requirements will be adjusted to the risk inherent in the activities involving genetically modified micro-organisms and - a point raised by several speakers - they will be classified into several risk groups .
Procedures will be simplified , provided that does not lower the level of safety , and clear minimum requirements on containment and control will be introduced for each of the four risk classes ; and it will in future be easier to adapt the Directive to technical development .
Of the 68 amendments tabled , the Commission can unreservedly accept Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 9 , 10 , 16 , 17 , 19 , 31 , 41 and 42 , 49 and 56 .
They all serve to clarify the principles in the Commission proposal .
The Commission can in part accept Amendments Nos 4 , 11 , 27 , 30 , 35 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 43 , 47 , 48 , 54 and 55 , and it can in principle accept Amendments Nos 7 , 8 , 14 , 15 , 17 , 21 and 22 , to which Mrs Jackson in particular sought a reaction , 23 , 24 , 25 , 64 and 68 , which should however be formulated somewhat differently so that they do not create problems in new areas .
I would like to make just one observation regarding Amendment No 37 , because I think that Mrs Gebhardt was indirectly referring to this proposal , namely the question of the legislative procedure for Annex I. The Commission can in part accept the requirement that the full legislative procedure be applied for Annex I. A full legislative procedure , as you know , offers the advantage , sought by several speakers , that both Parliament and the Council have an influence over amendments to the Annex .
Following on from that , the Commission cannot accept 31 of the amendments , and I will comment briefly on some of them .
To begin with , there is Amendment No 1 , which means altering the legal basis for the Commission proposal from Article 130s ( 1 ) to Article 100a .
We cannot accept that .
It is not because the Commission does not sympathize with Parliament 's desire to be fully involved in the legislative process .
We strongly support that .
However , as I understand it , there is no legal authority under the present Treaty for selecting Article 100a in preference to Article 130s , unless the scope of the Directive is altered significantly , so that it has a direct bearing on the internal market .
There is no doubt that the fact of choosing between one or the other of these two provisions amounts to discriminatory treatment of Parliament in a quite incomprehensible way .
I myself hope that this matter will be put to rights by new Treaty amendments .
Let me also add that the proposed amendment of the legal basis would mean that the Member States would not be free , as at present , to introduce stricter requirements for containment and control than those laid down in the Directive .
The present provisions mean that Member States can lay down stricter standards in their own legislation than those required under the Directive .
If the legal basis is amended to 100a , it will mean full harmonization and the Member States will no longer have this freedom .
As a result they may be obliged to weaken their containment and control measures in order to comply with this amendment , and that is of course not desirable .
Amendments Nos 18 and 20 , calling for a separation between Class 3 and Class 4 activities as regards notification requirements , cannot be accepted .
Such a separation would , in the Commission 's opinion , complicate the practical application of the Directive and lead to confusion .
The Commission does , however , realize that the intention of these amendments is to strengthen the administrative supervision of such high-risk activities .
The Commission therefore proposes that both these aims be achieved by requiring express consent for subsequent uses in respect of both Class 3 and Class 4 .
The Commission is not in a position to accept Amendments Nos 44 , 45 and 46 , which seek to limit the scope of the Directive in such a way that only laboratory work for research purposes is included .
The reason is that the Commission wishes to regulate all activity involving laboratory work , irrespective of the final purpose of the work in question .
Then there are Amendments Nos 26 , 36 , 50 , 57 and 58 , which we also cannot accept , because they mean that information to which the public may have access , or aspects of activities on which the public may be consulted , would be limited to health and environmental protection and emergency plans .
In the Commission 's opinion , this is not desirable since it is important that the public should have confidence that gene technology is being satisfactorily regulated .
In the Commission 's view , it would be questionable to leave it up to the notifier to decide what should be covered by health and environmental protection and emergency plans .
For the same reason , the Commission also cannot accept Amendments Nos 32 and 33 .
According to these , the information to be given to the authorities responsible and the Commission in the event of an accident would only include those aspects that relate to the possibility of serious damage .
Again , an unfortunate limitation from the point of view of the public interest .
Concerning Amendments Nos 13 and 28 , it is correct , as Mrs Heinisch said , that we are working on this matter in the form of a White Paper , and I can say that I entirely share the view of Mr Bowe and Mrs Breyer that it is particularly important to have the question of liability dealt with under EU auspices .
While I do not wish to go into detail on all the rejections , let me just mention Amendment No 39 , in respect of which the Commission can accept committee procedure IIb , which allows the Council to adopt arrangements other than those proposed by the Commission , instead of procedure IIIb as provided in the Commission proposal .
As regards the Commission 's report on experience with the Directive , this requirement already arises in Article 18 ( 3 ) .
The report will be sent to Parliament .
Parliament 's proposal that the decisions and minutes of the advisory committee be made available to the public cannot be accepted , since it is not in conformity with the new interinstitutional agreement between the Commission and the European Parliament on transparency and public information in connection with committee meetings .
At the same time I stress - although it goes without saying - that the Commission will honour its commitments under this agreement in full .
The Commission can accept the principle underlying Amendment No 15 tabled by Mr Bowe , but does not think that the wording of the amendment is in conformity with the intention .
Instead , the Commission would propose an amendment requiring that good microbiological practice be regularly assessed .
I will close by again emphasizing the value that the amendments which have been accepted in whole or in part add to the Commission proposal .
An example of this is Amendment No 9 from the rapporteur , Mr Trakatellis , which strengthens the application of the precautionary principle .
Under this amendment , if there is any doubt as to the risk class within which a given activity falls , the higher class would be assigned until sufficient documentation is available .
As I have said , the amendments help to tighten up and clarify the Commission proposal . They will thus assist in bringing about more appropriate and effective outline legislation to achieve the high level of safety we all want to see for activities of the type covered by the Commission proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately I have to put another question .
It is important both to Mr Bowe and to myself to know your position , Commissioner , on liability .
You said very little on Amendments Nos 28 and 30 .
You said you agree with both me and Mr Bowe , but also with Mrs Heinisch .
That is a major contradiction .
We had asked you specifically whether you believe there should be more selfresponsibility in relation to this science ?
That would mean assuming liability .
Anything else , Commissioner , would mean indirect subsidies .
I would like your position on that too .
Last point : I cannot understand how you can say that transparency and access to information would infringe an interinstitutional agreement .
We have the environmental information directive and you are bound to take account of it .
So I really would urgently ask you to answer these two questions .
They are quite elementary and the credibility of biotechnology is at stake here .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , you did not answer me why in your directive there is an inconsistency relating to the previous Directive 679 , which concerns the protection of working people from biological factors .
In that directive it is mentioned that category 3 is a high-risk category , while in this directive it is said that category 3 is a medium-risk category .
That is a serious inconsistency and I would like to ask you : do you consider that working with genetically modified AIDS virus is a medium-risk occupation or a high-risk occupation ?
I therefore urge you to correct that inconsistency , because the Commission had two texts , one official and one unofficial which differs from it in important ways , and in this connection the unofficial text indeed agreed with the previous directive .
I would also like to ask you : what do you intend to do about risk assessment ?
Will you accept our amendments which give completely clear indications about how risk is to be assessed ?
Mr President , when I spoke earlier , using up a great deal of my speaking time , I made a brief attempt to answer the question on liability . I said then that I agreed with Mrs Heinisch that the Commission should now draft a White Paper on the subject , after we had first discussed some of the matters in a communication .
That is because we regard it as a horizontal matter , which means that we cannot deal with the question of liability in the sole context of the proposal under discussion here .
At the same time , I stated my agreement with the remarks of Mrs Breyer and Mr Bowe on the importance of the subject .
I therefore hope that we can return to the matter in a broader context .
I do not think there are problems as regards transparency and public information in connection with the agreement in place .
In my answer here to Parliament , I argued quite specifically in favour of public involvement , and I rejected some of the amendments because I think that they would diminish public involvement , and I referred in that connection to the agreement entered into with Parliament .
With regard to the question put by Mr Trakatellis , I will say that I concentrated in my answer on addressing the various amendments which have rightly retained Parliament 's attention , and it is our impression that there is no material difference between the directive Mr Trakatellis refers to and that we are discussing here .
The problem is that these directives use different classes , and that is what we have tried to resolve in the proposal in its present form and in our acceptance of the amendments I commented on during the debate .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item on the agenda is questions to the Commission ( B4-0019 / 97 ) .
Question No 28 by Mary Banotti ( H-0116 / 97 )
Subject : Interim trade agreement with Israel
Is the Commission satisfied that Article 1 of the interim trade agreement with Israel is being both properly monitored and implemented ?
Will Parliament receive a report from the EU special envoy to the Middle East , with particular reference to the special tasks assigned to him in the Dublin Declaration of December 1996 ?
The Israeli authorities are well aware of the importance the European Union attaches to the rule of law and to strict respect for the undertakings to which Israel has subscribed by her adherence to international conventions on human rights and the Barcelona Declaration of 1995 .
The monitoring of human rights and respect for democratic principles in countries linked to the EU by association agreements is carried out in accordance with the rules of CFSP .
Under the present interim agreement respect of these principles is periodically monitored .
Once ratification of the recently concluded Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement between the European Union and Israel is completed , the Union as a whole will be in an even better position to exercise a positive influence regarding all human-rights-related issues in the framework of the political dialogue with Israel established by the agreement .
A specific human rights clause stipulates that respect for democratic principles and human rights constitutes an essential element of the association agreement .
The EU special envoy to the Middle East peace process reports regularly on his mission to the Council through the presidency and the Commission , with special regard to his mandate , as outlined in the decisions of the Ministers ' meetings of 28 and 29 October 1996 and the Dublin Declaration of 14 December 1996 .
The Commission is fully associated with the special envoy 's tasks .
The special envoy has recently reported to Parliament on the occasion of the hearing at the Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy .
Since Sir Leon has galloped through the answer at enormous speed , I will have to ask him if he would give me a copy of his answer .
I am also really concerned about the question of exports from Palestine and the difficulties many producers are still experiencing when trying to export their goods - and I understand fully the need for security and everything else - because of an excessive amount of rather exigent security checks at the border .
I would also be interested if Sir Leon could tell us why it is considered necessary to register some of the Palestinian produce as being Israeli in order to facilitate its export to European markets .
I would of course be delighted to provide a copy of the answer .
I am sorry if I spoke too quickly ; I was anxious not to take up too much time .
On the specific points , they are not related to the matter of the monitoring of the interim agreement or to the report of the special envoys , so I am not in a position to give a specific answer to them .
But I will certainly draw the attention of those in the Commission dealing with these matters to the points raised .
The first point to be borne in mind is that Community regulations and directives apply throughout the Community and not just in the United Kingdom .
On average nineteen regulations and two directives were adopted each week in 1996 , most of them concerning the common agricultural policy .
These figures are taken from Celex , the publicly accessible interinstitutional database .
They do not , it should be specified , include regulations of what can be called transient status , that is , those which concern the day-to-day management of Community policies such as the common agricultural policy , instruments whose titles appear in ordinary non-bold type in the Official Journal and have a period of validity of between a few days and a few weeks .
In addition - and I think this is very important - it should be emphasized that almost exactly the same number of regulations and directives as are adopted each week also expire or are repealed each week .
The global practical effect therefore is that the sum total of regulations and directives which are applicable in the Community remains more or less constant .
Many thanks to the Commissioner for his very illuminating response .
Members will be aware that over recent weeks Sir James Goldsmith has been funding an extremely expensive poster campaign in the United Kingdom saying , amongst other things , that Brussels ' spouts ' , to use his word , over 100 rules and regulations every week which the United Kingdom must obey .
I think the Commissioner 's response today shows how that poster campaign is not just misleading , it is actually totally untrue .
I would like to ask the Commissioner to give this House an undertaking in the very near future that the Commission will embark upon a campaign in the United Kingdom , spelling out , as he has done to this House today , exactly what the situation is .
Can I first of all say that the honourable gentleman has done a public service in giving me the opportunity to put the record straight and to correct misleading impressions that may have been given .
As to conducting a campaign , I am not sure that the Commission 's resources extend as far as those of the honourable gentleman who has been referred to , but in general terms I certainly think it is important that we should put the facts out as clearly as possible , and this is one of the facts that will now be available to the Commission through its offices in London and other parts of the United Kingdom to make the true facts known .
I myself , in a slightly different context , last week in London , launched the European Movement 's campaign to present the facts on Europe generally , that is , an all-party and non-party campaign to present the facts ; it is given support by the Commission financially too .
Thank you very much , Sir Leon , but may I put a question to you and earn my keep and prove worthy of my office as vice-president .
I should like to be able to call upon you to speak , which would accord with the procedure we follow in this Parliament .
I know that you like to reply right away out of courtesy to the Members , but I too should like to play my part and earn my keep .
Question No 30 by James Provan ( H-0126 / 97 )
Subject : World Trade Organization
The Uruguay Round Agreement of the GATT means that EU agricultural trade is operating within a global trading system and that future agricultural policy decisions must take account of this .
As we prepare ourselves for a new round of World Trade Organization talks it seems imperative that the EU should put itself in a strong negotiating position .
What action is the Commission currently taking to bring this about ?
It is undeniable that agricultural trade operates within the global trading system .
It is the agreement on agriculture negotiated in the Uruguay Round which sets the ground rules for agricultural trade .
The question of future negotiations is taken up in the agreement on agriculture which foresees that , and I quote : ' Negotiations for continuing the process will be initiated one year before the end of the implementation period ' .
The Commission is aware of the need for an in-depth preparation of the negotiations , which are due to start at the end of the century .
The Commission is ensuring that work is put in hand in a timely fashion so that we are placed in a strong negotiating position from the outset .
I thank the Commissioner for that very interesting and , I am sure , correct answer .
Many of us in this House , however , are concerned that whilst maybe certain DGs within the Commission are interested in trade negotiations , it appears that DG VI in particular - the agriculture directorate - is perhaps hanging back a little bit .
The feeling is that we really have to take a major step to try to ensure that reform of the CAP is seen to be continuing , and that is not highly apparent at the present time .
It would be helpful if the Commission were to take an initiative fairly quickly to make the agriculturalists and the farmers in the European Community aware of the fact that these negotiations will be coming and that if we do not take the correct steps to reform the CAP before those negotiations we will be on the wrong foot and on the defensive .
I should just finish by saying that I hope the Commissioner understands this and that DG VI will therefore be fully involved in all the negotiations that he is going to be undertaking .
The agricultural community is well aware of our commitment to resume negotiations , as agreed in the Uruguay Round , and all parts of the Commission are also aware of this .
With regard to the question of the evolution of the CAP , there are , of course , a number of pressures pointing in the same direction : one is the prospect of new negotiations in the context of the WTO ; another is the prospect of enlargement and a third is , of course , internal pressures of a budgetary kind , relating to the cost of agriculture .
All of those are coming together and will mean that the common agricultural policy will have to evolve further .
But it is also fair to say to our trading partners that they cannot expect to get any further progress ahead of what has been agreed in the Uruguay Round , which is what some of them tried to do in the period before the Singapore ministerial meeting of the WTO .
What was agreed was that the process of analysis and information exchange should take place , but no more than that .
So it is quite natural that , in defending ourselves from premature pressure from the outside world , we should take a properly cautious position .
But I can assure you that will not prevent us doing what is necessary , being aware of the timescale and the cumulative factors that will bring to bear , and we shall make every effort to bring about a situation in which all parts of the Commission work together to handle this issue .
A strong bargaining position is for me the same as aggressively helping European farmers to obtain a reasonable share of an increasing world market .
There is a concern within the EU about free competition in this market .
I believe this concern to be exaggerated .
It is in my opinion important to adjust EU price levels to those of the world market .
A certain level of compensation may be required , but the profit would still be there .
Do the members of the Commission share this view ?
As , at the moment , we are simply working on the process of analysis of information exchange , it will not surprise the honourable Member to know that the Commission has not formulated its negotiating stance for the next round to begin in some years ' time .
It would be very unusual to do that at this early stage .
But I understand the force of the honourable Member 's point and I have no doubt that it will be a rich contribution to the evolving debate .
Since the author is not here , Question 31 falls .
Question No 32 by Wolfgang Kreissl-Dörfler , which has been taken over by Mr Schnellhardt ( H-0170 / 97 )
Subject : Support for environmental protection and the land rights of indigenous peoples under the EU-Canada action plan
According to a study by the Sierra Legal Defense Fund , even following the introduction of the most recent forestry law in the Canadian province of British Columbia ( British Columbia Forest Practises Code ) , 92 % of the felling undertaken by the major timber companies is still carried out as clear felling , with the directives on watercourses also being disregarded in most cases .
In addition in th great coastal rain forests which are the traditional territory of the Nuxalk Indians , large parts of their land are being released to timber companies for clear-felling under long-term lease licences .
What joint actions will the Commission take under the Canada-EU action plan to hal these clear felling practices and the destruction of the territory of indigenous peoples , thus also implementing the international obligations for sustainable development entered into both by the EU and the Canadian government ( e.g. the Convention on Biological Diversity , Agenda 21 ) ?
Chapter 3 of the EU-Canada joint action plan contains specific language concerning preservation of the environment in general and sustainable management of forestry in particular .
In the action plan the EU and Canada , for instance , commit themselves to exchanging information and reports on forestry issues .
The action plan furthermore provides that the EU and Canada will work together at the UN Commission on Sustainable Development and will continue to work on a successful conclusion of the Commission 's work on the sustainable management of forests .
There is thus a clear mandate in the action plan to continue and further develop cooperation and dialogue with regard to forestry and the environment .
The action plan is , however , not considered to be a legally binding agreement but rather a statement of intentions and political will to cooperate on a wide range of issues .
The EU and Canada agree that a legally binding international regime for sustainable management of forests is necessary and we are working together to initiate negotiations on a global forest convention under the auspices of the United Nations .
An opportunity to raise forestry-related issues with Canada on a bilateral level already exists through the so-called ad hoc Working Group on Forestry , which is part of the EU-Canada annual high-level consultations on the environment .
At the last meeting of the working group on 24 October last , the Canadian side mentioned that Canada is launching a new aboriginal forestry programme .
With regard to the question of indigenous people , the Commission and the European Union are deeply attached to promoting sustainable development practices which take due account of indigenous peoples ' human rights , including land tenure and the preservation of traditional lifestyles .
The European Union has raised these issues repeatedly in relevant contexts , such as the Convention on Biological Diversity , and , in line with the conclusions of the Rio Conference of 1992 , it has always emphasized the link between the promotion of human rights and respect for the environment .
Thank you , Sir Leon .
Mr Schnellhardt does not wish to speak , so we have come to the end of this block of questions .
Whilst we are waiting for Mr Van den Broek to arrive , I suggest we break for a few moments .
( The sitting was suspended for a few moments )
Ladies and gentlemen , now that we have had a few moments of welcome relaxation - for which we gratefully than Mr Van den Broek - I suggest that we resume our sitting .

I have to inform you that Question No 33 by Mr Graziani on the situation in Albania will not be considered because , as you know , it is being discussed within the scope of this Parliamentary session .
Question No 34 by Leen van der Waal ( H-0117 / 97 )
Subject : Customs levy imposed by Ukraine on humanitarian aid
According to reports in the Dutch press , Ukraine abolished the tax-free import of goods constituting humanitarian aid on 1 January 1997 .
Aid is now subject to a customs levy of some 30 % which has to be paid by the recipient of the aid .
Although the measure is designed to counter any misuse of the opportunity of importing goods free of tax , it is reported that the activities of bona fide aid organizations are also being adversely affected by the customs levy .
Can the Commission confirm these reports and indicate what steps might be taken in order to secure the free export by bona fide aid organizations of goods constituting humanitarian aid ?
I should like to make the following points in reply to Mr van der Waal 's question .
The Ukrainian Parliament adopted a law on 17 December 1996 abolishing the exemption enjoyed by humanitarian aid from import duties , VAT and other taxes .
The law came into force on 8 January this year , and was designed to eliminate abuse and fraud in the sending of aid consignments .
The Commission contacted the Ukrainian authorities through its delegation in Kiev in an attempt to resolve this problem , and the European Union troika brought the issue up at its meeting with the Ukrainian Foreign Minister , Mr Udovenko , on 5 February in The Hague .
The troika was given an assurance by the Ukrainian authorities that an amendment to the law would be brought before parliament to restore the tax-free status of humanitarian aid .
On 20 February , the Ukrainian Parliament adopted a resolution giving the government the power , in the short term , to allow humanitarian aid to be imported tax-free , on condition that each part of the consignment is properly labelled .
This provided a legal solution to the problem .
However , donor organizations and their counterparts in the Ukraine are being advised to contact the Ukrainian authorities or their embassies before sending any aid .
Organizations receiving funding from the Commission , such as through ECHO , and which encounter problems should contact the Commission delegation in Kiev .
I hope that this answer has reassured Mr van der Waal .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for his answer , and in particular for the trouble his office has taken over this matter .
It does indeed appear that there is legislation in the pipeline which will once again make the import of these goods tax-free , and I think we need to concentrate now on the period until this legislation comes into force .

The Commissioner suggested that we should look to the embassies for as much help as possible , but I can foresee problems here , in that wherever the aid supplies arrive , permission will be needed to release and distribute them , and instructions will be needed from the authorities in Kiev if all this is to run smoothly .
These are details which we cannot expect to resolve at the moment .
Perhaps the Commissioner could tell us if the European Union ambassador could also be notified about aid consignments that are to be sent , and if he will promise that the Commission will constantly monitor the situation .
I think it would indeed be best for anyone sending aid to contact their counterparts who are to receive the goods , their own ambassador or the Commission delegation .
I think I would be overstepping the mark if I said the Commission delegation would handle all the consignments sent to Kiev by the Member States , aid organizations and so on .
So as I said , if the goods are financed by Community programmes such as our humanitarian organization ECHO , then of course our delegation can be approached .
Otherwise I would strongly recommend contacting the appropriate national embassy .
If there is not an embassy , then our delegation will always be pleased to help .
Commissioner , thank you very much for your answer , but I would like to put a practical question .
There are still difficulties today , especially in countries bordering on others where there is genuine misery .
Would it not perhaps be useful for the Commission to try to come to a general agreement at least with the states that have already applied for membership of the European Union , in other words with the 11 states that really do want relations with us ?
We need a general agreement that also covers the question of transit in the various states where there really is misery - Romania for instance - so that we can resolve this problem , for to act through embassies takes a very long time and is very bureaucratic .
Muchas graçias , Señor Presidente !
I entirely agree with Mr von Habsburg that the countries which have applied to join the European Union are certainly not expected to cause any problems here , or else have already agreed not to obstruct goods in transit , to take the example he mentioned .
But the country in question here is not an applicant country , it is Ukraine , and as you know we have a partnership agreement with Ukraine which specifically states that in areas such as goods in transit , the goods must not be discriminated against compared with goods of national origin .
In this respect , I entirely agree with Mr von Habsburg that we must try to eliminate these kinds of obstacles , even with countries with which we have partnership agreements .
However , I fear that this will have to be done on an ad hoc basis each time the occasion arises , because in this case , for example , the levy on humanitarian supplies and so on was reinstated quite unexpectedly , and we were forced to intervene at a political level to have the decision reversed .
We shall have to make sure that the new rules are applied throughout the country , but I am confident from our contacts hitherto that there will be a considerable improvement in the situation .
Thank you , Mr Commissioner .
Question No 35 by Ursula Stenzel ( H-0128 / 97 )
Subject : Phare - Poland
Since its introduction in 1995 , the Phare programme has been the most important financial instrument for the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
However , implementation of Phare is beset by major problems because the programme is very fragmented and its funds are poorly allocated .
What is the Commission doing to utilize Phare programme funds more efficiently in the important preparatory stage ?
What specific measures are being introduced in favour of Poland with a view to using Phare programme funds to prepare that applicant country 's administrative authorities for accession ?
Does the Commission plan to step up training for Polish officials to familiarize them with current EU law ?
As you know , the Phare programme began in 1989 , primarily as a programme of technical aid to assist the process of economic conversion and reform in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
As part of the pre-accession strategy , Phare was identified in 1994 as the ideal financial instrument for helping the associated countries to adopt the ' acquis communautaire ' and to complete the market reforms and economic restructuring required in the medium term to make them eligible for membership .
In view of the political timetable for the enlargement negotiations , we are currently planning a fundamental reorganization of both how the aid is allocated and what it is allocated for , in other words of the entire implementation system .
The aim is to help the applicant countries with the transposition , interpretation and enforcement of the ' acquis ' , and it will make Phare more effective and useful as the main financial instrument for helping the applicant countries to prepare for membership of the Union .

In 1995 and 1996 , Poland was allocated a total of ECU 377 million , 82 % of which was divided between just six sectors : transfrontier cooperation , transport , agriculture , small and medium-sized businesses , regional development , and the well-known Tempus programme .
The aid in these sectors was concentrated on promoting the integration process either in material terms or in the fields of legislation or education .
Harmonizing legislation and institutional consolidation are important elements of these programmes and are sure to be continued in future .
Together with the Polish Government , the Commission is examining the further concentration of Phare assistance to support the Polish Government 's national integration strategy .
On the training of government officials , I can tell you the following : in 1992 , Phare financed a public administration reform programme in Poland which played an important part in the development of the new law on government services and the central government reforms introduced in 1996 .
The European Institute for Public Administration is currently holding training courses for officials in Poland which are also being funded by Phare , and funding is also being provided for a Dutch organization to give veterinary inspectors important training in methods of quality control .
From 1997 , funding is to be provided for further specific institutional consolidation and training for officials on the Union ' acquis ' , in line with the government 's new priorities under its national integration strategy , which I mentioned earlier .
I have just one small supplementary in relation to the training of officials , which the Commissioner referred to .
I hope that it would be possible , since officials of the Polish parliament and Polish ministries will have to deal with this Parliament and assist , in the course of time , Polish Members of this Parliament , that the training could also involve links with Parliament and , indeed , Members of Parliament .
In this context I was pleased to be invited along with others to speak last autumn to a group of officials from the Polish parliament who were visiting London under the auspices of one of the London universities .
It seemed to me that the officials were very keen to know more about Parliament .
Could we take account of that in what is being organized ?
We would be more than happy to look into this matter .
I would also point out that we are very much in favour of the Poland / European Parliament joint parliamentary committees which meet at certain times and which may well provide opportunities for exchanges of information between MEPs and members of the Polish Parliament .
More generally , however , I agree with the honourable Member that in our democratization programmes , for example , and our programmes designed to strengthen democratic institutions in Poland , consideration must also be given , wherever the need arises , to providing information for members of parliament as well .
Thank you , Mr Van den Broek .
Question No 36 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0129 / 97 )
Subject : Partnership and cooperation agreements with the countries of Central Asia and Mongolia
What is the Commission 's proposed time-frame for approval of the partnership and cooperation agreements with Central Asia and Mongolia ?
Three partnership and cooperation agreements have been signed with Central Asian countries : Kazakhstan in January 1995 , Kirgizstan in February 1995 , and Uzbekistan in June 1996 .
For these agreements to be concluded and enter into force , they must be ratified by the national parliaments in the Member States and , of course , by the European Parliament .
Hitherto , the agreements with Kazakhstan and Kirgizstan have been ratified by the parliaments of seven Member States .
The European Parliament has ratified the agreement with Kirgizstan , but the agreement with Kazakhstan is still pending .
The process for approving the partnership and cooperation agreement with Uzbekistan began only recently and it has therefore not yet been ratified by anyone .
The Commission has also been instructed by the Council to negotiate a similar agreement with Turkmenistan , but so far there are no plans to negotiate such an agreement with Tadjikistan , where there is still a situation of armed conflict .
Finally , it is also not planned to enter into negotiations with Mongolia in the foreseeable future , since relations between the European Community and Mongolia are already covered by a trade and cooperation agreement which came into force on 1 March 1993 .
I thank the Commissioner for the information he has this afternoon given to this House .
In any case it is very clear that there is still a long way to go and the pace is slow .
In fact , as the Commissioner has told us , the cooperation agreement with Uzbekistan signed in June 1996 has been ratified by Uzbekistan only .
I should like to ask whether Finland has ratified recently .
In the case of Kazakhstan it was in fact seven .
Kazakhstan itself has serious problems with the democratic deficit and has not ratified either .
The case is similar for Kirghizstan .
It appears that this Parliament , which has still not ratified any of the three agreements mentioned , is proposing to ratify the Kazakhstan agreement after tomorrow .
In any event , as regards the three which the Commissioner mentioned , Mongolia , Turkmenistan and Tadzikistan , the process should be speeded up as far as possible since the main objective is to step up political dialogue with these countries .
I entirely agree with what the honourable Member said regarding the need to speed up the procedures for approving agreements which have been concluded , or are about to be concluded .
I had the pleasure of accompanying the Dutch presidency and President Santer to the Moscow summit ten days ago , and if I tell you that the partnership agreement with Russia was concluded two years ago , as was the agreement with Ukraine , and we are still struggling to have them both ratified , you will have some idea of the effort required to persuade all 15 Member States to conclude the ratification process in good time .
In this particular case , there has been an additional legal complication caused by the accession of Finland , Sweden and Austria , which now also have to go through the ratification procedures .
But you may be sure that the Commission is doing everything it can to speed things up , since there are no actual political obstacles in any of the cases to which you referred .
Can the Commissioner comment on the current human rights situation in Uzbekistan , and does he think the situation there is suitable enough for the EU to proceed with the ratification of a partnership and cooperation agreement with that country ?
I would be interested to hear his views .
The reason why the Commission recommended that the Council should give it a mandate to negotiate a partnership agreement with Uzbekistan was because of the country 's importance in the Central Asian region , and not because the democratic and human rights situation there is ideal .
What persuaded us to approach the Council , and what persuaded the Council to agree to our request , was the fact that we were convinced that the government of Uzbekistan was entirely open to discussions on its human rights record , and indeed talks are still continuing .

So while I would agree with Mr Truscott that the situation leaves something to be desired , it is also true that Uzbekistan is open to dialogue , and continuing to work on the partnership agreement could be an incentive for it to improve the quality of its democracy and its record on human rights .
Thank you , Mr Van den Broek .

Ladies and gentlemen , with Question No 36 we have used up the 20 minutes allocated for this block , so I must therfore first thank the Commissioner for the time he has given us , then tell you that Questions 37 to 44 will be answered in writing .
So , ladies and gentlemen , we can move on to the next block which comes under the jurisdiction of Madam Commissioner Bjerregaard .
Question No 45 by Ivar Virgin ( H-0077 / 97 )
Subject : The creation of wetlands
Wetlands are able to trap nutritive salts and can protect our seas against eutrophication which poses a threat to the reproduction of animal species .
This is a big problem in the Baltic Sea .
The current EU programme for environmental improvements in agriculture , Programme 2078 , includes incentives for the creation of wetlands , though only in the case of the area set aside for this purpose .
Support for the investment required to create wetlands capable of trapping nitrogen would benefit the environment , especially with regard to eutrophication .
Does the Commission intend to change the rules so as to make this type of support possible ?
Mr President , under Regulation No 2078 of 1992 the Member States must introduce programmes for environmentally compatible agriculture , but the detailed formulation of the programmes is in the main left to the Member States .
There is nothing to prevent a Member State from using Regulation No 2078 to create wetlands at any suitable location on the territory of the State .
It is not obliged to limit such measures to specially designated areas .
Within specified ceilings , the Community can contribute to the financing of such projects .
I will merely confirm the conclusion Mr Virgin drew from my answer .
Clearly , there are various economic possibilities for supporting these areas and various forms of co-financing which fall within the powers of the Commissioner for Agriculture .
As there are a good many questions to answer , I will refrain from going into detail on the matter , but there are a number of facilities that can certainly be used .
Thank you , Mrs Bjerregaard .
Question No 46 by Tom Spencer ( H-0114 / 97 )
Subject : Endocrine-disrupting chemicals
Is the Commission aware of increasing scientific evidence which points to human and wildlife reproduction and hormonal balance being affected by a cocktail of chemicals passed through the food chain , through industrial emissions and products , and present in consumer food packaging ?
These hormone-mimicking substances , known as endocrine disruptors , have been shown to have direct effects on animal reproductive systems and have been linked to declining human sperm counts , increased evidence of reproductive cancer , such as breast cancer and behavioural problems and neurological deficits .
Given that existing EU legislation on toxicity tests and release of harmful substances does not cover the effects of endocrine disruptors at present , what action does the Commission intend to take to safeguard future generations ?
The Commission is well aware of the question of endocrine disruptors which affect various parts of the general hormone system , including reproductive systems , on which possible effects are mentioned in the question .
There is now no doubt that these effects exist , but there is doubt as to what could be called the mechanism of action . There is also doubt as to the causal relationships , and test methods are lacking .
Irrespective of this uncertainty , there are some rules in the field .
We have classified as toxic to the reproductive system a number of substances which probably have effects on human health due to endocrine disruption .
Substances such as PCB and DDT , which have often been mentioned as endocrine disruptors , have of course long been banned for other reasons .
It is true that Community legislation on test programmes for industrial chemicals does not cover toxicity to human reproduction or effects on wildlife .
That is a deficiency , because there is a need for test protocols to establish which of the hundreds of thousands of substances on the market can cause the endocrine-disruptive effects described .
In the Framework Programme For Research , and the arrangements under it for bilateral cooperation with the USA , the Commission has given top priority to the development of screening methods to identify potential endocrine disruptors and to new methods of assessing new side-effects , which are not covered by current legislation , as well as epidemiological studies to determine the extent of the problem .
Thus , while it recognizes that there are certain effects on humans and the environment which may be due to disruption of the endocrine system by industrial chemicals , the Commission will seek to clarify how great the problem is , develop these screening methods and establish the causal relationships with a view to selectively regulating specific substances or groups of substances within the framework of a comprehensive programme .
I thank the Commissioner for that thoughtful answer .
I suggest that this is a clear case of when we should observe the precautionary principle that if even 50 % of the threats implied by our current state of scientific knowledge prove to be real , then we are facing a very serious and very complicated challenge indeed .
I ask the Commissioner to confirm that we might expect from the Commission some specific work in the research programmes of the European Union ( things which both the Commission and the European Environment Agency do directly ) , using her considerable influence to encourage both industrial and theoretical research in this area ; and secondly , that she might consider , with her colleagues in the Commission , a review of how this threat impacts not just on the Environment Directorate but across a broad sweep of Commission proposals and activities .
I entirely agree that these matters must remain subject to the precautionary principle , and I also agree that that principle must be applied extensively in the research programme .
I mentioned in my answer that we had already ensured that it would be applied , and I also consider it important that we continue to build on that .
I think it may be appropriate to look at the matter in a broader context and , in the light of the brief debate we have had here , we will consider how we can tackle it on a somewhat broader basis than dealing with it solely as an environmental issue .
Apart from the matter of endocrine-disruptors raised by Mr Spencer , the Commissioner will be aware that there are others areas where EU legislation does not cover the ingestion of harmful substances through both the food chain and the water supply .
Will the Commissioner also consider looking into EU standards to encompass the recent outbreak of crypto-spirillum bacteria in the UK ?
I have submitted a more detailed question on this matter but would be interested in hearing the Commissioner 's initial thoughts on the issue .
I cannot promise to answer all supplementary questions on substances we need to look at more closely in connection with the question put by Mr Spencer .
We have already got to grips with some of these problems in the context of the Drinking Water Directive , of which the questioner is no doubt also aware . I understand from Directorate-General XI that we have not concerned ourselves specifically with the problems raised by the questioner , but we will look at them in the context indicated .
Would the Commissioner agree that things seem to have been moving very slowly on endocrine disruptors , and could she give any dates by which she hopes there might be some results from the research ?
Could she tell us whether she is planning research simply on substances in isolation , or whether any work at all is going to be done on the cocktail effect , which many people feel is particularly dangerous in this field and about which very little is known ?
When we discuss these problems relating partly to human health and partly to the environment , we very often get into a situation in which we quickly need scientific results other than those immediately available to us .
It very often happens that the results we get are such that we rightly become concerned over a development and feel the need to act .
On the other hand , we cannot do that without ensuring that it is thoroughly investigated .
We cannot act on suspicion .
Hence , as I said in answer to Mr Spencer earlier , we are endeavouring to move things forward on the research front and to secure some of those results .
Clearly , we are also endeavouring to prioritize these subjects which are giving rise to concern among the population .
I am sorry that I cannot give a more precise answer at the present time , but I am not in a position to do so .
I am only aware that we have got things moving on the research front .
How far we are forward and when I shall be able to present any results , I am not able to say in the context of Question Time today . But it provides an excellent opportunity to seek some clarification of the matter , and I will make sure that that is done .
Thank you , Mrs Bjerragaard .
Question No 47 by Konrad Schwaiger ( H-0124 / 97 )
Subject : Decimation of fish stocks by cormorants in the Rhine and other EU inland waterways
Is the Commission aware that the destruction of fish stocks by cormorants in and along the Rhine has become a European problem ?
Is it aware that in late 1996 thousands of fishermen from France , Germany and Switzerland held a mass demonstration in Strasbourg to draw attention to the cormorant menace ?
Does the Commission regard the Land government of Baden-Würtemberg 's ' Cormorant Decree ' of 16 December 1996 as an appropriate and adequate measure for decimating cormorant populations in internal waterways in which they were not indigenous ?
Would it not be desirable to consider other measures to bring a permanent cross-border reduction in cormorant numbers ?
Is the Commission contemplating , if they continue to proliferate , removing cormorants - at least temporarily - from Annex 1 of the bird protection Directive ?
It is not the first time I have had the occasion to answer such a question . We are aware of the rising number of cormorants in certain regions of the EU , which are widely regarded by anglers and fishing interests as having a negative effect on fish stocks .
The situation was described in a recent study from 1996 , entitled Cormorants , Phalacrocorax carbo , a first step towards a European management plan .
This report does not contain any particular indications or complaints of observed damage to leisure or commercial fisheries on the Rhine , but I am aware that the subject often crops up in public discussions .
On the other hand , the report does point out that the species has attained positive conservation status .
In order to take account of this fact and the many and varied viewpoints and concerns manifested on this subject , the Commission will present a proposal to the committee concerned to remove the sub-species from Annex 1 to Council Directive 79 / 409 on the Conservation of Wild Birds .
The Commission will also urge Member States to cooperate on controlling populations of this sub-species .
In fact , the Member States can control the populations of species locally under the terms of Article 9 of the Bird Directive , if they wish to take action at places where cormorants constitute a problem .
As regards the Cormorant Decree of Land Baden-Württemberg of 16 December 1996 , the Commission has not yet received notification of any such a measure .
Mr President , Commissioner , are you aware that the Committee of the Regions ' working group on agriculture has also drawn attention to this problem and that the ministers of agriculture of various regions are now also addressing the Commission on this question ?
The first cormorants appeared here , in this area on the central Upper Rhine , in 1973 .
In the late 1970s there were 10 pairs .
Now there are 20 000 .
Are any further studies needed here given that fishermen and anglers are already on the streets to draw attention to their problems ?
Should we not take joint action here and consider culling the stock to a reasonable level ?
Your answer seems rather hesitant to me .
I do not think my answer was particularly hesitant . I pointed out that a proposal would be presented to the committee concerned to remove the sub-species Phalacrocorax carbo sinensis from the Directive .
I also stated in my answer that we would be urging Member States to cooperate on controlling populations of this sub-species . So I think my answer gave a sufficient indication that we are looking at the problem and are putting the matter before the committees and authorities which will have to deal with it .
Emphasizing my support for the wild bird directive , it is important to say that angling is the biggest participation sport in Britain and , I assume , in Europe , and it is important to show that we listen to the points made to us by anglers .
It is not just a problem on the Rhine , it is a problem in the UK too , where , for example , the Billericay and District Angling Society in my constituency , which has over 3 , 400 members , has seen the fish depleted in the 22 different waters which they use for angling .
It is a voluntary association but they had to spend £ 1 , 700 last year to restock with fish waters that have been depleted .
I do not want to see the culling of wild birds but I would like to see every alternative explored .
I particularly ask the Commissioner two things : firstly , will you accept that there is a European dimension to this ?
It is the depletion of fishstocks in our coastal waters and the failure of the common fisheries policy which is driving the cormorants inland .
Secondly , will you comment on the position of the British Government where the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries has said it will take three to five years before it reports on this ?
If they can act under Article 9 , as she said , will she not talk to them so that they can act more quickly ?
I have to say that I am not aware of the reaction pattern of the British Government on this matter , but I stress again that what I have said here today is that we will use the Directive on the Conservation of Wild Birds to ask the committee concerned whether this sub-species , Phalacrocorax carbo sinensis by name , not a particularly easy one to say , can be removed from Annex 1 , so that we can solve this problem which has been raised in various quarters .
If I understood the Commissioner correctly , she intends to remove cormorants from Annex I of an earlier directive .
I find this most regrettable , because the link between cormorants and fish stocks has never been clearly proved .
The main threat to fish stocks is actually overfishing , so we would be changing Annex I of the earlier directive for the wrong reason .
I would hope that the Commission will change its mind on this , but Parliament will naturally have an opportunity to give its opinion on the proposal once it receives it in writing .
But at this stage , I do not agree at all with what the Commissioner intends to do .
I was of course not proposing that Annex 1 should be removed from the Bird Directive .
I was referring to a single species of cormorant and , on the basis of the information available to me and the DirectorateGeneral , I will present to the committee responsible the proposal I have indicated .
Mr President , I have to say that I do not think I have a really satisfactory answer to give to these two questions .
I will say to Mrs de Rivera that , at the 16th meeting of the Standing Committee , a common position was presented on progress achieved on the setting up of a marine nature park in Greece .
A number of matters falling within the sole powers of the Community , such as fisheries , could not be dealt with , however , because the Commission had not yet received the mandate it had asked for from the Council .
Mr President , there is no doubt that the response , as the Commissioner said , is not at all satisfactory .
Therefore , if she says it is not satisfactory , I must ask her whether she does not fear that there will be no common position by December 1997 , which could affect the protection of species in the first place ; if we are going to manage to arrive at a joint position by December 1997 what changes will have to be made ?
Will the Commission be better organized in order to reach agreement ?
And thirdly , are talks due to be held beforehand with non-government organizations , as is usually the case ?
As I said , I did not think it was a particularly satisfactory answer to give . Of course it is not unusual that we are not able to discuss a matter because there is no common position .
Prompted by this question therefore , and against the background of the representations I have received from the NGOs which have a special interest in this area , I intend to ensure that we do not end up in such a situation again .
We must do what we can to move things forward in the Council - there is a recommendation from the Commission on the matter - so that we can get to play a more active role .
So at least I can promise that , prompted by the questions raised in Parliament today , we will do what we can to avoid getting into such an unfortunate situation again .
I could understand you answering both our questions together , but it should not be so difficult to give me a separate answer to my question on what consultation arrangements there have been over the past five years between the Commission and the Member States .
It must be quite easy to answer .
I am not just interested to know whether the Commission will in future come prepared with a common position since , without it , we block fifteen votes , i.e. everything that is to be adopted by qualified majority in conjunction with the Berne Convention cannot be adopted when the Commission blocks fifteen votes , votes that cannot be used .
That is in itself extremely unsatisfactory .
But , after we got a habitat directive , the way things went was that the Commission met with the fifteen Member States at the preparatory meetings of the Berne Convention Standing Committee , where a common position was established .
Does the Commissioner think it appropriate that the Commission should determine the common position of the fifteen Member States at a time when the NGOs were not yet in the picture and there was no possibility of taking into account the views of the NGOs , since the NGOs cannot be present at this preparatory meeting ?
I hope that it is clear what I wanted to ask about , now that time is so short .
No , I was not trying to get out of giving Mrs Sandbæk an answer to the question she had asked .
I merely pointed out that there was a connection between the two questions and , in essence , I do not think the answer I gave to Mrs Sandbæk was all that much better than the one I gave to Mrs Rivera .
As regards the formal consultations , there is no requirement that such formal consultations should take place in this area . So I cannot of course say that there have been so and so many consultations , because there was no obligation to hold such formal consultations .
It is not so long ago that we had a discussion on financial support to the NGOs , in which we had the occasion to discuss the role of NGOs in the environmental field and in which I clearly stated my view that we should try to involve the NGOs actively in the work .
That also applies in this area , and I think there is much to show that we are pressing for an improvement here . We must make sure that we make progress on that .
Mr President , the Commission 's recruitment and staff policy is based on the principle of equality .
Under this principle all suitable candidates are treated equally and all members of the Commission 's staff have the same possibilities for career development .
The Commission looks favourably on all measures which promote the integration of disabled people into the Commission 's working environment .
The Commission has issued guidelines for the recruitment of disabled people .
Its aim is that these guidelines should come into use in all the EU bodies .
The guidelines relate to all areas of working life : recruitment , education , career development and the working environment .
In this they also comply with the principles which the Helios programme stresses .
An official will be appointed to follow up the implementation of the guidelines .
The Commission 's new buildings will have to comply with the national legislation on access to public buildings for disabled people in the country in which they are situated .
The rules concerning Commission buildings contain strict criteria on the adaptation of buildings to meet the needs of disabled workers .
Very briefly , firstly , my question was not specifically about recruitment policy but policy towards existing personnel .
I should like to give the Commissioner a hypothetical example : if a 62-year-old , registered blind official was working in an external office - in other words he is only three years from retirement - and he is comfortable in that office , can find his way around about it and there are no complaints about the quality of his work , would he think it a reasonable policy towards disabled people to consider compulsory transfer of that individual back to Brussels at that stage of his career ?
Mr President , it very difficult to answer hypothetical questions .
If this occurred to a disabled person who was carrying out his duties well and wanted to carry on working , I should gladly do my best to ensure that he was able to continue in his former duties , if this was in the interests of himself and the Community .
In such matters an employer must show a great deal of flexibility .
The Commissioner mentioned making Member States ' buildings accessible to disabled persons .
Would he be in favour of having discussions with the other institutions at Community level to ensure that all our buildings - parliamentary buildings , the new Council building , and any agencies the Commission has - would be able to be accessed easily and speedily by disabled persons ?
On his recruitment policy , would he look again at the problem of discrimination on the grounds of age , which has been a considerable difficulty ?
Would he enter into discussions on the recruitment policies on ageism as well ?
Mr President , we have a project on this very subject which is just now being launched .
Its purpose is to organize an architects ' competition together with the Brussels institutions and the Belgian authorities .
The aim is to create pedestrian ways between the buildings which can be safely used by disabled people .
At present moving safely from one building to another in Brussels is completely impossible for disabled people too .
We will be discussing this matter among the institutions on Monday , and on Tuesday we will be meeting the Belgian authorities .
I am prepared to bring up this matter of rules governing the buildings themselves with the officials responsible in other institutions too , at our meeting on Monday .
I am prepared to return to this matter later .
Concerning age limits , the Commission has decided on a new policy for the recruitment of officials on fixed-term contracts .
This will mean that the Commission will continue to hold competitions for young applicants of under 32 or under 35 years of age , but also for older applicants at A4 to A5 level where the age limit will be considerably higher , even up to 55 years .
The aim is thus to achieve more differentiated competitions .
I would like to ask the Commissioner , following on from his own response just now , with regard to access to buildings and discussions between the European Union authorities and the Belgian authorities , what plans , if any , he has in his role to consult with the disabled people themselves to ask them what access and what kind of special facilities they may need .
All too often in these architectural situations everybody goes by the textbook , and when you look and ask a disabled person afterwards what the textbook solution is like , firstly , invariably it is more expensive than what disabled people want themselves , and , secondly , it is actually not right for what they require themselves .
I would just point out one factor alone : that in the new buildings we have in Brussels it is impossible for a person in a wheelchair to move from the B block to the C block or from the B block to the A block , because the passageways are too narrow .
Therefore you have to go down in a lift to the ground floor and cross across the buildings outside or inside and get to another lift and go up there to get from one side of the building to another .
Mr President , I have spoken on this matter with individual representatives of disabled people but the Commission has not heard their opinion at organization level .
I would be glad to speak on this issue with the honorable Member and hear of his experiences .
It is clear that people who have personal experience of a disability will understand the matter best .
Thank you , Mr Commissioner .
Question No 58 by Josu Imaz San Miguel ( H-0162 / 97 )
Subject : 1998 budget and the Structural Funds
When the 1997 budget was drawn up an ECU 1 billion cutback was made to the Commission preliminary draft in the headings relating to Structural Fund payment appropriations .
This reduction by the Council only affected Objectives 2 , 3 , 4 and 5 and the Community initiatives , leaving Objectives 1 and 6 untouched .
However , examination of the implementation of the 1996 budget as at 31 May reveals that the Objective 2 payment percentage ( 23 % ) is higher than that relating to other objectives , such as Objective 1 ( 17 % ) .
In its 1998 preliminary draft budget , is the Commission planning to increase the Structural Fund payment appropriations corresponding to Objectives 2 , 3 , 4 and 5 and the Community initiatives ?
Does the Commission consider the reductions made by the budgetary authorities to be logical in the light of the above budget implementation statistics ?
Mr President , in 1996 there was an underspend in the payment commitments on the Structural Funds of 5.2 % or ECU 1200 m .
In 1994 and 1995 the underspending was even more significant .
In 1996 the utilization of appropriations in Objective 1 areas was 99.3 % and in Objective 2 areas 98.3 % .
In 1997 by the beginning of March 14 % of Objective 1 appropriations and 27 % of Objective 2 appropriations had been spent .
This shows that the level of utilization of appropriations may vary considerably from one objective area to another during a calendar year , but the differences do not always remain the same throughout the year .
It is also useful to note that appropriations are transferred within budget headings to improve the efficient use of resources .
The Commission estimates that it will be able to deal with the requests for payment during 1997 .
But at the same time it has stated , in connection with cuts made in the Structural Funds by the budgetary authority , that it intends to propose additional appropriations during the course of the budgetary year if this proves necessary .
In this connection it is still too soon to assess the individual points of the 1998 budget .
The Commission will take a decision on these in April 1997 .
Mr Commissioner , I thought I heard that 98 % of the payment appropriations under Objective 2 had been implemented .
Could you please confirm that ? Is it correct that 98 % of the payment appropriations under Objective 2 have been implemented for 1996 ?
If that is so , then the ECU 1 000 million reduction in payment appropriations suggested by the Council at its July 1996 meeting seems all the more incomprehensible to me , since that reduction in payment appropriations referred only to Community Objectives 2 , 3 , 4 , and 5 - and excluded Objectives 1 and 6 .
I should like to know therefore whether the Commission shares my surprise that the Council should make this reduction exclusively as regards those objectives and whether the Commission considers that the Council made this proposal not for technical reasons of implementation , but for political reasons in line with the interests of certain Member States .
Mr President , the Council did indeed decide to cut the appropriations in this way .
When the Council decided to cut payment appropriations , the Commission thought it best that these cuts should be made equally for all the objective areas .
However , following a very long and difficult discussion , the Council decided to exempt Objectives 1 and 6 .
I can however state that our commitment appropriations have been largely used but that there has been clear over-budgeting for payment appropriations .
There has been significant saving of appropriations .
I do not myself believe that there will be any special problem in dealing with payments during this year .
If there should be any such problem , we have already announced in the Council and in Parliament that the Commission will produce a draft supplementary and amending budget .
Thank you , Mr Commissioner .
Question No 59 by Charlotte Cederschiöld ( H-0169 / 97 )
Subject : Making the Commission more efficient
The Commission has launched several projects aimed at boosting its efficiency , including SEM 2000 .
The Community 's institutions must be made more efficient , as many citizens will lose confidence in the Community if it does not operate as it should .
Are the efficiency-boosting measures going according to plan , and what economic benefits have they already yielded ?
Mr President , when it took office the present Commission stated that an important objective was to reform its financial and staff management structures .
This administrative development project , known as the SEM 2000 , aims to rationalize administration and create a new administrative and budget culture for the Commission .
At the third stage of the project cooperation will be tightened up between the Member States .
This is important because 80 % of the appropriations in the budget are administered in the Member States .
A working party made up of representatives of the Member States ' finance ministries is currently working to improve the management of Community funds , and its work has progressed very well .
The working group 's first report , which contained numerous proposals for measures , was prepared in December last year and had a positive reception in the Council and in the European Council .
In general , the administrative development work is progressing according to plan .
As time goes on the necessary reforms will improve the efficiency of the use of Community funds .
I agree with the honorable Member that administrative reforms are very important in boosting the confidence of the EU 's citizens .
I do not yet wish to put a figure on our results , but Parliament will have an excellent opportunity to assess these results annually when the Court of Auditors report comes out for Parliament 's inspection .
I would like to thank you for an encouraging response , but I also understand that there has been some criticism from members of the Committee who have pointed to unreasonable working methods and bureaucracy .
This criticism has now died down , which is all to the good , provided that it is based upon considerations of efficiency rather than on constructive criticism that is not allowed to come to the fore .
SEM 2000 has many beneficial part-projects .
Amongst other things , the preliminary checking level , on payments , is to be increased .
Three quarters of all payments are to be checked .
Has this been done and has it produced a better result ?
In addition , not enough has been done on the personnel side of things .
We are aware of the large number of people employed by the Commission .
SEM 2000 has for example taken up 23 of the positions of which 8 are on A2-level .
Does the Commissioner know how many are directly employed by the Commission , how many work on a consultative basis and how many are used by the Commission as third party contractors ?
I would be grateful for information about the number of people working for the Commission and maybe some figures as this would make it easier for people to assess whether the work is being carried out in a more financially efficient manner .
Mr President , I would say to the honorable Member that the Commission is currently preparing a significant administrative reform .
Our objective is , in connection with the 1998 draft budget , to take significant measures to decentralize administration .
This will imply a reduction in in-house bureaucracy and greater powers begin given to the DGs to work in their own fields and at the same time increase their responsibility .
We aim to decide on this matter at the end of April together with our decision on the budget , so that the first stage of the reform can enter into force in January next year .
At the same time the Commission is preparing a broader set of measures in connection with the ' Santer package ' .
When the funding packages for the years after 2000 are proposed , the Commission must also propose in that connection a concept for the Commission 's role for the years 2000-2006 : how its activities can be made more efficient and more transparent , to enable it to accept the challenge of enlargement .
At the end of July , in connection with the first communications on the Santer package , Parliament will have an opportunity to debate this .
As regards criticism in general , I regard this as the basis of any healthy debate .
It is even better if the criticism contains suggestions for improvements and how the implementation of reforms might be speeded up .
Thank you , Mr Liikanen .
Ladies and gentlemen , with Question No 59 we have come to the end of the time which is allocated under our agenda for questions to the Commission .
Questions 60 to 94 will therefore be answered in writing .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.20 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time to the Council ( B4-0019 / 97 ) .
Question No 1 by Mr Crowley ( H-0098 / 97 )
Subject : Second-chance schools
According to the Commission , five million young people between 16 and 25 years of age left school without a diploma and another 2 million are at risk of doing the same by the end of the century .
Does the Council consider that this serious social problem requires urgent action and will it now invite the Commission to develop partnership programmes with Member State governments with a view to utilizing European Social Fund resources to offer these young people training in skills which would better assist them to get a job ?
I would like to thank you for the opportunity of being here with you today .
I would answer Mr Crowley 's question as follows : the question refers to schools for second-chance education and I would point out that for a considerable time now the Council has been paying special attention to the problem raised by Mr Crowley .
In 1984 and 1987 the Council in its conclusions stressed the need for an ongoing campaign to combat illiteracy .
On these occasions the Council and the Ministers of Education emphasised the serious consequences of school failures .
And again in 1987 and 1989 the Council and Ministers drew conclusions and adopted a resolution which specifically dealt with combatting failures at school .
The importance which the Council and Ministers attach to professional training for future opportunities for job seekers is evident from the fact that since 1976 the Council and Ministers of Education have passed thirteen resolutions or conclusions on the subject .
This illustrates the continual attention which the Council pays to this problem .
May I also remind you that in the decision of the European Parliament and the Council of 23 October 1995 , which called for 1996 to be the European year of life-long education and training , the subjects for that manifestation included promoting professional training which ensured that all young people could acquire qualifications and promoting continued education and training .
I would also remind you of the Council decision of 6 December 1994 on deciding an action programme for the development of a European Community policy on profession training , the so-called Leonardo da Vinci Programme , which covers Community measures to improve professional training systems and provisions in the Member States by means of pilot projects and transnational programmes .
The Leonardo da Vinci programme stipulates , and I would refer Mr Crowley to part 4 , section 1 , that Community aid is given to initiatives in the Member States to set up transnational partnerships in this field and training to submit transnational pilot projects .
As to the question of possible finance from the Social Fund , I would point out that Article 8 ( 2 ) of the decision to determine the above-mentioned Leonardo da Vinci programme stipulates , and I quote , ' The Member States have , within their responsibility to implement Community provisions , the possibility of creating links between this programme and the structural funds in accordance with the provisions on the implementation of the structural funds ' , end of quotation .
So there is already a link between Leonardo and the social fund .
Finally I would point out that under Article 10 ( 4 ) of the decision , the Commission must by 31 December 1997 present an interim report on the implementation of the programme to the European Parliament , the Council and the Economic and Social Committee and the Consultative Committee for Professional Training .
As soon as that report is available an assessment can be undertaken into the way in which the above mentioned provisions have been implemented .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his very lengthy and informative response .
However it did slightly go off the mark , because the question related specifically to the opportunities for secondchance education .
In particular I am looking at people who are at risk , whether because of social problems and their lack of access to formal education , or because of dropping out of formal education and getting involved in crime and other activities .
What I would like to ask the President-in-Office is , accepting that high priority has been placed on this issue in the Council in the past , why is it that we are still facing this problem ?
Why is it that we have failed to look at the structural problems that are causing people to drop out of education ?
Finally , why is it that the Council as an appropriate body cannot work together in exchanging best practices ? - because there are many Member States where there are fantastic second-chance educational facilities that do not seem to be available in other areas .
I would ask the President to bring this back to the Council if possible .
I shall do as Mr Crowley requests .
I would point out that the chief responsibility for education and creating opportunities through education for socially weak young people lies first and foremost in the exclusive authority of the Member States and that the Community only has an ancillary role to play here and only takes action when , for example , it involves a trans-border project , or where special measures can be taken under the social or structural funds .
If Mr Crowley is pressing for the Council to take action under its own responsibility then I think he is going a little too far with the normal division of authority between the Community and the Member States , but I shall certainly pass on your comments to the Commission and those responsible for any follow up and for the use of structural funds when the report is being drafted so that they may be taken into account .
Question No 2 by Mr Camisón Asensio ( H-0103 / 97 )
Subject : Madrid to Lisbon high-speed train service
Is there any likelihood that the projected future high-speed railway line linking Madrid and Lisbon will pass through the Spanish region of Estremadura ?
Mr Camisón Asensio 's question refers to the route of the future rail links between Madrid and Lisbon .
I must reply that the decision on this kind of high speed railway link and the relevant route is a decision for both Member States .
I recall that this link was included in the decision 1682 / 96 / EEC of the European Parliament and the Council of 23 July 1996 on community guidelines for the development of transEuropean networks .
In the map annexed to this decision , no .
3 , 3.5 , this link is described as a planned high speed railway link , but the exact route , however , is not given .
Mr President-in-office of the Council , thank you for the information you have given us .
I have to say , though , that in recent years hundreds of documents have been distributed - quite a lot of them by the Council itself - some of them with a profusion of colours showing a hypothetical high-speed railway line between Madrid and Lisbon .
The natives of Madrid and Lisbon , the inhabitants of Estremadura and La Mancha knew that the improvement was of great interest , albeit in the long term , and the proof of that is that it is not even included in the trans-European networks .
But this ' in the long term ' , since it is feasible , does bring some hope .
Now we are told that it is a question of a multi-modal link between Spain and Portugal and the rest of Europe and I am in fact asking this question in order to dispel the doubts once and for all .
We see that there is still some doubt , but there is still hope from the Commissioner 's words .
And since there is hope , let us keep on hoping ; but finally we see that the work has not been abolished , since the multi-modal Lisbon line has been approved from Lisbon to France via Valladolid .
I welcome the fact that Mr Camisón Asensio and myself are totally ad idem on the priority of this project and on the importance of international links between Member States .
As you are aware , the European Council in its meeting in Essen came out strongly in favour of top priority being given to community involvement and to the financing of high speed links .
As I said , the question of the actual implementation and choice of route are matters to be decided on by the Member States but nevertheless the European Council and the Council as such have always considered it a high priority .
I am tempted to say , but I may be too outspoken , that it is up to your colleagues in the European Parliament to exert your influence when you can , and try to ensure that the higher priority of financing high speed links is reflected in the budget .
Question No 3 by Mrs Sandbæk ( H-0108 / 97 )
Subject : EU and CITES and elephants
The African elephant ( Loxodonta Africana ) was listed in Appendix I of the CITES Convention at the 7th COP held in Lausanne , Switzerland , in 1989 .
Southern African nations opposed the ban on the grounds that their elephant populations were well managed and in many cases growing beyond the carrying capacity of their land , and wished to resume a legal and controlled trade in elephant products for the benefit of conservation and rural communities .
Southern Africa is home to 50 % of the total population of the species .
CITES COP 10 , to be held in Harare , Zimbabwe , from 9-20 June 1997 , will address the issue and analyse proposals from several Southern African countries .
Will the European Union honour CITES Resolution conf .
7.9 ( the Somali amendment ) and support the down-listing of any elephant population that meets the criteria of the CITES Panel of Experts ' review ?
If not , why not ?
Does the EU have plans to compensate those countries for losses of conservation revenues from an ongoing ban on the sale of elephant products ?
Mr President , I would answer Mrs Ulla Sandbaek 's question as follows .
The Council has not yet received the Commission 's proposal on discussing the EU 's standpoint to be taken during the tenth conference of parties to the CITES Convention .
And I am therefore unable to give a specific answer to the questions put by Mrs Sandbaek .
I would , however , like to point out at this juncture that the report from the panel named in Resolution 7.9 , the resolution quoted by the honourable member , forms only the basis for the parties ' talks on any requests for transfers from Annex 1 to Annex 2 .
I am equally unable to comment on any possible loss of income resulting from the protection of those animals , as elephant products will not longer be allowed to be sold , nor on whether the EU intends to compensate the countries concerned .
As I said the Council has yet to study the Commission proposal which has not yet been presented .
Since this has yet to be considered by the Council , I should like to ask it to take account of the fact that the panel of experts set up to review CITES has given its opinion on the elephant populations in Botswana , Namibia and Zimbabwe , which states that these are not under threat and are increasing , and in the case of one of these countries , the panel has said that it is very probable that the proposal will have a positive effect on elephant conservation and community conservation and development programmes in the country .
This means that there will be a positive effect if controlled sales of ivory are allowed .
Could you perhaps comment on this ?
I agree with Mrs Sandbaek , but now I am talking in general terms , that with proper wildlife management it should be possible to market the products resulting from that wildlife management .
The only thing is that it must be properly balanced against the more general and wider measures of tackling the ban on illegal trade , particularly in ivory .
There is a certain area of tension there and we should always assess that sensibly .
Once the Commission has presented its proposal on the CITES Conference I shall bring Mrs Sandbaek 's remarks to the attention of the Council .

Question No 4 by Mr Bianco ( H-0110 / 97 ) and Question No 5 by Mrs Ahlquist ( H-0148 / 97 ) on the situation in Albania will not be taken as the issue is already on this week 's agenda .
Question No 6 by Mrs Banotti ( H-0115 / 97 )
Subject : Interim trade agreement with Israel
Is the Council satisfied that Article 1 of the interim trade agreement with Israel is being both properly monitored and implemented ?
Will Parliament receive a report from the EU special envoy to the Middle East , with particular reference to the special tasks assigned to him in the Dublin Declaration of December 1996 ?
The article to which Mrs Banotti refers in her question is often called the human rights clause .
Respect of human rights and of democratic principles is an essential part of the Barcelona process , the cooperation between the European Union and the countries of the Mediterranean .
It is an integral part of all Euro-Mediterranean association agreements , including the interim agreement with Israel .
The European Union therefore follows closely the human rights situation in countries with which such agreements have been concluded in order to ensure that the conditions for the agreement are being respected .
That refers to both Israel as it does to the PLO , with whom the European Union signed an interim agreement on 24 February last .
Under the joint approach in relation to the appointment of a special envoy for the peace process in the Middle East the envoy on the authority of the Presidency must report to the Council of General Affairs .
This in no way prevents Parliament from inviting the envoy to the relevant parliamentary committee for an exchange of views on the subject raised by the honourable member .
Mr President-in-Office , are you satisfied with the reports that are coming from the special mediator ?
Do you anticipate that he will give direct reports to the relevant parliamentary committee on a regular basis ?
There are disturbing reports that the Palestinians are still encountering considerable difficulties , particularly in relation to the export of their goods from Gaza and the somewhat exigent security measures which can have a detrimental effect on these products before they are exported : products , for example , such as flowers which form a significant part of Palestinian trade with Europe and which , when exposed to the sun , very quickly die .
Ambassador Moratinos was appointed at the end of last year as the Council 's special envoy to the peace process in the Middle East .
His first job was to pull out all the stops to concentrate his total attention on restarting the peace process which had grounded to a halt , especially the situation in Hebron and the evacuation in Hebron by the Israeli army .
I can assure you that the Council , and especially the Dutch presidency , is extremely pleased with the work and achievements of Mr Moratinos in the peace process .
At the present time , for Mr Moratinos has been in his position for only a few weeks , I have been given special reports on the human rights situation .
Mr Moratinos has specifically been asked to observe that since relations between Israel and the Palestinian authorities and the Palestinian people require close monitoring , as does action on breaches of human rights .
It is also regularly discussed in normal contacts between the Council and Ambassador Moratinos .
Mrs Banotti 's question of impediments to trade is also being monitored by the Council and the Member States .
What we are particularly concerned about here is doing everything possible to stimulate economic activities and create economic opportunities in the Palestinian areas in view of the unemployment and the social problems in these regions ; a strong economic basis is essential for stable , peaceful relations in the Palestinian regions and between the Palestinian authorities and Israel .
The smooth resumption of trade is regularly addressed in our talks with Israel and with the Palestinian authorities , especially with the leadership of the PLO .
We are aware of the situation .
It is an old subject of discussion , but the European Community , the Commission and the Council will not let it be dropped from our talks .
Question No 7 by Mrs Hautala ( H-0120 / 97 )
Subject : Groupeuro
In the context of the Information Programme for European Citizens ( Prince ) , the Commission has established a network of independent EMU experts called Groupeuro .
The Commission demands that they sign a statement whereby they agree that ' they may speak in a personal capacity for a part of their lecture , provided that they state explicitly that they are going to do so and do not express any views contrary to those of the Commission . '
Is the Council aware of such demands by the Commission ?
Does the Council find them helpful in order to convince the European citizens of the single currency ?
Is this declaration in accordance with the ethics normally expected of scientists and with democratic , pluralist values ?
In reply to Mrs Hautala 's Question on the Groupeuro , I would point out that the Council is unaware of the Commission 's rules for the activities of a network of independent EMU experts that was set up in the context of the information Programme for European Citizens , the so-called PRINCE programme .
The Commission is entitled on its own responsibility to take a decision on this information campaign and the conditions attached thereto .
The network to which Mrs Hautala refers was set up independently by the Commission under its right of initiative conferred by the Treaty , and I would ask her to consider putting this question to the Commission and not to the Council .
. ( FI ) Mr President , I would point out to the President-in-Office of the Council that in fact I also put this question to the Commission , because it is indeed as you say , and the Commission has the right to make these rules itself .
I received a written answer today and I am concerned that the Commission really supports this practice .
Certainly in Finland and a number of other Member States it has been severely criticized .
How can we trust the experts sent by the Commission if they have already been gagged and bound to support the Commission 's point of view ?
Worse still , the Commission says in its reply that in such circumstances it is perfectly entitled to ask for such guarantees of loyalty .
This in its way is an even more wide-ranging practice and in my opinion it will be good for the Council to be aware of this .
I should also like to tell you that Commissioner Liikanen , who represents a slightly more modern and perhaps more democratic concept of administration , has condemned this practice today in the Finnish press .
I hope the Commission will take up a position on this and will talk to the commissioners about it because this project is important to the Council as well .
My first problem was that I was unaware of the Commission 's regulation , but I now have a second problem , namely that I do not know the Commission 's answer to Mrs Hautala 's question , so this debate is rather bizarre .
If she thinks the Commission 's activities in her country hinder normal events concerning the European Monetary Union , then the government in Helsinki will not fail to raise the matter with the Commissioner responsible either directly or through its own Commissioner .
But I find it rather difficult to answer this question on the basis of documents and information with which I am not familiar .
I must say that I am rather surprised that the Council is not taking this matter more seriously .
The Council should after all be responsible for whether these types of methods are acceptable or not .
The matter cannot be waved aside with the excuse that you do not know anything about it .
First of all I find it deplorable , ignorant even , not to know what is going on in one 's own organisation .
Secondly , I think it ought to be a matter of principle to reply when you are given a question and not to refer the matter to another institution , especially as it is the Commission 's own proposal that is being criticised and the Council has overall responsibility for what is happening in this area , as has always been the case with the Council and the Council 's representatives .
My question is what action the Council plans to take bearing in mind the information given by a Member of the European Parliament .
To avoid any misunderstanding : the Commission has a responsibility of its own to provide information on the implementation of legislation and the implementing decisions concerning the European Community and it is not up to the Council to monitor the Commission in all details .
I repeat that it is difficult to continue discussion on these questions and answers because I do not know the Regulation nor the Commission 's answer to the written questions put by Mrs Hautala .
As Mrs Stenzel is not present , Question No 8 ( H-0127 / 97 ) falls .
Question No 9 by Mr Bertens ( H-0132 / 97 )
Subject : Developments in the negotiations on the ban on anti-personnel mines
The European Parliament has declared its unequivocal support for a ban on anti-personnel mines .
It has also welcomed the action recently taken by the Council in this matter on the Community 's behalf .
APMs are currently being discussed both in the ' Ottawa process ' and at the UN disarmament conference .
The UN conference is , however , in danger of grinding to a halt over other issues .
It is therefore extremely important that the European Union should give a high priority to the Ottawa process .
Does the President agree that the first follow-up conference in the Ottawa process in Vienna was a success , partly because it was attended by more than 100 countries ?
Can he guarantee that the Council is committed to the Union 's active involvement in the Ottawa process , regardless of the activities of the UN disarmament conference ?
What specific action will the President of the Council take to ensure that the follow-up conferences in the Ottawa process , like that in Brussels in June , are successful , with a treaty being concluded at the end of the year ?
I understand that Mr Bertens has put three questions and I shall take each of them in turn .
I agree with Mr Bertens that the participation of 110 countries in the Vienna conference must be regarded as a great success .
This large-scale participation demonstrates international concern about the problem of land mines and anti-personnel mines in particular .
At the same time , however , it is equally clear that major efforts still are required to overcome the differences of opinion on the content of a general ban on antipersonnel mines and the way such a ban should be implemented .
On Mr Bertens ' second question I would say that in the past the European Union has supported the Ottawa process on various occasions .
All 15 Member States took part in the Ottawa and Vienna conferences .
Land mines and the way in which a total ban should be effected is the subject of intensive EU coordination .
It is also important to adopt tactics which offer the greatest chance of results .
The forum is a means , not an aim in itself .
In deciding on its tactics the Union also takes account of developments in the various fora , including the Geneva Disarmament Conference .
The European Union recently decided to try to start negotiations in the Geneva Disarmament Conference on an effective world-wide ban on the use , production , possession and transfer of anti-personnel mines , with the aim of producing a treaty as quickly as possible .
This negotiation process does not in any way exclude active EU participation in the Ottawa process .
At this stage , however , it is impossible to determine what the future specific contribution of the European Union in the Ottawa process will be , independent of developments in the conference on disarmament and elsewhere .
To Mr Bertens ' last question I would reply that the Presidency assumes that all 15 member States will make a constructive contribution in Brussels .
I cannot yet indicate the specific content of the EU contribution in Brussels .
As I have already said , it will partly depend on developments elsewhere .
The Presidency has proposed to the Member States that coordination meetings should start at the beginning of June .
I would like to thank the Council warmly for its commitment to a total ban on the most inhumane weapon we know , the anti-personnel mine or the anti-people mine .
I am also pleased that the Ottawa process is not only being closely monitored but that it is also regarded as a good forum .
I hope that this forum , which was instigated at Canada 's initiative last October , will lead some way or other by the end of this year to like minded countries supporting a convention .
I regret that land mines will not feature prominently in the disarmament conference , as also happened in 1995 and 1996 .
I realise that there are some five Member States of the European Union , including France and the United Kingdom , which prefer it that way , but I hope that this Presidency at any rate will use its diplomatic endeavours to change that position .
On behalf of the Presidency I wish to stress the absolute political priority of containing an international plague which has got completely out of control .
Land mines used to be a military weapon , nowadays they are an instrument of terror which in the wrong hands spread death and destruction .
The Presidency lays great store by coordination prior to the Ottawa process but especially in developing formal disarmament negotiations which could under the auspices of the UN bring about a treaty on the ban on production and trade in anti-personnel mines .
Resistance to such a concept will have to be broken down and the economic interests will undoubtedly also have to be considered , but this process has been started and we shall bring it to a conclusion as best we can .
I just wish to thank the President-in-Office for the excellent , lengthy and detailed answer on this important subject .
I just wondered , following Mr Bertens ' third question on follow-up work , whether the Council is aware of the large level of publicity that was generated on this very subject by the visit to Angola with the Red Cross of a former member of the British Royal Family , Princess Diana .
Does the Council feel that she and other international celebrities have a role to play in perpetuating the serious publicity that could be given to this highly important issue ?
The Council as such has taken no note of the visit of a member of the British royal family to Angola .
I personally learned about it through the media , and without commenting specifically on that visit I think it is very important to create sufficient political support to put an end to land mines as an instrument of terror .
People with vision and power to motivate other people can in their own way contribute to public awareness .
Question No 10 by Mr Wibe ( H-0133 / 97 )
Subject : Tax-free sales in the EU
The Commission stated in its answer to a question on 18 February 1997 that there was no need to investigate the consequences of abolishing tax-free sales in the EU and that the decision to abolish them had been taken long ago , so that there had been ample time in which to adapt .
Commentators believe about 100 000 jobs in all to be at risk if tax-free sales are abolished .
Ferry services between the Scandinavian countries in particular earn vital revenue from tax-free sales .
Many routes , such as that between Umeå ( Sweden ) and Vaasa ( Finland ) , could close if tax-free sales are ended .
In view of this , does the Council not think that an impact assessment should be carried out before tax-free sales are abolished in 1999 ?
If such an assessment indicates that the consequences will be severe , e.g. for employment or ferry services in Scandinavia , the Council ought to be able to review its decision , e.g. by extending the time limit for its implementation , at least in the case of ferries .
Is the Council prepared to commission an assessment of the impact of ending tax-free sales and is it prepared to postpone implementation of the decision or grant exceptions , e.g. in the case of ferries operating between Member States ?
Mr President , I would answer Mr Wibe 's questions as follows .
I would remind you that tax-free sales in intra-Community travel does not mesh with an internal market without frontiers .
That is why the Council in adopting the directives on the abolition of tax borders , with effect from 1 January 1993 , decided to put an end to these tax-free sales .
The Council is equally aware of the economic problems and social consequences this means for the sectors concerned .
That is why it decided a long time ago to allow a long transition period , namely from 1 January 1993 to 30 June 1999 , during which these tax-free sales may be enjoyed by travellers in intra-Community travel .
Thank you for that brief reply .
I have learnt that when discussing these types of reforms one ought to ask oneself : Where is the beef ?
Or to put it in ' European terms ' : Where is the profit ?
In this case , I cannot see any profit for anyone involved .
In a theoretical model with unlimited competition and a balanced market reforms of this kind could possibly bring a financial profit .
However , in the EU , as it is at present , with 20 million unemployed , such profits do not exist .
It should be mentioned that in Sweden we are talking about approximately 5 , 000 jobs , primarily on the ferries , that will be lost .
For the Community this must be closer to 10 , 20 or 30 times more , in addition to the indirect effects of freight becoming more expensive .
I believe it is wrong to push through this type of reform when the levels of unemployment are as high as they are .
I therefore appeal to the chair of the council to bring the matter up for discussion and to at least initiate an analysis of the implications of these amendments .
I take note of Mr Wibe 's comments .
I think he has a rather one-sided view of this issue .
The major winner of this policy change in Europe is the treasuries of the Member States which will have considerable increases in their excise revenue because the big tax-free sales , which were always an anomaly for normal intraCommunity traffic , will cease and be replaced with normal tax levies .
I also think that the major winner will be public health as the problem of alcoholism may well be slightly reduced .
May I thank the Council for its reply , even if I think it was somewhat negative .
I can understand the principle that an internal market should not have duty-free trade .
The most important question is on the other hand what is to be done to reduce unemployment in Europe .
It is undoubtedly the case that this proposal will have negative consequences for employment , particularly in those countries furthest away from the centre of Europe .
These countries will be worst hit .
Through its Minister of Labour , the Netherlands have , in other matters , put forward exceptionally good proposals as far as employment is concerned .
This is currently the most important issue , one that must take precedence over any principle .
Reality is more important than any principle .
Employment is more important than abolishing duty-free trade .
My first reply may have been somewhat short , my second reply to Mr Wibe was short but to the point .
I think that if you want a serious discussion on this we must approach it in a serious way .
My basic assumption is that tax exemptions , particularly excise on cigarettes and alcohol , for this is what it is all about , for normal intra-Community trade is a total anomaly .
Now it is a fact of economic life that a certain economic activity has grown up around this anomaly , on ferries and tax-free sales at airports .
That is what the whole discussion centred on when this measure was being prepared , away back in the eighties , so there is no question of any surprise element here .
And in addition to that there was a six-year transition period .
I think that everyone who wittingly benefited from this anomaly was warned in plenty of time , plus the transition period , so that they could do whatever was necessary to switch over to other types of marketing of their transport services from the sale of cheap alcohol .
I also think that you are underestimating the macro-economic effect in general .
I think that if you investigate the amounts the British treasury is currently losing through tax-free import of alcohol in lorries , or perhaps not lorries , but in any case in the luggage of her own citizens , I think that treasury loss could finance a large number of new economic activities in Great Britain , for example , which would more than compensate for the activities on the ferries .
And I think that if you are insisting that some kind of injustice is being meted out to a specific group , then logically you must be presenting a one-sided view of affairs , with which I cannot agree .
The President-in-Office has himself said that it is time to start tackling this matter more seriously .
I would therefore like to give him the chance to do so by asking him two specific questions that he should be able to answer more or less in detail if he agrees to the abolition of duty-free trade .
The first question is : How many people will be without work if the EU decision to abolish duty-free trade between Member States is implemented in 1999 ?
The second question is : If the ferry companies ' income is to be reduced by approximately 30 per cent , which probably will be the case if duty-free trade is abolished , how will this affect transport charges ?
Mr Stenmarck will not be surprised to learn that when he bombards me with such a specific factual question that I do not have the information at my fingertips .
But I would say that you can never isolate that from other facts if you calculate the effects of abolishing tax-free sales on ferries .
In the English Channel it is related to the opening of the channel tunnel or other new forms of transport .
So it cannot be seen in isolation .
I also do not think it opportune to continue this discussion solely from examining the consequences for one sector alone .
One could equally say that this measure produces a considerable increase in revenue from excise for the Swedish or British treasury .
That can be used to help promote economic activities or reduce taxation which will also help to stimulate the economy .
So if you want to have this debate we must have it on the basis of serious wider considerations with account taken of all aspects which are relevant and which are based on accurate statistics .
Question No 11 by Mrs Kinnock ( H-0140 / 97 )
Subject : Combatting international corruption
Can the Council assure Parliament that preventing and combatting corruption on an international scale will be added to areas listed in Article K.1 of the TBU as a matter of common interest with a view to cooperation and common action ?
I would reply to Mrs Kinnock 's question as follows .
As she will appreciate , I feel that in general terms and in particular as President-in-Office of the Council it is not my place to dwell on what is being discussed in the Intergovernmental Conference as these are matters for negotiations between the Member States and the Council as such has no role to play there .
I can however confirm that this question , which was included in a draft proposal from the Irish government for the Intergovernmental Conference , is receiving full attention .
I cannot , however , give her the assurance she is seeking on behalf of the Council .
That depends on the final result of this Intergovernmental Conference .
I can inform the Honourable Member that after the protocol to the Convention on protection of the financial interests of the European Community was adopted in September 1996 the Council continued to work on combatting international corruption .
Parliament gave its opinion on that in a resolution on 15 November 1996 .
There is every reason to hope that the irregularities referred to by the Honourable Member have already been tackled under the present Treaty .
I thank the President-in-Office for his response and I appreciate the difficulty he has in being more specific .
However , I would like to pursue one or two issues with him .
Under the third pillar , bribery within the European Union is a criminal offence .
So why is it that we do not make a similar commitment when dealing with third countries ?
Would not such an initiative be desirable in developing countries and countries in transition , as well as within the European Union ?
Since the Council was not able to be more specific , I should like to ask the President-in-Office if he would be prepared to welcome a Commission proposal designed to secure such a development in developing countries and countries in transition with respect to bribery and corruption ?
I must consider that carefully because the subject raised by Mrs Kinnock , international bribery and corruption , covers an enormous area where the European Community as such , for example through its responsibility for international customs traffic or its development cooperation programmes , is involved in the most varied ways , including in relations with third countries .
I can assure you that it is certainly taken into account in the normal execution of programmes and activities and in the general functioning of the European Community , and not only because the European Court of Auditors warns where the European Union runs the risk of entering the danger zone on this point .
When it comes to judicial cooperation and detection cooperation with third countries then the matter becomes somewhat more complicated because the whole responsibility of the European Union is based on intergovernmental cooperation and one of its shortcomings , I must admit , is that it is difficult to develop very constructive cooperation with third countries on the basis of the third pillar .
This subject as such is not really on the agenda of the Intergovernmental Conference but will be studied in a group of senior officials which was set up by the Dublin European Council and which was instructed to report in a very short time on organised crime in Europe and beyond , in so far as Europe is involved .
As I understand it attention will also be paid to improving the judicial and administrative working of cooperation with third countries in preventing and detecting fraud and crime .
Question No 12 by Mr Sjöstedt ( H-0141 / 97 )
Subject : Opt-out from the third stage of EMU
It seems most likely that a majority of Members of the Riksdag will vote against Sweden taking part in the third stage of EMU at the beginning of 1999 , even if it fulfils the convergence criteria .
Sweden does not officially have a derogation from the relevant part of the Treaty .
Does the Council take the view that , in order to settle this matter , Sweden should , during the current IGC , follow Denmark and the UK in applying for a formal exemption from the third stage of EMU ?
Or would it be equally acceptable for Sweden simply not to sign up to the common currency , regardless of what the Treaty officially says ?
First of all I would say in reply to Mr Sjöstedt 's question that the European Council in Madrid fixed the starting date for the third stage at 1 January 1999 .
Under Protocol 11 to the Treaty the United Kingdom , however , is not committed to proceeding to the third stage of the Economic and Monetary Union without its government and parliament specifically deciding to do so .
Under Protocol 12 Denmark announced it would not proceed to the third stage of the Economic and Monetary Union , at least until further notice .
Under the Treaty of the Union or a treaty of accession all other Member States decided to participate in the third stage on condition that the Council , in the composition of heads of states and government , and I refer in this context to Article 109J ( 4 ) of the Treaty of the Union , confirms they meet the conditions for participation , the so-called convergence criteria .
Member States not meeting these criteria will be granted a derogation under Article 109K .
Any Member State may itself determine which procedure should be applied , including the role of its parliament , in order to prepare for the above mentioned decision of the European Council .
During the fourth sitting of the negotiation conference on Sweden 's accession to the European Union the conference took note of the declaration to that effect made by the Swedish delegation .
As to the operation of the Intergovernmental Conference , it is not up to the Council to comment on the conference agenda or on any initiatives the Member States may wish to take .
I thank you for a detailed , legal reply to the question .
However , the question also concerns a very specific political reality that I am sure Mr President is aware of , i.e. that the majority of the Swedish Parliament probably will decide not to be part of a single currency from 1999 .
Despite the reply from the Presidentin-Office , I still want an answer to the actual question .
Do you really mean that a country can do this ?
Or does the council prefer to make changes in the actual Treaty during the Intergovernmental Conference ?
Surely this is something on which the council has a viewpoint .
I would like a clearer reply to my question about which model the council prefers when Sweden decides not to be part of the single currency .
I have tried to explain clearly the legal situation of the accession process to the third stage of monetary union .
I would point out that the decision will only be taken in a year 's time , that a lot of water can flow under the bridge between now and then and that I do not wish to jump the gun , either with regard to decisions in the European Council or decisions by the Swedish government or decisions by the Swedish parliament or decisions any other Member State may wish to take under Article 109J a year before the due date .
I would , however , urge you not to speculate on what might happen , we still have a year ahead of us to prepare the way .
Mr President , I should just like to ask one question , and at the same time I must apologize , because we could not hear very clearly over here , so I only think I understood what the President-inOffice of the Council was saying .
My question is as follows . Is there really any point in speculating about what will happen in Sweden in the year 1999 ?
As far as I know , elections are due to be held between now and then and , to judge by current public opinion , there is likely to be a change in the majority , in which case the whole thing would be invalidated .
It would be better to cross that bridge when we come to it .
Mr Habsburg 's comment is exactly in line with what I myself said . I said that there was no point in speculating about any decisions to be taken by either the Swedish government or the Swedish parliament or the Council or the government of the Member States in a year 's time , and a year in politics , as Mr Habsburg well knows , is a long time .
I should like to take both Mr Papayannakis ' and Mrs Daskalaki 's questions together .
Under the conclusions of the European Council in Cannes in June 1995 accession negotiations with Cyprus on the basis of the Commission 's proposals begin six months after the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference .
I would add that account will be taken of the results of that conference .
This is the Union 's starting point which was confirmed again to the government of Cyprus at the meeting of the Association Council on 25 February 1997 .
Close coordination within the international community to support the efforts of the United Nations is essential in order to reach a general settlement in accordance with the resolutions of the UN Security Council leading to a federation with two communities and two zones .
The prospect of Cyprus joining the European Union offers a chance this year to find a solution to the old and thorny Cyprus issue .
As confirmed in its conclusions of 6 March 1995 the Council believes that Cyprus ' accession to the European Union should lead to greater security and well-being for each of the two communities on the island .
It should help the northern part of the island to catch up in economic terms and to improve growth and job prospects .
The Council believes that the Turkish Cypriot community ought to appreciate more the advantages of Cyprus ' accession to the European Union and overcome its misgivings .
The Council has asked the Commission to make the necessary contacts with the Turkish Cypriot community , in agreement with the government of Cyprus .
The Council equally confirms its stance of not recognising the authorities of North Cyprus .
It was with this aim in mind that the current financial protocol was signed in June 1995 to support the efforts for a general settlement of the Cyprus question .
An amount of ECU 12 million was earmarked for possible confidencebuilding initiatives agreed with Cyprus .
It is expected that additional funds may be made available to finance programmes and projects to promote the development of the whole island .
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office , for your answer .
I agree with most of what you said , and am very pleased to do so .
However , the decisions you described , on the one hand recognition of the Republic of Cyprus as a partner in talks , and on the other hand participation of the Turkish Cypriot community in the negotiations , a participation which the Republic of Cyprus has in any case accepted and proposed , those two decisions should lead towards some development , some outcome .
My question , therefore , is this : Can you tell us now when the European Union is to meet with Cyprus in the context of political dialogue , in the context of structured dialogue with a view towards accession ?
Because since we agree about the general principles , progress ought to be made .
I am telling you that time is passing .
So when will meetings take place to further the structured political dialogue ?
Contacts between the European Union and the Cypriot government in general are very intensive .
I have already mentioned that the Association Council met very recently .
Commissioner Van den Broek visited both parts of Cyprus very recently .
We are very busy preparing for the prospect of starting accession negotiations with Cyprus in the near future .
Such negotiations will also have the necessary accompanying political monitoring .
Mr Papayannakis ' question referred to a very specific point , namely the political dialogue between the European Union and Cyprus .
Mr Papayannakis is undoubtedly aware that this political dialogue did not get far with the Association Council because the fifteen Member States were unable to agree on the political declaration drafted by the European Union to prepare for this political dialogue .
I am sure there will soon be an opportunity to resume talks whereby I am assuming that everything being done by the European Union and by Greece in the context of the Council is directed at creating the conditions under which the peace talks with Cyprus can be resumed , and resumed in such a way that gives assurance that there will be no political spokes in the wheel to upset the commitment given by the European Union on the start of accession negotiations with Cyprus .
I repeat : all efforts on the part of the Council and of the Members of the Council must be directed at creating the political environment for smoothing the path towards the start of the accession negotiations with Cyprus .
It is clear that the general atmosphere would be improved by a definite prospect of peace negotiations being resumed in the near future under the auspices of the United Nations and preferably producing results in the very short term .
Mr President , I am particularly grateful to the President-in-Office of the Council for his detailed answer , and I share the view expressed by Mr Papayannakis that along general lines it is a very good answer .
However , I would like to return to the subject of structured dialogue . I want to ask , indeed to insist a little , on the following : granted all these difficulties and facts that we all know about and that the President-in-Office mentioned earlier , does the Council have a view about any specific timetable for this resumption of structured dialogue ?
And in any case , what must now be done to overcome the previous difficulties ?
The Council will undoubtedly resume talks on the small difference of opinion , because the disagreement was about one small sentence , on the political declaration to prepare the structured dialogue .
I am confident that this will also be taken in the wider context of these talks , for it is not about the structured dialogue with Cyprus at all .
It is about creating the political conditions for the Council 's commitment on starting the accession negotiations with Cyprus being put into action without hindrance .
That is a commitment the Council which is standing by and which we also want to put into action .
We want no political complications there .
It is part of a wider context which involves Greek-Turkish relations and relations between the Turks and the European Union which affects all parties - and I would point out in this context that the European Parliament has also a certain responsibility of its own here - and which should contribute to the whole complex of political sensitivities and political risks being brought back to manageable proportions , to the political difficulties being reduced to problems which can be resolved and to the accession prospects of Cyprus being fulfilled .
As Mrs Izquierdo Rojo is not present , Question No 15 ( H-0151 / 97 ) falls .
Question No 16 by Mr Lindqvist ( H-0153 / 97 )
Subject : The EU 's foreign and security policy
The clearest expression of the Union 's objectives in security and defence is to be found in Article J.4 ( 1 ) .
The present wording is : ' the common foreign and security policy shall include all questions related to the security of the Union , including the eventual framing of a common defence policy , which might in time lead to a common defence . '
In the draft for a new Treaty the word ' eventual ' has been replaced by ' progressive ' .
The present wording ' which might in time lead to ' now reads ' in the perspective of ' .
This represents a clear upgrading of the objective for the common foreign and security policy , i.e. a common defence .
Are these changes designed to pave the way for a common EU defence ?
My reply will not completely satisfy Mr Lindqvist because he is asking about the Intergovernmental Conference and I am unable to give him an answer on behalf of the Council .
I do not think it opportune to answer , but from my own observations and involvement in the IGC I would just like to assure Mr Lindqvist that the matter he raised is receiving a great deal of attention .
I would even go further and say that it is one of the main subjects of negotiations within the framework of reviewing the second pillar of the Treaty on European Union .
I thank you for the reply , even if it did not reveal anything new .
For a Member State such as Sweden , the question of military alliances is very important .
It is important in the light of Sweden 's long experience , 180-200 years , of being a country free of military alliances .
However , it is also important for the future to preserve what the people and the parties more or less agree on .
It would therefore be a loss and a dilemma - a rather serious dilemma - if new regulations were introduced into a future EU Treaty , which would take the matter even further than the regulations , which still apply and which even during the referendum in 1994 caused an intense debate in our country .
I do understand that the members of the Council cannot say at the present time what will come out of the Intergovernmental Conference .
However , the matter is important from our point of view which is the reason for asking the question .
Question No 17 by Mr Needle ( H-0154 / 97 )
Subject : OECD recommendations on combating bribery
In 1994 and 1996 OECD member states adopted at ministerial level a set of recommendations on combating bribery in international business relations .
Very little has happened in terms of implementation .
Would the Council share the view that a concerted , simultaneous action of the 15 Member States would be a means of breaking the deadlock and of carrying other OECD members along ?
Should not one of the first steps consist in ending tax deductibility of bribes paid to foreign officials ( which creates considerable distortions of competition and represents a major obstacle to development ) ?
I would like to say the following in response to Mr Needle 's question .
It is correct that the OECD Council adopted a recommendation on 11 April 1996 inviting the OECD members states to review their tax legislation and end tax deductibility for bribes paid abroad .
As a result of this recommendation and of other current discussions , such as those in the Council of Europe , some countries have either ended tax deductibility of bribes paid abroad or are planning to do so .
As this issue in some countries is linked to a possible change in their penal legislation , in particular the penalisation of corrupt foreign officials , it may take some time for the legislation in the various member states to be revised in the light of the OECD recommendation .
Although this is a recommendation adopted outside the framework of the Community and therefore does not come within the powers of the Union , the Presidency will certainly pass on Mr Needle 's request to the delegations .
I would just mention in this context that the Council is currently working on a draft agreement making the bribing of officials from the EU Member States a punishable offence .
The Council views corruption as a very important matter .
We must unequivocally condemn the practices of individuals who unscrupulously harm the whole community and tax payers in particular .
It goes without saying that the Dutch presidency will leave no stone unturned in dealing with this subject .
I thank the President-in-Office for that very encouraging reply and I am delighted that , taken together with the question from Mrs Kinnock earlier on , we have had a welcome and very positive response on this important subject this evening .
I should like just to press you on a couple of small points about what can actually be achieved , particularly given the slow process in the Council of Europe and the OECD .
Does the Council believe that the Commission could be encouraged to use the legal instruments already available to it , in particular in the field of competition rules , for example , and rules governing the internal market ?
Lastly , given the initiatives about which you have spoken in the framework of the OECD and the changes by the World Bank , does the Council intend to press for new European Union procurement rules so as to prevent corruption more effectively ?
On the implementation of the OECD recommendation which concerns tax legislation and penal legislation , it strikes me that regulations on competition and the internal market do not directly affect this discussion , so I must think carefully about this one .
For the time being I am unable to answer your question on European rules on procurement .
I think it very important that the European Union , which is responsible for a large number of invitations to tender every year , should be extremely wary of any shady practices involving tenders .
I think the European Commission and the European Court of Auditors must constantly be on the alert .
The Council Presidency will not fail to play its part .
As Mr Pirker is not present , Question No 18 ( H-0165 / 97 ) falls .
Mr Pirker 's office told me that the Bureau had been informed that I would be taking over Mr Pirker 's question .

Mr Pirker 's office was kind enough to inform you , but it was not kind enough to inform us as well .
I was told that the Bureau had been informed .
I am sorry , but that did not happen .
Question No 19 by Mrs Cederschiöld ( H-0168 / 97 )
Subject : Deadlines in areas which are part of the third pillar
The IGC is discussing the introduction of deadlines in areas of the third pillar that are now being transferred to the Community domain .
The term ' deadlines ' in this case means the year by which Member States must fulfil the requirements imposed by virtue of communitization .
In the Council 's view , how will the introduction of such deadlines affect enlargement of the Union ?
On Mrs Cederschiöld 's question on the deadlines for transferring powers under the third pillar , I can only say in my capacity as President-in-Office of the Council that this too is one of the many proposals being discussed in the Intergovernmental Conference .
As my predecessors and I myself have said on various occasions in earlier replies to questions on the workings of the IGC , the Council is not a party to this conference .
It is therefore inappropriate that I say anything further here today .
I repeat that it is not opportune for me to comment on the content of the Intergovernmental Conference , but Mrs Cederschiöld put another question which does fall within the remit of the Council .
She asked about the link between the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference and the start of accession negotiations .
I wish to state that the Dutch presidency attaches the greatest importance to doing everything in its power to conclude the Intergovernmental Conference under its presidency , and that is because of the political link between the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference and the start of accession negotiations .
The Intergovernmental Conference , including the work of the think tank under Mr Westendorp , has already been on the go for nine months and we consider it of the utmost importance that the governments of the Member States meeting in the conference continue to make themselves available during the final three months to conclude the conference properly .
I fully agree with Mrs Cederschiöld that we keep the periods for starting accession negotiations - and we all know that these negotiations will be rather lengthy and that they have to be followed by a ratification process - as short as possible for precisely the reasons adumbrated by Mrs Cederschiöld , namely that we cannot afford the expectations of the applicant countries to be dashed through internal division and procrastination .
Question No 20 by Mr G. Collins ( H-0174 / 97 )
Subject : Cot deaths
Despite efforts to prevent Sudden Infant Death Syndrome , the number of deaths rose in Ireland in 1996 following a steady decrease during the previous five-year period .
Will the Council outline the ways in which it believes the European Community can contribute to preventing Sudden Infant Death Syndrome ?
Does it consider the 5th Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development , in addition to research in the fight against age-related diseases , should support research into SIDS and , finally , will the Council encourage the setting up of a Union-wide register of cot deaths which will enable all unexplained cot deaths to be notified , as is the case in Ireland , to the respective Departments of Health and relayed within the EU ?
Mr President , in reply to Mr Collins ' question on cot deaths I can assure him that the Council shares his concerns on the development he described .
I must , however , inform him that in the context of action in the field of public health the Council has not yet received any specific proposal on the notification of cot deaths or on the creation of a Union-wide register .
It is possible that certain general actions in the framework of the Community action programme on public health , information , education and training which was adopted by the European Parliament and the Council on 29 March 1966 could indirectly contribute to the prevention of cot deaths , but sudden infant death syndrome as such is not specifically mentioned there .
It is the duty of the Commission in cooperation with the Member States to ensure the implementation of this programme .
Were the Commission to produce a proposal , the Council will certainly consider it seriously with the encouragement of the Presidency .
As Mr Andrews is not present , Question No 21 ( H-0176 / 97 ) falls .
Question No 22 by Mr Gallagher ( H-0181 / 97 )
Subject : Compensation for Irish fishermen
The fishing industry and the fish-processing industry in Ireland have been severely hit by the storms of recent months .
Will the Council now instruct the Commission to immediately bring forward an urgent compensation package to assist fishermen and those involved in the fish-processing industry affected by these severe storms ?
In reply to Mr Gallacher 's question on compensation for Irish fishermen for the damage suffered from the storms of recent months I wish first of all to express my sympathy to all concerned .
I must point out that it is not the responsibility of the Council to request the Commission to present proposals for compensation .
It is up to the Member States concerned to bring this matter to the attention of the Commission which is authorised to grant emergency aid to victims of disasters .
I want to thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
However I do not accept what he suggests , that it is a matter for the Member States to make a case to the Commission .
He also suggests by implication that there is a fund there .
Could I draw the President-in-Office 's attention to the fact that the Commission made a case to the Council of Ministers in March 1995 and it included a proposal for aid for the establishment of bad weather unemployment funds .
This was rejected by the Council of Ministers .
That contradicts what the President-in-Office has just said .
I am asking the President-in-Office now , is there a fund there and if there is a fund can he give me details of it ?
If there is no fund will the Council now give favourable consideration to the proposal which was rejected in March 1995 ?
I am not familiar with the 1995 proposal which was rejected by the Council or by Parliament , I am not too clear about that .
I cannot comment on it .
The Commission has funds for emergency aid .
But this form of intracommunity aid for victims of disasters comes specifically under the authority of the Commission .
The Commission decided independently on 16 October 1996 to use ECU 300 , 000 for victims of the severe floods in Ireland in January 1996 .
Incidentally Parliament may ask the Commission itself to release funds for victims of disasters by adopting a resolution , for example , in its debates on urgent questions .
As Mr Papakyriazis , Mr Ephremidis and Mr Theonas are not present , Question No 23 ( H0184 / 97 ) , Question No 24 ( H0190 / 97 ) and Question No 25 ( H-0191 / 97 ) fall .


Question No 26 by Mr Posselt ( H-0193 / 97 )
Subject : Enlargement and internal security
What stage has been reached in the cooperation and structured dialogue with the Central and Eastern European candidate countries with regard to internal security , and what implications does this have for the security situation on the EU 's external frontiers ?
In reply to Mr Posselt 's question I can say that the structured dialogue with the Central and Eastern European countries started in June 1996 under the French presidency in Luxembourg .
It entered a new phase in March 1996 .
A specific subject is given top priority attention during each presidency .
During the second half of 1996 the dialogue concentrated on the problem of drugs .
A seminar was held on that subject on 24 and 25 October 1996 and the conclusions of this seminar adopted as such by the partners on 28 and 29 November 1996 .
A meeting of the working party ' Drugs and Organised Crime ' was held with the Central and Eastern European countries on 10 March .
The Council services are currently implementing the conclusions of that meeting , which include a number relating to internal security , for example exchange of information , monitored deliveries and rules on the control of precursors for chemical drugs .
The dialogue is now concentrating on asylum problems .
The conclusions will be presented to the Council in May .
Specific practical problems of border controls are being dealt with under the so-called ' CIREFI ' , which is an EUwide data bank on asylum affairs .
The applicant countries have already attended meetings in the past on this subject .
A second meeting with Central and Eastern European countries on this matter will be held under the Dutch presidency .
Mr President , thank you for this very precise answer , and I should just like to ask whether certain elements of the cooperation that would be expected to result from membership might perhaps , given the length of time the negotiations will take , be given priority , in the interests of cooperation and in the interests of public security .
For example , could not EUROPOL start working directly with the police forces of the candidate countries , and could not the structured dialogue be extended to cover three issues that are particularly explosive , namely the slave trade , an area in which organized crime is already earning more than in the drugs trade - and secondly the theft and smuggling of works of art , which is a major problem in Bavaria and the Czech Republic , and thirdly the drugs problem , which has already been mentioned ?
I reply to Mr Posselt 's second question I would say that the Council attaches the utmost importance to cooperating with Central and Eastern European countries on the prevention of and fight against organised crime .
Organised crime does not stop at the borders of the European Union .
Central and Eastern European countries are just as concerned as ourselves .
The Union and Member States attach great importance to giving this top priority , including the areas mention by Mr Posselt .
There are still some restrictions which have not yet been solved but we are working on them .
The first restriction is that the Europol Treaty has not yet been ratified .
Practical cooperation in the immediate future can only be on the provisional European Drugs Unit which has a limited capacity .
We must keep that in mind .
But I believe that as soon as Europol is ratified and the necessary human and financial resources made available then it can quickly be extended to the Eastern European countries .
Another aspect I would refer to , and I already mentioned this in reply to Mrs Kinnock 's question , is the shortcoming in the institutional means of the third pillar ; specifically , it is very difficult to make agreements with third countries under the third pillar .
I have already mentioned that the group of senior officials dealing with combatting organised crime , a group set up in Dublin by the European Council which is to report back to Council in April , will also discuss this aspect of cooperation between the European Union and Central and Eastern European countries in fighting organised crime .
Question No 27 will be answered in writing .
That concludes Question Time .
Driftnets
The next item is the oral question by Mr Arias Cañete , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , to the Council ( B4-0017 / 97 - O-0001 / 97 ) , on driftnets .
Mr President-in-office of the Council , I thank you first of all for being here and for being willing to discuss the future of driftnets with us .
As you know , the Commission has a proposed amendment to the current regulation on technical measures seeking to ban driftnets exceeding 2.5 kilometres in length as from 31 December l997 .
This proposal dates from 1994 and thus far neither the Council nor the Commission has done anything to break the deadlock .
I am putting this question to the Fisheries Committee to underscore our conviction that various events which have taken place since 1994 in the legal , legislative , social , economic and environmental spheres , have placed the Commission proposal in a totally different global context .
We therefore think that the content urgently needs to be reviewed .
Although there have not since 1994 been the serious disputes seen in previous years , that was because inspection vessels were permanently deployed by sea-bordering countries as well as a Commission monitoring vessel .
That has all proved so costly that it appears that the Commission does not intend to deploy its vessel for next summer 's fishing year in the Atlantic .
That will no doubt mean that the member countries will step up their inspection activities , because those of us who know the fleets well are aware that the dispute is still lurking beneath the surface and that rules are still being broken , as the Commission 's own reports indicate .
It seems clear that nets of 2.5 kilometres are not an economic proposition for most ports and the proof is that many countries , under pressure to carry out inspections , have dismantled their driftnet fleet as uneconomical - as in the case of Ireland and the United Kingdom - or for other more complex reasons nonetheless directly related to unprofitability , as is the case with Italy .
On the other hand , we in the Council , Commission and Parliament are currently working on a new proposal for a regulation on technical measures .
Is there any point in approving this proposal when there is still an amendment to the previous regulation which is still dragging on and which has not even been included in the new proposal ?
Another original - and in my opinion very important - aspect arises from the approval of the New York Agreement on trans-zonal and highly migratory species which the European Union is preparing to ratify .
I would draw attention to some of the points in Article 5 , particularly 5 ( f ) , according to which the states undertake to reduce to a minimum contamination , depletion of stocks , waste , fishing by equipment which is used once then discarded , accidental catches of species of fish or other creatures outside the scope intended , by the adoption of measures which include the use of gear and techniques for selective fishing which do not harm the environment and which are not expensive .
Other sections of this Article might be mentioned , but I think that is sufficient to make the point that promises are not being fulfilled with regard to these nets .
There again the ecology movement and those Member states most concerned about the environment have a much clearer view of driftnets nowadays than they had in 1994 and what happened with regard to the United States ' threatened embargo against Italy , which directly affects the entire Community tuna and sword fish production , further demonstrates what we can expect if we do not tackle the problem .
Finally , Mr President , I should like to remind you of another factor which has been largely responsible for the changes cited : this Parliament 's own resolution on the banning of driftnets dating from 1994 and which was , moreover , by excluding the Baltic and use within the 12-mile zone , instrumental in securing the agreement of the northern countries of the Union .
We therefore think that there are sufficient aspects left to warrant a new proposal and that , if it makes the requisite effort , the Council can find a way out .
On behalf of the Committee on Fisheries and in view of the arguments put forward , I ask for that effort and that impetus .
I must put the record straight on a number of facts .
The present Community legislation on drift nets , EEC Regulation 3094 / 86 , amended by Council Regulation 345 / 92 , bans the use by Community vessels of drift nets of more than two and a half kilometre 's length , irrespective of the waters being fished .
The only exception to this regulation is the Baltic Sea where special international rules apply .
On 8 April 1994 the Commission presented a proposal to the Council for a total ban on drift nets with effect from 1 January 1998 .
The Council debated this proposal in the light of the opinion from the European Parliament and the opinion from the Economic and Social Committee on various occasions but has so far been unable to reach a qualified majority opinion .
The proposal is still on the table and while waiting for a Council decision the Member States and the Commission have cooperated in implementing stricter controls and conservation measures on tuna fishing in the Atlantic Ocean and since 1996 in the Mediterranean Sea .
The proposal was last discussed at the Fisheries Council of 22 April 1996 when the Council again stressed that the present Community legislation on drift nets must be fully respected .
The Council also expressed its satisfaction on the results achieved to date on the conservation measures .
The Council also welcomed the Commission 's initiative to try to meet these objectives during the fishing season without increasing the overall fishing activities .
The Commission representative stated that the Commission wished to see progress made and would welcome any constructive ideas from delegations on procuring a qualified majority on its proposal .
On 17 December 1996 the Commission presented the Council with a plan produced by the Italian authorities for a decision on a specific measure to encourage Italian fishermen to switch certain fishing activities .
This proposal was aimed at the Italian fleet gradually abolishing the use of drift nets with the smallest possible effect on employment .
Measures have been taken to encourage fishermen to switch to other more selective methods for the period 19971999 and to offer them compensation for any loss of income .
This proposal of 17 December is currently being debated in the Council and the European Parliament consulted .
In the light of Parliament 's opinion the Presidency intends to do everything in its power to ensure that the proposal is adopted during the Dutch presidency .
The Member States are also reminded of the Commission 's request during the Council meeting of April 1996 to take the initiative and produce constructive proposals to solved the problem of drift nets .
Without such an initiative , for which unanimity is required in the Council , in the absence of an amended Commission proposal , the prospects for a solution are not favourable .
I think I should leave it at that .
Mr President , Mr President of the Council , I believe it is right to hold this debate , and to be able to go deeper into the matter next month , when we will be dealing with the conversion plan for driftnet fishing , which affects Italy .
Italy , or more accurately its new government , has taken a firm line on the issue and it is highly likely that within three years it will have succeeded in moving fishing vessels using driftnets up to 2.5 kilometres in an acceptable direction .
The plan is voluntary and will therefore involve those intending to convert their own businesses .
But the problem has to be dealt with not just from a distinctly Italian viewpoint , but taking account of a wider area surrounding the Mediterranean .
We are convinced certain resources are being overfished and overuse of driftnets is creating problems , not least environmental ones .
This has been scientifically proven .
This problem reaches beyond Italy to third countries , because the risk is that once the European fleets have been converted , the use of driftnets could easily proliferate in the third countries .
So there has to be a conversion plan covering the whole Mediterranean and it is also important for Europe to develop its Europartenariat role with Mediterranean countries , encouraging awareness in these countries of the environmental effects of this type of fishing .
We also have to recognize that there are fleets fishing indiscriminately in the Mediterranean - I am referring to the Japanese and Korean fleets - as well as flags of convenience ploughing those waters and having an enormous impact on fisheries resources .
That is why the problem of driftnets has to be analysed jointly with the complex effort in the Mediterranean fishing sector .
Other types of fishing and other fishing gear are extremely prejudicial to the maintenance of certain very delicate species . Dolphins and ' caretta caretta ' turtles are of course suffering significant repercussions from other types of fishing too , like longline .
So I believe we must press ahead with controls , but recognizing our duty to comply with the Community regulation setting the length of driftnets at 2.5 kilometres .
I believe this is a fundamental point we must keep to .
In my opinion , Mr President , your answer is completely unsatisfactory .
You say that there are no constructive proposals .
But from whom ?
In my opinion , these constructive proposals are lacking on the part of the Council , and certainly not on the part of the European Parliament !
We have already , on many occasions , given our opinion on the problem of driftnets .
In the past , we have always prohibited them - quite rightly - because public opinion , which is what we represent here , regards the protection of marine creatures and the maintaining of the ecological balance as being threatened by these nets .
The fishing industry also means safeguarding people 's economic and social living conditions .
However , we must be extremely careful here , particularly at a time when those areas where fishery resources are available are experiencing losses .
The use of driftnets brings with it two negative consequences . First of all there is the problem that when driftnets are used the species to be caught cannot be selected .
In addition , sea creatures are senselessly killed by these so-called ' ghost nets ' .
Even if we have to make a distinction between the fishing problems in the North Pacific , the South Pacific , the North Atlantic , the South Atlantic , the Baltic Sea , the Mediterranean and within the twelve-mile limits , the fact remains that , basically , the use of driftnets is disastrous everywhere .
We should continue to set an example on this issue , in accordance with our previous decision .
Some updating is needed .
The Council 's acceptance , possibly revised , of the Commission 's 1994 proposal is therefore absolutely vital and a matter of great urgency .
In order to defend its interests and values , and those of other communities and countries , the EU must find a way , within its own institutions and within the international bodies concerned , to achieve an immediate and appropriate prohibition on the use of driftnets , and at the same time come up with the necessary effective control measures .
Mr President , if a man wants to drown his dog he first accuses it of having rabies .
Nowhere is this proverb better illustrated than in the case of driftnets .
First of all , there is the question of what is included in the mixture .
To lump together under the same heading the nets that are used in the Mediterranean and those that are used in the Atlantic really smacks of trickery .
In the Mediterranean , they fish for swordfish , a rare species . The fish are very scattered , which makes it necessary to use very long nets , whereas in the Bay of Biscay , which is the subject of my proposal , they fish for tuna , a species which occurs in abundance and which is found in shoals , so that it can be caught in nets that are not so long .
It has also been claimed that nets that are 2.5 km in length could not be profitable .
Yet this is just a generalized falsehood .
You only have to go and check .
And people did go and do just that - two boats were chartered by the Community in 1995-1996 - and checks were carried out - 60 to 70 inspections per season - and no infringements were found .
Now we are being led to believe that these nets would be diabolically efficient , but do you know what percentage of tuna is fished using nets ?
Is it 80 % , 50 % or 25 % ? Not even that much , but less than 12 % of the total catch !
So what arguments are we now left with ?
The resolution contains only one : the argument that driftnets are described as non-selective , and the bigger they are , the more this is true .
But this argument completely ignores the study carried out by the IFREMER , which covered two seasons and included observers from five countries .
The conclusion of this study was that the rate of selectivity is 85.8 % ; in other words , it is one of the most selective methods of fishing .
Finally , what would be the consequences if French tuna fishermen were to abandon this technique ?
It would be a disaster as far as resources are concerned .
In actual fact , these are fishing vessels that derive 50 % of their annual turnover from the tuna-fishing season .
If they are denied this opportunity , they will have no alternative but to give up fishing for tuna , and carry out their winter occupation , which is trawl-fishing , all the year round . This would have an effect on species , such as the hake for example , which are very much at risk .
Mr President , if it had been up to the European Parliament there would have been no need to ask this question because away back in 1994 we said that at the end of that year there should be a ban on drift nets .
I would just remind you of our report .
There is no need either for me to explain why we in this House object to what happens with drift nets .
Mrs Langenhagen has described that in sufficient detail .
The Italian drift nets in particular catch less than 20 percent of the total allowable catch of tuna and sword fish , the remaining 80 percent is by-catch .
I do not need to explain how serious that is for the marine environment .
Now the President-in-Office of the Council says that the Dutch presidency will do its best to discuss this proposal again , this proposal that was last discussed in the Council on 22 April .
I would ask the Council to take seriously the Commission proposal , namely for a ban with effect from 1 January 1998 .
I wish to ask the President-in-Office of the Council when it will be put on the agenda and how the Presidency intends to prepare this for the coming Fisheries Council .
Mr President , it is three years since the Commission presented its proposal on the banning of driftnets and the decision is still blocked within the Council .
Although governments , such as the Italian government , are prepared to adopt measures to reduce the use of such nets , these initiatives are not sufficient from any point of view and there are Member States which have banned them , but until there is a generalized ban the situation will be exactly the same .
It is argued that fleets from third countries are still using such nets .
Let us not fool ourselves - until the European Union bans them it will be impossible to take action against third countries to persuade them to desist .
Moreover , the European Union tries to excuse itself by carrying out monitoring operations , which do not basically affect the problem and which , furthermore , are exorbitantly expensive in relation to their effectiveness .
There are weighty arguments for banning the use of driftnets .
First reasons concerning the environment and the conservation of fish stocks .
When these nets are used approximately 80 % of the catch is accidental which has an enormous impact on protected species .
Banning such nets is fundamental , both for the sake of conservation of resources and the protection of endangered species .
There are also reasons of an economic nature which militate in favour of banning these nets .
They are not very selective , affect other fishing activities and place those fishing with selective methods at a distinct disadvantage .
Let us make no mistake .
These nets do not even benefit those using them .
Some governments are turning this into a state issue , but that is another matter .
The market situation , the low quality of the catches which these nets yield and the high investment and amounts for amortization make their use uneconomical .
The fishermen indeed are the prisoners of the investments they have made .
The reduced profits which these catches bring pushes the amounts for amortization up to excessive levels .
Some governments ought then to deal decisively with the problem of conversion for the sake of their own fishermen and future generations .
Fishing in the Community and throughout the whole world is facing an unprecedented crisis caused by the lack of resources and the problem of the market .
Driftnets are an example of what should not be done in fisheries policy .
The Council should be aware of that and solve this question once and for all .
Here is a challenge and a great opportunity for the Netherlands Presidency .
Mr President , like others , I too must express a certain disappointment at the reply from the President-in-Office of the Council , because I do not believe it can be said there is a lack of constructive proposals .
The problem is that we have before us a 1994 Commission proposal , a series of positions taken by the European Parliament , but also a UN resolution .
Given this situation we might have expected coherent decisions from the Council and action to obtain positive results from the Presidency-in-Office .
Why are we asking for a total ban on the ' spadare ' ?
The answer is that the ' spadare ' is non-selective tackle , as has already been mentioned , and it is used not only in the Mediterranean , but also in the Atlantic . In particular it is used on French , English and Irish fishing vessels , although the practice has tended to decline in recent years .
But there is no doubt that the greatest impact is occurring in the Mediterranean .
This impact can be summarised as follows : according to the International Whaling Commission , the ' spadare ' , so-called because it is used to catch swordfish , kills around 5000 dolphins and dozens of sperm whales every year .
Furthermore , the target species , the swordfish , constitutes only 17-18 % of the catch , which demonstrates the non-selective nature of this type of fishing .
Furthermore , according to the FAO , swordfish stocks are being overfished .
This means that a decrease in fishing would involve an increase , by weight , in catches which currently comprise young fish which often have not reproduced .
In the Mediterranean , the area at greatest risk , an Italian fleet is now operating and , perhaps increasingly , fleets from third countries .
The only way to control these third countries is to state that the European Union no longer uses the ' spadare ' and establish trading relations with third countries creating disincentives against using the ' spadare ' .
That is the only credible solution .
Either there are advantages to 2.5 kilometre net lengths or there are not .
If there are advantages , the complaints are incomprehensible ; if not there are two possibilities : either fishermen who say they use 2.5 kilometre nets are using longer ones , or they would benefit from a change in direction .
So the only way to guarantee Italian fishermen an income and a future in fishing is to ban the ' spadare ' completely , carry out a conversion process , use more selective methods that are less dangerous for the environment and cement relationships with third countries to ensure control of the use of the ' spadare ' in that zone .
Why , Mr President , are we resuming here today the debate on driftnets , when the only new scientific evidence confirms their selectivity , and when other types of fishing equipment are being developed that are highly questionable , such as the ' naveran ' , for example ?
Why is it that we are trying , at all costs , to stir up a controversy which has already been settled , to the best possible advantage to everyone ?
The last two long-finned tuna fishing seasons in the North Atlantic have demonstrated the responsible behaviour of driftnet fishermen , who have been strictly observing the 2.5 km limits .
This is proved by the very large number of national and Community inspections that have been carried out on French tuna fishing vessels .
These two seasons have also shown that vessels can use both nets and lines at the same time , and that these two techniques have proved to be perfectly compatible .
Finally , it has been proved that minimum profitability is possible within the framework of the 2.5 km limits .
But let us not forget that , for many fishermen , accepting the 2.5 km limits represents a considerable sacrifice .
Some of them have given up fishing , and there are also all those who naturally based their calculations regarding their vessels ' capacity and their investments on the rules that were in force at the time , when the limit was 5 km .
Dropping it to 2.5 km has placed an extremely heavy burden on them in the form of extra costs .
This is not , therefore , the moment to give them the impression that the rules might be changed again .
As far as driftnets are concerned , we must stop stirring things up for political reasons , and stop maintaining this climate of uncertainty and anxiety .
What our fishermen need , on the contrary , is for the rules of the game to remain stable . They need a lasting regulatory framework if they are to be able to carry out their difficult occupation with the necessary degree of forward planning .
What we have to do , Mr President , is very simple .
First of all we must remember that the driftnet is a vital piece of working equipment for many fishing communities in Europe .
We must then confirm the fact that there is a system of rules , and that there is one system that applies to everyone and to all fishing areas , and that that system is the 2.5 km limit .
Even if this is harsh , at least it has the merit of being clear .
Finally , we must also make sure that everyone is scrupulous in applying it , both third countries and , of course , the Member States concerned , all of whom should send out an inspection vessel during the next season .
It is by doing this , Mr President , and not by fanning the flames , that we shall avoid a return to past conflicts , which are harmful to everyone , and it is in this way that a lasting peace will be brought to our fishing grounds .
It is in this direction , Mr President , that our parliamentary group would like to see the Council , in its wisdom , proceed .
Mr President , we are conducting an old debate here , since it goes back to 1994 , when Carmen Fraga - who is to swordfish and tuna what Astrid Lulling is to honey or what I myself am to vines - the passionate advocate of the swordfish , first brought up this subject , this problem of the conflict between net and line .
At the time , the Commission proposed a ban , but a ban that would come into force after a period of four years .
This period will come to an end at the end of December 1997 . Carmen Fraga Estévez herself wanted an immediate ban , with no variations , though as it turned out there would have been some variations - an immediate ban except for the Baltic ( why the Baltic ? ) and for territorial waters , but it is true that , as far as the twelve-mile limits were concerned , the coastal State would have sovereignty .
This is a problem of a Hegelian nature .
It is a dialectical problem , because the good and the bad are not only on one side .
It is true that there are opposing economic arguments : the hundreds of Spanish fishermen , who are , moreover , Carmen Fraga 's voters , and the Italians .
We went , with Mrs Péry , to Palermo , where 500 Italian fishing vessels are involved .
On the other hand there is the question of financial equilibrium - Mr d 'Aboville , or the Mayor of Luçon , was talking about this just now - the financial equilibrium of the sixty fishing undertakings , or the sixty vessels , of the Isle of Yeu , and all the problems that would arise from having to convert the fishing fleets .
Mr Baldarelli mentioned this a few minutes ago .
And then there are the ecological arguments , the real walls round the Atlantic - 20 km in the case of Italy - against which everything is battering , just like in the days of the Second World War !
The turtles , the dolphins , would die !
If we look at the real situation , the actual wastage , if I may call it that , is only 2 % , though I admit that that is already too much .
I should like to remind you of what the fishermen of Sicily said to us .
When we went to see them , they told us that , although they understood what was happening to the dolphins , they were themselves under threat of extinction .
Father and son , they have always fished for a living .
The little dolphins were at risk of disappearing , but then so were the little fishermen !
They also pointed out that the Koreans and the Japanese were not affected by the ban .
But will the dolphins make a distinction between a Korean net , a Japanese net and an Italian net ?
This poses a problem .
There is also the risk of intensive fishing .
I think that Mr d 'Aboville said just now , for heaven 's sake , that it was something like 12 % of the catch .
The Commission , in its wisdom - which is rare , and therefore worthy of comment - has finally , for once , arrived at a sort of compromise , which originated with the United Nations , and which the UNO itself adopted in 1989 : a 2.5 km net instead of a 5 km net .
It involved cutting the net in two , if I can put it like that .
One net , one piece of fishing gear .
But with all the risks that this involved , all the problems of damage to nets , and the time it takes to change a net , this could mean losing at least one day 's fishing , if not more .
I thought that with this compromise we had managed to put an end to the psychodrama , the neurosis , about fishing nets in the Bay of Biscay . And it was all being done under supervision - eight inspectors to keep watch over the long-finned tuna , eight EEC inspectors !
If British cows had had as many inspectors as tuna fish , we would probably not have had that other drama .
So , the tuna war will not take place , because , and Mrs Fraga will understand what I am saying , we should stick with the 2.5 km limit .
This is a compromise , and it will enable us to restore peace to the troubled waters of the Bay of Biscay .
Mr President , the key word in this question is ' balance ' .
We must try in the first place to find a fair balance between viable fishing activity on the part of the Community fleet and the conservation of resources .
Despite what some French colleagues have said , the fall in the number of scombroid species in the Bay of Biscay is alarming and it is a result of the use of these very nets .
Balance means in the second place equal treatment for all .
Driftnets have been banned for Spanish and Portuguese fishermen since the 1986 Treaty of Accession .
Fishermen from other countries use nets up to 2.5 kilometres long and in the Bay of Biscay nets up to 25 kilometres are allowed .
We ask that the use of driftnets be banned in general , irrespective of area .
We also ask the Council to tackle the question directly , to take a decision on the banning of the nets and at the same time to settle what amounts of compensation would be appropriate .
We should also like to call attention to the paradox involved in importing into the Union large quantities of fish caught by foreign fleets using these nets .
Could we be selective in our imports so that we put the brake on driftnets not only for our own fleets and our own waters ?
Finally , Mr President , during the transitional period the Commission should ensure there is more monitoring .
Although they are not sufficient , the two vessels chartered by the Commission and other measures taken with regard to fishing for tuna in coastal waters were decisive in reducing tension and avoiding the sad events of 1994 .
Mr President , the reply from the Presidency of the Council could not have been more misleading .
It gave no indication that things would move any faster .
We get the impression that this proposal will still be excluded from the agenda or systematically blocked within the Council .
And that we find disconcerting , as is the obstinacy of some Member States , because the only thing which the stepping up of monitoring over the past few years by the Member States and the Commission has shown is that driftnets of the regulation length are not economically viable ; some Member States ' fleets have stopped using them and where they are still used it is thanks to aids granted by some Member States .
These are fishing techniques which , when all is said and done , are ecologically harmful , uneconomical - within the letter of the law - and which , moreover , in the present situation for some Member States actually cause commercial disputes with third countries .
I the circumstances the Netherlands Presidency has a golden opportunity to settle this question which cannot simply be left to one side in the general revision of technical measures .
It would be absurd if , in a situation where there was over-capacity when the new multi-annual guidelines were being discussed , we were to continue to allow the use of non-selective fishing techniques .
The amendments proposed by Parliament might provide the flexibility needed to achieve the requisite majority in the Council - so that could not of course be the Commission 's original proposal .
In conclusion , Mr President , I urge you to include this question in the agenda of this Council and to establish the necessary contacts and talks to make it possible to achieve agreement there on a solution which would constitute a step forward in the development of a responsible and sustainable common policy .
Mr President , we are against the proposal for an immediate ban on driftnets in the Mediterranean because it would only hit Community fishermen , while third countries ' vessels would continue to fish without rules or controls .
No-one would argue that driftnets are harmless or have no impact on resources , but it is obvious that immediate abolition would not only fail to produce the desired results , but would look like discrimination to the fishermen and have serious consequences on jobs .
The consequences would be especially serious for Italy , bearing in mind that this activity goes on almost exclusively in the Objective 1 area , and public order problems cannot be ruled out .
Italy itself is now demonstrating willingness to find a solution .
A ' spadare ' plan has been drawn up , the fruit of an agreement between the government and the organizations in the sector , and providing for financial participation by the Community .
The Commission 's proposal for financial support has already been analysed and judged favourably , at the Council of Fisheries Ministers last December .
But the fishing vessels are being fitted out to start the fishing season even now .
So the Community must give a clear signal of its determination to resolve the issue of Italian driftnets positively , so that the fishermen and shipowners do not find themselves , yet again , starting the season in an uncertain and precarious atmosphere .
The commitment we are seeking from the Council , Mr President , is to adopt the support measures to the Italian plan as quickly as possible , bearing in mind the extraordinary situation which justifies not only recourse to the FIFG but also access to other Community funds where the quotas intended for Italy are not fully used .
Mr President , as some previous speakers have said , the Council 's answer seems to me to be far from sufficient on this problem of fishing with driftnets .
I am referring only to the problem seen in the Mediterranean and the specific harm which such fishing with driftnets causes for the fishermen , to be precise in the Balearic Islands , which suffer the damage occasioned by the presence of over 500 Italian vessels fishing with driftnets .
It has often been said that the Mediterranean is an ailing sea , a sea with problems concerning the conservation of species .
The conservation of these species depends on the use of fishing techniques which are as selective as possible and driftnets can never be a selective system of fishing .
I have approached the Commission on several occasions concerning the harm being done in the Balearic Islands by this type of fishing .
It has been indicated and stated that the date for prohibition would be December 1997 at the latest .
I cannot see at the moment that the Council is intending to meet these deadlines envisaged , which will do serious harm to some Community fishermen .
Mr President , Mr President-in-office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the words of the President-in-office of the Council really are misleading .
Previous speakers have mentioned this and I must repeat it .
We were hoping for much more from the Presidency of the Council and still more from the Netherlands Presidency .
The current impasse in which the legislation on driftnets finds itself is simply untenable .
It has been said here that the Commission asked for these nets to be discontinued from the end of this year - Parliament has repeated it on many occasions - and it appears , ladies and gentlemen , that we are going to have to keep on repeating it .
Allowing time to go by without solving this problem makes the situation worse , detracts from the credibility of the Community institutions and leads to undesirable situations , such as the present situation in Italy where there is pressure from North America , as mentioned here also .
A new fishing year will be opening soon bringing with it the risk of confrontation between Community fleets and the deployment of costly patrol and monitoring measures which could be avoided , since the problem is none other than the manifest incompatibility between fishing methods , as has been mentioned here ; on the one hand the traditional and selective methods which respect the environment and on the other the destructive driftnets .
It is known that nets of 2.5 kilometres are not profitable .
The same course which the Italian government has taken for conversion by means of the corresponding aids should be pursued for the Atlantic and those Member States still using it , thus settling the problem which keeps the fishermen on tenterhooks and each year costs the Community budget dearly .
The new situation in the Mediterranean , Mr President , the proposed exclusion of the Baltic should make it possible to obtain a better majority in the Council to break the deadlock on this problem finally as Parliament has requested .
It is the Council which is in a position to solve the problem .
I might say that the Netherlands Presidency could not be in a better position to achieve this historic political success , since it is not directly involved .
We therefore request the Council to show political responsibility and coherence .
Since we were not satisfied with what the Council said , and I think most Members agree with me , we ask them not to give up until these ' walls of death ' have been totally eradicated .
Mr President , firstly , I wish to take the opportunity during this debate on fisheries to refer to an incident off the south-west coast of Ireland on Sunday last on a bright , sunny day , with calm seas and good visibility .
The incident involved the 16-metre Irish vessel , Exodus , and the 33-metre British vessel , the Seahorse , crewed by Spaniards and Portuguese .
An inquiry is under way by the Irish authorities .
I suggest to the House that the Commission keep itself fully informed of developments relating to the inquiry and that it keeps the Committee on Fisheries fully informed .
I hope that we will have an opportunity to debate the outcome of the inquiry at a later stage .
I call on Parliament to send its condolences to the relations of skipper Danny O 'Driscoll who died as a result of this incident and , indeed , to the community of Castletownbear .
I , for one , am not disappointed at the response from the Council as the Council is being realistic in relation to the driftnet issue .
If it is intended to ban driftnets , then logic would suggest a ban on beam trawling or indeed any other method of fishing deemed to be deleterious to the environment .
Since a reduction of the limits to 2.5 km , there has been a 66 % fall in tuna landings in my country .
There has been no economic analysis or consultation with the industry and scientists have never recommended a ban on driftnetting .
Mr President , I too want to sympathize with the relatives of the fisherman who was drowned off the south coast of Ireland in a collision which took place on Sunday .
I want to refer to the question by Mr Arias and to say that I admire his tenacity and that of Mrs Fraga on this question .
But obviously there are two sides to it .
Most of the public sentiment surrounding the whole question of driftnet fishing comes from experiences in the Pacific , where everything is entirely different , where the tuna fish swim close to dolphins and where driftnets do cause a loss of other sea life besides what they are intended to catch .
In the Pacific , also , nets are 40-50 km in length and that is an entirely different situation from what we have in the Atlantic .
We should remember that a net 2 1 / 2 km long spans a distance of about 1 , 500 metres when deployed in the Atlantic .
It is a fairly insignificant length of net in that situation .
We should remember we are not dealing with the Atlantic .
What I want to say is that we should try to find a solution .
There are two problems , but what we have here is mainly a conflict of interests between the French , on the one hand , who use long liners , and the Spanish , on the other .
What I would suggest is that if we as a Community decide that nets may not be used , then the people who are prevented from engaging in the legitimate practice of catching tuna fish with nets should get compensation .
A sensible solution would be that if the French and the Irish and British are forced out because their system of fishing is unacceptable , then obviously the Spanish fleets will catch more fish and they could concede to the Irish and the British and the French other quotas of similar value and everybody would be happy .
The tuna would be caught in the way that is acceptable to us and the French and Irish and British would not have to sustain any losses .
That is an obvious solution : either financial compensation or compensation in some other form .
We should not use spurious environmental arguments to condemn a practice that we know and is scientifically shown to have no implications other than the catching of tuna fish .
Thank you , Mr President .
It is reasonable and necessary to increase production in the fisheries sector , always provided that is accompanied by increased selectivity .
Driftnets to not achieve that selectivity , but rather pose a threat to the resources / production ratio mentioned previously .
To give an example : just imagine that if the 400 Basque and Gallician vessels were to use those nets the stocks of scombroid species in the Bay of Biscay would be wiped out forthwith . That therefore implies a threat to the environment , unprofitability , incompatibility with traditional nets in the same waters , conflict between fleets , real difficulties as regards control and the risk of commercial sanctions .
Something must therefore be done .
I should like to put a specific proposal to the Netherlands Presidency : the Presidency of the Council could spearhead an agreement between the Member States for the final solution of this problem .
You , Mr President of the Council , mentioned the consideration of initiatives to achieve voting by qualified majority in the Council .
Consider the possibility of excluding the Baltic from that initiative , laying down the definitive ban on these nets from 31 December 1997 .
And try to associate States such as Italy with this initiative - Italy 's Minister for Fisheries , Mr Pinto , said in Venice on 29 November last year that he was in favour of taking these nets out of the Mediterranean , in exchange for the compensatory measures which you have mentioned as a socioeconomic alternative .
The Member States which might oppose these measures - the United Kingdom , France and Ireland - do not constitute a minority sufficient to block the procedure .
But they could join forces with a majority with an alternative plan for conversion from driftnets in the Atlantic - a plan financed from the FIFG which could in the course of 1997 and 1998 finance : first the cost of the investment already made in driftnets ; secondly training for fishermen in more selective methods of fishing for the same species - tuna ; thirdly the investment needed for conversion .
Please try to convince governments such as the British government that during the last fishing year it spent six hundred thousand pounds to monitor fisheries activities which brought in only four hundred thousand pounds from catches by only five vessels .
This is one alternative - the other is to carry on with an unresolved environmental problem , a latent conflict in Community waters , vast Commission expenditure , gaps in the legislation described annually in the Commission reports and finally the threat of commercial sanctions by the United States which will adversely affect the entire Community market unless the Italian problem is solved .
The ball is in the court of the Netherlands Presidency .
As we just heard , Mr Imaz San Miguel has given the President-in-Office the floor .
I imagine Minister Patijn wishes to reply , as several Members have criticized his earlier speech .
The Dutch presidency , and the Dutch in general , are well known for knowing their way about water .
Unfortunately I have not yet learned the art of walking on water .
That is the kind of skill expected when it comes to reaching a Council decision on the Commission proposal of April 1994 .
With the best will in the world the Council has been unable to produce a qualified majority on the basis of the Commission 's current proposal .
You may regret that , but that is the political reality and it also means that no legally valid decision can be taken on the basis of the Treaty on European Union , which is the constitution of our community .
But there are two ways of producing that result .
Either the Commission amends its proposal so that a number of Member States currently against it can change tack , but I fear that the Commission is unlikely to do so because it would then have to come here and explain to you why it has amended its proposal and would then be subject to the same kind of criticism as the Council presidency , or the Council presidency tries to overrule the Commission with its own compromise proposal , but that requires unanimity and that is quite out of the question .
You have encouraged us to do everything in our power to bring the Commission proposal of April 1994 to a successful conclusion .
If we see a chance to do so we shall take it , but the Dutch cannot walk on water .
The other track , even if this is apparently blocked at the moment for political reasons , is to act , for example , on the basis of the Italian government 's proposals to work through structural measures aimed at the fishing communities in Italy to phase out the use of drift nets by these communities and encourage them to switch to other techniques or other economic activities .
There is a Commission proposal from December last year , I believe , which invites the European Parliament for an opinion and I would urge you not to block this second track and to produce your opinion as quickly as possible so that something can be done which might produce a tangible effect in the Mediterranean .
Preserving the marine environment is a Council priority , but in realistic terms of everyday politics it will have to be balanced at all events against economic and regional interests .
If we win that one there will be a decision in the Council , but if the diversity of the Community is such that no agreement can be reached then you are left without a decision and I unfortunately must say that at the moment that is what it looks like - unless you can give the Commission some political margin for manoeuvre to amend its proposal so that a majority in the Council can accept it .
We cannot continue the debate , Mr Eisma , because we have another item on the agenda .
But what exactly was your point ?
Does the Commission share the wish expressed by the President-in-Office of the Council to amend the Commission proposal ?
Mr President , on behalf of Commissioner Bonino , I should like to stress that the Commission certainly also regrets the fact that no progress has been made on this matter in the Council .
As we have heard , the Commission 's proposal has been pending there since 1994 and , according to the information I have received , the Commission has repeatedly indicated to the Council that it is in favour of a compromise being reached which could secure a qualified majority .
I can only reiterate what I gather has already been said a number of times , namely that we are in favour of a solution being found which takes account of the economic interests of the fleets in question and of the relevant environmental considerations .
On a point of order , Mr President , I do not consider that the Commission has answered the question put by the previous speaker and I would ask if the Commission could indicate soon whether in fact it is thinking of playing an active role in the drafting of a new proposal .
Fishing off the coasts of Angola and Guinea
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
( A4-0013 / 97 ) by Mr Cunha , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol defining , for the period from 3 May 1966 to 2 May 1999 , the fishing opportunities and the financial contribution provided for by the Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Angola on fishing off the coast of Angola ( COM ( 96 ) 0323 - C4-0475 / 96-96 / 0176 ( CNS ) ) ; - ( A4-0385 / 96 ) by Mr Macartney , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol establishing , for the period 1 January 1996 to 31 December 1997 , the fishing rights and financial compensation provided for in the Agreement between the European Community and the Government of the Republic of Guinea on fishing off the Guinean coast ( COM ( 96 ) 0111 - C4-0270 / 96-96 / 0084 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , since 1987 the European Union has had Fishing Agreements with Angola . First of all , a three-year Agreement and since then the Agreements have been renewed every two years .
The current Agreement which is valid from May 1996 to May 1997 , covers the fishing fleets of five Member States - Spain , Portugal , France , Germany and the Netherlands - and includes a considerable enlargement of the possibilities of fishing off those coasts .
It maintains catch levels for prawns and shrimps - species of extremely high value , and substantially increases fishing opportunities for bottom long and surface longliners , specialising is sea bass and other demersal species and including for the first time pelagic fishing for horse mackerel and Atlantic mackerel .
This Agreement costs a total of 40 million ECU , which is a considerable increase over the previous Agreement , which cost only 18.5 million ECU .
There are three fundamental reasons for this increase , the first , the most important one , is the increase in the period of duration of the Agreement which has gone up from two to three years ; the second reason is a considerable increase in the possibilities for fishing given to the Community 's fleet ; the third reason is the updating of the cost of compensating the Angolan State , which had not been updated since 1992 .
I should like to emphasise the fact that this Agreement is also innovative in other areas , in particular in that it very much respects the principle of conservation of fish resources , allowing for the possibility of declaring biological rest periods on the basis of scientific data calling for them . It also sets maximum capture limits on the more sensitive species such as shrimps and prawns .
On the other hand , I should like to emphasise the fact that although this Fishing Agreement - as is the case of all fishing agreements - is a commercial agreement , it also respects the principles of co-operation and development , in particular because it finances activities such as scientific research into fish resources , bursaries , the promotion of the local fishing fleet , and it also increases from three to five the number of sailors who can sail on Community ships , in addition to providing for vocational training for those same sailors .
Our conclusion , as rapporteur , is that this is a positive Agreement for both sides : for the European Union and for Angola .
It is also positive because it increases from two to three years the duration period , which should give shipowners risking their capital some stability .
Finally , I should like to draw the attention of the European Parliament and the Commission to the habitual delays in consulting the European Parliament , something which is now part of our history !
I should just like to point out that this Agreement was signed by the Commission with Angola on 2 May 1996 and that the European Parliament was only consulted for its opinion on 12 September 1996 .
This is really very strange !
On 12 September , in other words just a fortnight before the deadline for paying the first amount due under the Agreement .
This is a sign that something is not working quite right here .
The rapporteur notes that , in fact , in order for the institutions to be properly respected , we really must change the administrative and political machinery so that the European Parliament can be consulted within a reasonable length of time and so that its opinion can really have an effective influence on the decision-making process .
I do not think that this is asking too much .
Mr President , I would echo some of the points which my colleague , Mr Cunha , has made .
But let me say that in approaching the discussions on this issue , I first of all took what seems to be the rather unusual step of consulting the Embassy of the Republic of Guinea and tried to get their input into the report .
I commend this to others who find themselves in the same position because they very much appreciated that we were talking to them to get their opinions .
The agreement was already reached so that no aspect of it could be called into question .
But they made some comments to me on behalf of the Guinean Government , which I was able to incorporate in the report .
First of all , it has to be said that Guinea is desperately dependent on revenue from agreements like this for its ordinary governmental functions .
So they have a rather weak position because they are so dependent on the EU for revenue .
Nevertheless , within the agreement there are some new developments which show exciting possibilities for using these agreements towards the development end of the spectrum .
We often talk about the dilemma of whether these agreements should be trade agreements or development instruments .
Parliament has repeatedly said we should move more and more towards seeing them as development instruments .
Mr Crampton has made this point in his own contribution to Parliament , as have many others .
So it is good to see that the Guinean agreement begins to move in that direction .
For example , there are for the first time specific grants for scientific research and for study and training built into the agreement as well as the amounts of aid offered for general revenue , some of which will find its way - this is always the defence of this kind of system - through the priorities of the relevant government to schools , clinics and development of that nature .
So we should not rule out that aspect at all .
However , the potential for these agreements is enormous .
A country like Guinea , which is one of the poorer countries of Africa , has a great potential if it can achieve stability , which I think it has now achieved despite the instability in the region , if it can exploit the economic zone which it possesses .
This is a problem because it faces invasion by foreign boats .
I am not talking about EU boats - at least we have an agreement which regulates that - but a number of fleets from elsewhere , particularly from Asia which have been found in violation of the territorial waters of the Republic of Guinea .
Guinea is , at the moment , very vulnerable .
We really have to look , as the EU , at that problem and look towards a regional solution right along the West African coast .
This , I know , would be welcomed by most of the countries in Africa with which we have agreements .
They feel vulnerable to blandishments or the simple invasion of boats from parts of the world other than the EU .
In 1958 Guinea became famous in Africa because when De Gaulle said to the French colonies ' Do you accept the new French Union of all the colonies ? ' , they all said ' oui ' but Guinea said ' non ' .
And the famous ' non ' of Sekou Touré was met with a whole lot of reprisals from the French .
Guinea suffered quite severely for standing up for its principles and becoming independent .
Ironically , two years later , all the other colonies which had said ' oui ' were also being given their independence , no questions asked , and a lot of aid .
I have a lot of admiration for the Guineans for standing up for independence but they have a backlog from that period to cope with .
So , as we approach countries like Guinea , we should be generous in our interpretation .
In conclusion , I should like to say a few words about the comments from the other committees of Parliament .
The Committee on Budgets is absolutely right on its procedural points .
Every time this Parliament makes the same point saying : ' we want to be concerned and consulted before the agreement takes effect ' , and every time it is ignored .
Mrs Jöns has made the point very precisely and I would support all her arguments .
Likewise the Committee on Development and Cooperation , as I mentioned , made absolutely the right point in saying that these agreements should be seen as tools of development .
These agreements are important .
We take them seriously in Parliament .
I wish , however , that we could get the Council and the Commission to build us into the procedure in a more effective way so we could really feel part of that process .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking here on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , and I should like to emphasize the following points . As the previous speaker has already said , we are dealing here with agreements that were initialled in December 1995 and May 1996 .
The history of these two agreements proves yet again how important it was that we should finally improve the procedure for keeping this House informed and involving it in the concluding of international fishery agreements .
I hope , in any case , that the kind of evasive tactics demonstrated by part of the budgetary authority will now be a thing of the past .
The code of conduct that we adopted along with the 1997 budget was intended to ensure that this would be the case .
Not to be consulted until five ( and in the other case four ) months after the initialling of the agreement is bad enough !
But for the Council to go on to decide that the agreements should be provisionally implemented , and for the Commission then to pay out not inconsiderable sums of money to Guinea and Angola , namely ECU 2.7 million in one case and in the other case as much as ECU 13.5 million , without having consulted our opinion , that really is too much !
In other words , the Commission , as it generally has done in recent years , took the Council 's decision on provisional implementation as a sufficient legal basis for paying out the first tranche .
One might almost be forgiven for thinking that our opinion counts for nothing any more !
Therefore I would ask the Council and the Commission - and I am sorry that the Council representative is no longer here - that in future negotiations on fishery agreements they should observe the code of conduct , and when concluding an agreement they should inform both the Committee on Fisheries and the Committee on Budgets regarding the progress of the negotiations and the financial consequences .
This is what we agreed jointly - and I emphasize the word jointly - in the code of conduct .
The code of conduct also lays down that the Council , the Commission and the Parliament should do everything possible to ensure that the procedures involved in the legislative process are carried out as rapidly as possible .
But this also means - and I would ask the Commission to take particular notice of this - that the Commission should begin its negotiations with non-member countries in good time , so as to leave enough time for the rest of the process to proceed properly .
It would be nice if these requests did not have to be repeated , rather like a prayerwheel , every two years !
Mr President , one of the key characteristics of the global fishing situation at the moment is that stocks worldwide are heavily depleted .
We have to ask ourselves why that is the case .
One of the major items which has always been identified with that stock depletion is the overcapitalization of the global fishing fleet .
One of the reasons for that overcapitalization is the vast sums spent by national governments on subsidizing longdistance fishing industries .
That in itself means that there is a race to fish in order to make enough money to service that capital , that agreements are made with different countries in order to move fishing volume away from home waters into other EEZs elsewhere around the world .
That is exactly what international fishing agreements , as concluded by the European Union , are all about .
It is that subsidy that has caused the overcapacity that has led to the depletion of stocks .
It is a cycle that has to end in order to protect fish stocks for fishermen for the longterm future .
That is why the Liberal Group in this Parliament is the only one that is actually facing reality and saying that the public subsidization of fishing agreements has to stop .
That is why within both these agreements we are tabling amendments that say that the fishing fleets , the vessels and the owners themselves who benefit from these agreements should pay the full cost of these agreements , and that they should no longer rest on the taxpayers of the EU - not because that is bad in itself but because through subsidy we have overcapitalization and continued depletion of stocks .
I ask this Parliament to support those amendments to ensure that we safeguard our fish stocks and fishing communities for the future .
Mr President , this opinion is just once again a pro forma , a formal intervention in the legislative process on an Agreement which has already been carried out .
Against this background , it is no surprise that the European Parliament should be less and less happy with international fishing agreements .
This is an institutional problem but it is also a procedural one , a methodical problem , given that the Commission systematically confronts the European Parliament with a fait accompli .
It is important that this should not penalise fishermen and other people connected with the industry , who depend on this vital aspect of fishing policy : international fisheries agreements .
An approach to these Agreements which is solely based on cost benefit is reductive , limiting , equivocal ; what it is aimed at is ending the so-called international fisheries agreements .
Against such a tide , I should say that this is a good Agreement - I am talking about the Agreement with Angola , for both the European Union and for Angola itself .
Let us hope that the shipowners and Community fishermen using it can benefit in full from the fisheries opportunities which have already been negotiated .
Mr President , I agree with a lot that has been said about the lack of consultation with this Parliament and I hope that the Commissioner present will take that back to the Commission .
We need to be fully involved in the presentation of these fishing agreements right from the start .
Like Mr Mccartney , I went to the Angolan Fishing Ministry and talked to them and they were dreadfully concerned .
They were going to sign the agreement because they needed the money .
I do not think that these developing countries , especially countries that have gone through such a tragedy as Angola , should be forced into that position .
But they need the money and they were saying quite clearly they do not think they will be able to monitor this agreement .
They will not be able to monitor 1 , 500 km of coastline with seven outdated boats and no airplanes .
So we ought to help them .
We ought to help these developing countries .
Our fishing agreements ought to be coherent with our development policy .
This is the theme , or one of the major themes , of the report I shall produce for this Parliament in May .
I have to stress this .
We have a responsibility all of us , particularly to the developing world , and particularly to countries which were our colonies in the past to whom we have not shown the respect they deserve .
We need to help them develop their own fishing industries so that in the long run - and I emphasize the long run because it will be the long run - they are able to export their own fishing products and get the added value of their fishing industries for their own development .
Mr President , I welcome the renewal of the fisheries agreements with Angola and Guinea , because they benefit European fishermen and consumers and also help Angola and Guinea who thus receive a significant source of income .
The mutual benefit is assured by making fishing by local and European fleets complementary activities .
The cooperation agreements with both countries have also been strengthened , as mentioned here , as have aids to the fisheries sector in the form of technical programmes and practical occupational training , for example .
This , it seems to me , is a question of a few balanced and fair protocols entailing a cost for the European Union which is reasonable .
The ACP countries must also be helped of course with monitoring measures in their waters in order to conserve stocks and also to drive out those factory ships fishing illegally .
We must deplore , as we so often need to , the fact that the Commission and the Council relegate the Parliament to a very marginal role beneath its station in budgetary matters .
The information submitted to us by the Commission is normally very scant and consultation of Parliament - which is one of the budgetary organs - scarcely takes place ; everything arrives late , wrong and when the agreements have already come into force .
I think the European Parliament should act , but extremely carefully if it wants to kick the Council and the Commission into action , for fear of accidentally kicking our own fishermen in the process .
And we must stamp out the image which some people with a bad conscience have of these fisheries agreements with the ACP countries ; they are not agreements which harm the population nor do they threaten the local fisheries sector .
The European Union pays a fair amount of financial compensation and the agreements are beneficial for the development of those countries and at the same time keep our fishermen in employment .
Mr President , the Commission would firstly like to thank the rapporteurs for these two excellent reports concerning fisheries agreements .
As regards the new protocol to the fisheries agreement with Angola , it should be pointed out that this creates increased scope for a variety of fishing activities .
Also , the fishing opportunities for shrimps and prawns are maintained and a new type of fishery is included - pelagic fishing - which opens up the agreement to other EU countries such as Germany and the Netherlands .
It should be emphasized that the agreement 's period of validity has been extended from two to three years , and this longer timescale will provided more stable conditions for Community shipowners .
For the first time , the annex to the protocol allows the Angolan authorities to introduce a biological recovery period .
The financial compensation has been increased to take account of the new fishing opportunities created by the agreement .
As regards Amendments Nos 1 and 3 , the Commission agrees with the sentiment they express , but is unable to endorse them .
The Commission already ensures that information is provided in an appropriate way on implementation of the agreements , in particular at the meetings of the Committee on Fisheries and prior to each meeting .
Nor can the Commission accept Amendment No 2 , since when the interinstitutional agreement was negotiated , only the Mediterranean financial protocols were included in the classification as non-compulsory expenditure .
The other agreements were excluded , such as those on fisheries .
The Commission cannot approve Amendment No 4 , since the Council lays down negotiating directives individually for each agreement , but not when every protocol is renewed .
When the Commission negotiates these protocol renewals , it ensures that the directives it was given by the Council are respected .
Turning to the fisheries agreement with Guinea , the Commission believes that the new conditions for fishing by the Community fleet in Guinean waters can ensure that the agreement is implemented more effectively , while observing the fundamental requirement that fishery resources should be conserved .
Through this new protocol , the Commission and the Guinean authorities have sought to encourage EU vessels to return to Guinean waters , a return which was started under the previous protocol , and to provide Guinea with resources that will enable the country to improve the supervision of its fishing zone and combat illegal fishing .
The technical and financial provisions of the protocol have this dual aim , and this applies in particular to the provision concerning the special financial contribution for fisheries surveillance bodies .
As for the amendments which have been tabled , the Commission cannot endorse the four amendments , since the first three fail to make a clear distinction between the aims , the thinking and the procedures which are specific to the fisheries agreements with the ACP countries and those which are specific to the European Development Fund .
It must also be considered that even if the outcomes which the Commission is aiming at in the negotiations on fisheries agreements are of a commercial nature , in the sense that a balance is being sought in the concessions made on each side , these outcomes respect and are in keeping with the measures being applied as part of development policy .
On Amendment No 4 , the Commission would point out that the protocol does not impose an obligation on Guinea to submit a report on the detailed use of the sum referred to in Article 6 .
However , the Commission will make enquiries of the Guinean authorities as to how this sum is used , and will then pass on the information to the European Parliament in an appropriate way as part of the current information procedures .
In conclusion , I should like to say that I will of course ensure that the Commissioner responsible , Mrs Bonino , is made aware of the fact that Parliament wishes to be involved in the process at an earlier stage .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I apologise for the late hour , but I felt that I should tell the Commissioner that I am deeply disappointed with the response that she has given to our very modest proposals for amendments .
I must say here , before the European Parliament , that the Commission has not given the slightest signal of changing a perfectly ridiculous situation which is insulting to the European Parliament when it comes to Fisheries Agreements .
As far as Amendment No 3 is concerned , calling on the Commission to present us with a progress report in the last year of an Agreement 's duration , the Commission does not even seem willing to approve such a suggestion .
Quite frankly , we are being messed around !
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
( The sitting was closed at midnight )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I have come into possession of a letter you wrote to a Secretary of State in England , Mr Howard , indicating that you did not approve of a meeting with Roisín McAliskey in Holloway Prison ; that it was not an official delegation .
It was not intended to be an official delegation .
What was intended was that a delegation from the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs should visit Roisín McAliskey .
This delegation would not contain Irish or British Members .
On a humanitarian basis , I want to ask you why you wrote this letter to Mr Howard .
On what authority ?
Under what rule or regulation did you write the letter ?
If you , at the beginning of your presidency , are going to behave towards Hedy d 'Ancona , a distinguished parliamentarian for many years , and the other Members of the European Parliament in this fashion , it seems to me that your presidency will fail almost instantly .
When I saw this letter to Mr Howard , I have to say I was absolutely horrified and so were other Members of the European Parliament to whom I showed it .
Mr President , would you please indicate to the House on what basis and why you wrote this letter cancelling the visit by Hedy d 'Ancona and other Members of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs ?
I am very happy to respond , Mr Andrews .
Pursuant to Rule 24 of the Rules of Procedure , the Conference of Presidents is the body responsible for all political relations of the committees of this Parliament .
It is therefore standard practice for a committee seeking authorization for a visit , to approach the Conference of Presidents , and the Conference of Presidents will either grant it or not .
So my letter was sent with the knowledge of the Conference of Presidents , to make clear that it was not a committee delegation authorized under the Rules of Procedure .
I have to comply with the Rules , whether I like it or not .
If you do not agree with this procedure , the simple remedy is to change the Rules of Procedure and dispense with the powers of the Conference of Presidents , and then every committee will be able to send as many delegations or groups as it likes .
What is not possible , Mr Andrews , is for a Committee to skip the authorization and send three members , giving the public impression that the committee has sent a delegation .
I was told it was not a committee delegation in a letter from the chairman , Mrs D 'Ancona , and I merely informed the government of the Member State that it was not a committee delegation .
I did this precisely because there was confusion in the media .
And if , when I ask the chairman of the committee for the relevant information , I am told that it is not a delegation from her committee , that is what I tell the British government .
Because it is important that there should be no ambiguity .
Mr President , given that we use all customary respect in our dealings with one another , I think that the proper procedure , before you write a letter to the British minister telling him that this is not an official delegation , would be to inform the Committee chairman , namely myself , beforehand .
I do not think this is a very nice way of doing things !
Mrs D 'Ancona , I would remind you that I asked you for information on the matter , and you told me in a letter that it was not a delegation from your committee .
When I saw that the press was describing it as a delegation , then , with the knowledge of the Conference of Presidents , I merely conveyed what you told me in your letter to the British government .
I could not say that a delegation was not being sent and then leave things ambiguous .
I could not do that , because under our Rules of Procedure the Conference of Presidents must have control over relations of bodies of this Parliament which might have a political impact .
That is all I did , and I believe the Conference of Presidents , which I informed , was fully in agreement on the need to remind all Parliament 's committees that , when they want to send delegations , they should communicate that and ask for proper authorization .
And if they do not , they are not delegations and we must make that known .
Mr President , I know how important it is for a lawyer and a President of this Parliament to respect rules .
However we are talking here about the will of the various groups in Parliament who wished a delegation to go .
If you get a proper request for an official delegation , can you assure us that you will assent to such a request in view of the particular concerns of Members of this Parliament on humanitarian grounds ?
There is nothing unusual about parliamentarians visiting this prisoner .
Many Irish parliamentarians have already visited her .
I think it would be symbolic and possibly helpful if you were to assent to such a request .
Mrs Malone , I have said this twice , but I will happily say it a third time . It is not my responsibility , it is the responsibility of the Conference of Presidents .
You must put this question to the Conference of Presidents .
Any Member may visit any prison on his own behalf whenever he wants , and be admitted .
On his own behalf .
As a Member .
He does not need authorization from this Parliament or from the Conference of Presidents .
A delegation of Members on behalf of a committee or delegation must have permission from the Conference of Presidents .
I cannot give it , I have to put the request formally to the Conference of Presidents . I cannot do anything else .
Mr President , I would like to pick up a comment of Mr Andrews .
He stated that you had written a letter to ...
Not another word on the matter .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am very sorry , but we cannot have a debate on it .
Mr President , I wish to deal with another matter which comes under your authority , namely the use of the Chamber and the premises associated with it .
In the corridor I noticed a display of photographs of personalities , some of whom are called famous , one or two of whom I would call infamous and one whom I would call thoroughly discreditable .
I refer to the photograph of Robert Maxwell .
Robert Maxwell was responsible for stealing millions of pounds of pensioners ' funds in my country .
He is responsible for conning his way into the confidence of highly placed politicians and receiving their support at a time when he enjoyed authority .
He is responsible for the suppression of free speech in the press of my country by the use of litigation .
So I would ask you , Mr President , to consider whether Robert Maxwell 's photograph should be removed from the photographs outside the Chamber .
( Applause )
Mr Falconer , it is the Quaestors ' responsibility to authorize displays , and I shall convey your request to them immediately .
Mr President , just to clarify what someone said earlier .
The Home Secretary in England is , in fact , the Home Secretary of the United Kingdom ...
Mr Thomas , I have said I will not accept another word on the subject .
Mr President , as regards the voting on the Van Lancker report , item 49 , the second part of the final resolution , I am mentioned in the voting protocol to have voted yes .
My intention was to vote no .
I would appreciate if the protocol could be amended to rectify the matter .
Very well , that will be taken into account and will appear in the Minutes .
Mr President , the same applies to me .
I am recorded as having voted yes in these matters when in fact it should have been no .
That will be corrected .
( Parliament approved the Minutes as amended )
( The sitting was suspended at 9.25 a.m. and resumed at 10.40 a.m. )

Community Transit System
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report ( A4-0053 / 97 ) by Mr Kellett-Bowman , on behalf of the Temporary Committee of Inquiry into the Community Transit System ; and-the draft recommendation ( A4-0054 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Temporary Committee of Inquiry on the Community Transit System , on the report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Community Transit System .
Mr President , the Committee of Inquiry met over 15 months and held 37 formal meetings .
I want to pay tribute to the overwhelming majority of the members of the committee for their attendance , diligence and discipline , which were necessary in order to get a report with a degree of consensus contained in it that will be imperative for that report to command respect from the Commission , the Member States , the Council and those engaged in the transit trade .
I commend all Members of the House to read at least volume 1 and , if that is too much , certainly chapters 1 and 17 of volume 1 - the executive summary and the recommendations - so that they know clearly what is being said in their name .
This report may sound to some as if it is a technical report - it is not .
It is a highly political report and has a very clear starting premise which is that , despite the crisis in the transit system and the damage caused by the problems in the transit system , transit arrangements are nevertheless vital to the single market and must change if they are to serve the needs of the single market .
They must change because they are outdated , inhibit transit and encourage fraud and corruption .
To give Members an idea of the monies we entrust to the transit system , it is necessary to understand that in that total of 18-20 million transit movements a year to which Mr Kellett-Bowman referred , if it is 18 million , each of those transit movements represents an exemption from taxation privilege while the goods are in transit .
The average value of that exemption from taxation privilege is ECU 25 , 000 .
If you multiply 18 million movements by ECU 25 , 000 you see that we have entrusted to this archaic , paper-based transit system ECU 450 , 000m of fiscal liability .
I have to say that if I go into my local Co-operative supermarket in Walsall on a Saturday morning to buy a can of baked beans , they actually protect their interest in that can of baked beans with greater scientific control than is the case when we control financial liability in the transit system .
So there are ECU 450 , 000m of fiscal liability in this system and it is entrusted to a paper-based system , discharged by a rubber stamp - a rubber stamp that can be forged , stolen or corruptly used by a corrupt customs official .
That is not adequate !
The monies cheated from the transit system not only cheat the own resources of the European Union but also the revenue of every Member State , because as they cheat our resources they cheat the European taxpayer in the Member State of the VAT and the excise duty .
That is why we do not merely ask but demand of the Member States that they protect our interest by protecting their own and that they act simultaneously to defend the interest at European and national level .
Fraud represents not just unlawful gain to the criminal , it represents the policies forgone because of the shortage of public resources ; it represents the policies that the Commission could have had without an increase in own resources ; the policies that the Member States could have pursued without increasing taxation rates .
Therefore fraud in this area is nothing less than a corruption of our democracy , and , following the Committee of Inquiry , action must take place .
It has to be action beyond reading the report : it must be action on recommendations 1-6 that deal with strengthening the customs services ; 7-13 that deal with the imperatives of improved control ; 14-20 dealing with the legal issues ; 21-26 dealing with improvement of the transit system , including computerization ; 2737 dealing with the political choices that must be made ; and for us , recommendation 38 dealing with the follow-up .
I wish to add my thanks particularly to our rapporteur , who has faithfully served the committee , and to all the Members , the Secretariat , the technical services from translation through to printing , the Commission and the many witnesses , without whose evidence we could not have had the recommendations because each of them stands on the evidence we have been given .
I commend the report to the House .
In conclusion , I particularly thank Mr Kellett-Bowman for the diligence with which he has reported our findings to this House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have already pointed on another occasion to the quality of the work done by the Committee of Inquiry , the first such committee ever set up by the European Parliament .
Here I want to give particular thanks to its chairman , Mr Tomlinson , and to the rapporteur , Mr Kellett-Bowman , as well as to all the members of the committee .
On behalf of President Santer and all our colleagues , let me stress the importance the European Commission attaches to this report .
The report makes a major contribution to the debate on customs transit .
It states that the Committee of Inquiry managed to bring the question of transit out from the recesses of administrative action and onto the political scene , and I entirely agree with that and would underline its importance in relation to the reform activities we now expect .
The report highlights the fundamental role played by customs in relation both to the functioning of the single market and to international trade and economic growth .
With the completion of the single market , the customs administrations have come under crossfire .
Initially the emphasis was on the abolition of frontiers and internal controls .
Far too often this process was simplistically associated with the dismantling of structures .
That obscured and undervalued the continuing role of customs in administering the Community 's external borders , preparing the applicant countries for enlargement , fighting fraud and implementing trade agreements .
Perhaps the European Commission , in its 1993 programme , did not entirely understand the importance of the new challenges facing the customs either , and this was reflected in its political analysis .
Secondly , the Member States did not manage , and some also did not really want , to adapt their customs administrations to the Community priorities , giving precedence instead to national concerns .
Here too , I am sure , it was a question of inadequate political awareness .
It is not my intention , Mr President , to comment on each chapter in detail or to respond to every single recommendation .
I prefer to indicate the way in which we propose to take account of the recommendations , in particular those addressed to the Commission , in determining our policy .
I shall briefly summarize my observations on what I regard as the five fundamental points highlighted by the Committee of Inquiry .
I am using the term ' highlighted ' in the fullest sense of the word and in a spirit of admiration : the Committee of Inquiry has given a new political form to various elements , which gives us all a clearer vision of the problem and of the necessary solutions .
These five points are as follows : the question of a European customs service , the investigative services , reform of the transit system , relations with the European economic area and the associated central and eastern European countries , the question of unpaid duties .
Firstly , the question of the European customs service .
The analyses of the crisis carried out by the Committee of Inquiry reveal that many of the problems encountered in transit derive from anomalies in the operation of the customs union , which therefore needs global reform in the framework of customs policy .
The report recognizes that many of the difficulties affecting transit are a direct result of the fact that the customs union is made up of 15 different administrations .
Although the report does not postulate the creation of a common customs service , the Commission notes that it strongly recommends the establishment of a European framework that will , as the rapporteur said , enable the 15 national customs services to act as one .
That is the most important practical objective .
Thanks in particular to Parliament , we now have one instrument for working towards one goal : ensuring that 14 customs administrations can work as one .
Let me refer you to the ' Customs 2000 ' decision approved last December .
Some of the recommendations put forward by the Committee of Inquiry are specifically provided for in the ' Customs 2000 ' decision and , having participated closely with the delegations of the European Parliament and the Council in the conciliation procedure , I can say that the political lines set out by the European Parliament have been reflected in and acted as practical forerunners for that decision .
The second area I want to dwell on briefly is the investigative services .
The Commission is in favour of the recommendations on the creation of a common investigative service and a centralized European Union customs office .
This is also consistent with the need to standardize the administration and implementation by the customs services of the rules on combating fraud , as called for by the Committee of Inquiry .
The Commission fully endorses that approach .
Of course this proposal cannot be implemented via the ' Customs 2000 ' programme , which is aimed at other objectives .
I am sure my colleague , Mrs Gradin , will be happy to respond to any requests and to look at these questions in greater depth .
It is important for the Commission to play a greater part in the control activities in order to fight fraud effectively .
That would imply far closer coordination between DG XXI and the activities of UCLAF .
The recommendations on the organization of the structures , powers and administrative responsibilities in the Member States are closely related to those on improving the investigative and inquiry structures , as are those on judicial cooperation .
And , Mr President , I must say that in this context the report has come at a good time , given that it also clarifies the need for a successful outcome of the negotiations in the Intergovernmental Conference on increasing and strengthening joint action in matters relating to the third pillar .
The third question is the transit system .
In this context , let me point out at once that the Committee of Inquiry , starting from an analysis of the system and the serious problems to which it gives rise , rightly situated this question in the framework of a more general problem .
With that in mind , my services have organized wide-ranging consultations both within the Commission and with the Member States and other countries involved in the common transit system , as well as with the entire private sector .
As you know , the Committee of Inquiry was closely involved in this process which led , early in February , to the Conference on Eurotransit in which 250 public and private sector representatives took part and which was also addressed by Mr Tomlinson .
The Commission now proposes to translate the results of these consultations into a range of practical measures .
I can assure you , Mr President , that the Commission will take the fullest account of the recommendations by the Committee of Inquiry ; moreover , by the end of April I intend to submit the action plan for reform for the College 's approval .
The Commission endorses the overall conclusion of the report , namely that the transit systems are essential to trade in Europe and outside Europe , but that they are in need of radical reform .
Allow me to say that the Commission also examined this question at the beginning of this Commission 's term of office , in its communication of March 1995 , followed by another in February 1996 and by the interim report on the transit system last autumn .
The work done by the Committee of Inquiry , which sheds so much light on the situation and provides strong political impetus , will be of great help when it comes to translating these initiatives into action .
Fourth point : the European economic area and the associated central and eastern European states .
The report voices serious concern about the functioning of the common transit system and its enlargement , last July , to the four Visegrad countries .
I have already expressed my views on the political timeliness and technical soundness of this enlargement and the fact that so far it has not had any dramatic effects per se .
I will confine myself here to a few comments .
In the Commission 's opinion , it will become increasingly difficult to maintain three different types of transit system - Community transit , common transit and the TIR .
The Commission will be submitting practical proposals on integrating Community transit and common transit in a single convention .
The Commission is also working towards closer cooperation with Switzerland , a point the report discusses at length .
To that end we have concluded a mutual assistance agreement which constitutes not just an important technical instrument but also demonstrates a real political wish on the part of Switzerland to cooperate with the Commission .
The Commission assumes its full share of responsibility for the decision to extend the system to the Visegrad countries .

Having said that , I stand by the undertaking I gave to the Committee of Inquiry - and I know how much importance Mr Tomlinson and Mr Kellett-Bowman attach to this - that there will be no further extension of the common transit system until it has been reformed and computerized .
Finally , Mr President , the fifth and last point I wish to discuss briefly is a delicate one : that of unpaid duties .
Here I will confine myself to a brief comment and leave it to my colleague Mr Liikanen to go into more detail if necessary .
The report calls on the Commission to make a proposal on cancelling unpaid duties if these are due to poor administration .
However , it is difficult to make a proposal of this kind that would take account of the particular situation involved in every single case .
The customs code provides for the refund or cancellation of the duties in individual , analysed and justified cases , but makes no provision for this kind of general measure .
The Commission is aware of the potential final implications for the operators concerned , however this question can only be resolved by legal means and by checking the merits of each case .
Otherwise , all kinds of abuses would be possible , to the detriment of the European tax-payer and the financial rigour we are all facing .
In any case , the Member States can secure favourable payment terms , on a case by case basis , and the Commission encourages them to do so .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would say that it is not possible in the time available to do justice to the wealth of detail in the report , which really is a very comprehensive one .
It contains 38 recommendations , many of which call on the Commission to make proposals and carry out studies or encourage the Member States to take specific measures .
The report calls on the Commission to show greater political leadership and on the Member States to show a stronger political resolve .
It is also clear that if the Commission is to play a more important part , that will increase the workload , especially for DG XXI and UCLAF .
This implies the availability of adequate human and financial resources .
Whatever the transit system that emerges in future , we need sufficient funds and staff to ensure that the system is correctly applied , controlled and adapted to change .
The Commission counts on Parliament 's support in obtaining adequate financial and human resources and is resolved to make its contribution towards directing the Member States ' attention more closely to these questions .
The success of the reform will depend also on the courage and determination shown by the Council , the national customs administrations , the economic operators and the European Parliament .
In this context , I intend to fully involve the Internal Market Council and the ECOFIN Council in the transit question , to ensure that they too assume their responsibilities , a need that is often and rightly underlined in the report on which , once again , let me express my very warm congratulations .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The applause from honourable Members is sufficient evidence that the proposals you have put forward and the commitment you have undertaken were greatly appreciated by this House .
Madam President , Mr Tomlinson , Mr Kellett-Bowman and the other members of the Temporary Committee of Inquiry have produced a detailed report on the transit system outlining its weaknesses .
These were also highlighted in the Commission 's transit report which was passed to Parliament in April last year .
Organised criminals exploit the weaknesses of the system and this results in large losses for taxpayers and companies within the European Union .
The Committee of Inquiry has proposed a series of measures to be taken .
We now need the political will to carry them through .
As already mentioned by my colleague Mr Monti , the Commission will continue to work constructively on the issue .
I hope Member States and the other institutions also are willing to take action .
We must together create a flexible and at the same time safe transit system as this is vital for the Community .
The system was after all created to simplify the flow of goods through the Community .
Since then a common internal market has been set up with 15 countries participating .
The Berlin Wall has fallen and the borders with the East are open .
This is important and constructive .
Trade has increased enormously and has become internationalised .
However , the control system has not adjusted to the increased flow of goods through the Community and applicant countries .
The Committee of Inquiry 's report is constructive and basically supports our efforts within the Commission to modernise the system and make it more effective .
The principle task for us all is now to reform the transit system quickly without hindering free trade .
There should be improved controls .
Investigation into suspected frauds must be made sufficiently effective to deter criminal gangs .
It is encouraging that several of the recommendations in the report are about increased control and more effective investigations .
Two of my areas of responsibility are directly affected , i.e. financial control and the battle against deception and fraud .
Recommendations 2 and 3 propose a joint Customs investigation body and a joint office for information and analysis .
These are interesting proposals .
The Commission 's experiences from its work with UCLAF show the importance of the police , Customs and other specialist co-operation in the battle against deception and fraud .
The current system is totally inadequate but I believe that these proposals complement each other well .
I hope Parliament also realises that if these changes are to be carried out , financial resources must be made available for the additional investments required in this area .
This will have to be taken up again in the budget discussions .
In addition , a regrouping and restructuring will be necessary within the Commission .
The proposal to strengthen and facilitate the judicial collaboration between Member States is also in line with the work started by the Commission .
As you know , several initiatives have been taken .
Various long-term programmes have commenced .
These promote the exchange of experiences and education between the different categories of employees fighting international crime .
One of the programmes , Grotius , is aimed at judges , prosecutors and others within the legal system .
Another programme , Sherlock , is generating a mutual understanding on how to deal with fraudulent documentation .
A third programmes under the name of Oisin is working for the police in our Member States to develop co-operation procedures .
The Council of Ministers and the Commission are at the same time discussing a formal legal structure for a more effective legal collaboration within the Union .
This relates to proposed regulations for direct contact between the justice offices and the setting up of a network between the Union 's examining magistrates .
The exchange of information between crime investigators and the magistrates must improve .
An important proposal has been made as to how the exchange of documents between the courts can be made quicker and more efficient .
We would like the courts to be in direct contact with each other and not to have to go via embassies and the Foreign Office .
Another proposal discussed concerns the mutual recognition of employees ' legal status .
A proposal for a joint registration of criminal investigations and a register of judgements has also been tabled .
All of this is concerned with the fight for better communication on cross border crime .
However , these discussions are as you know very slow , partly due to the unmanageable decision-making process of the Maastricht Treaty for the Third Pillar .
I hope the Intergovernmental Conference will change this and give us a better and more effective decision-making instrument for legal collaboration .
An example of the current system 's slowness is that none of the four important conventions signed by the Member States has been ratified .
These are the conventions on Europol , co-operation between Customs , extradition of criminals and protection of mutual financial interests .
I therefore wholeheartedly support the Committee of Inquiry 's recommendation No. 16 which requires the prompt ratification of the convention to protect Community financial interests and which also should apply to all the other conventions .
This convention was after all signed two years ago .
However , not a single country has honoured the agreements they signed .
If we are to have these instruments and facilities at our disposal it is important to get a response from the Member States .
Recommendations 19 and 20 involve the Member States introducing an extraterritorial legislation , i.e. that the courts in a Member State are given jurisdiction over Customs violations even if the violation has been committed in another Member State .
This is a very important instrument that we need .
In addition , UCLAF would be entitled to provide evidence in conjunction with proceedings in our Member States .
I share the opinion of the Committee of Inquiry that the Commission ought to be given a legal right to use our evidence in court .
The Commission should in my opinion be able to take legal actions in a criminal case and to give evidence in courts on the same basis as the national authorities .
A similar concept has been presented within the high-level group who are also attending the meeting with our Heads of Government in Amsterdam discussing international organised crime .
As regards recommendation 27 , the Committee of Inquiry suggests the outstanding debts caused by poor administration on the part of Customs should be written off .
I must say that I am not sure whether I agree with this and believe that the matter should be thoroughly discussed .
I cannot quite understand how writing off the outstanding debts of the Customs can improve Customs controls .
After all , it does not concern the Customs ' own money but that of the tax-payers .
There must be other ways of supporting the Customs who work with great efficiency and integrity despite manpower reductions and an increased flow of goods .
What we need to do is to develop co-operation between Customs officials throughout the Community .
Using all these means , the Commission should be able to create effective transit controls .
Finally , I would like to say that the Commission appreciates the report submitted by the Temporary Committee of Inquiry .
We will most likely have reason for coming back to this in due course .
Madam President , on behalf of the Socialist Group I want to welcome the Committee of Inquiry 's report and in particular to extend our congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr Kellett-Bowman , for the excellent work he has done in producing the report before us today , and to Mr Tomlinson for the excellent way in which he has managed the Committee of Inquiry as its chair and for the excellent basis it gives us for the committees of inquiry in the future .

I should also congratulate the Commissioners , who , at the opening of this discussion , were certainly here in considerable numbers .
I understand why one or two have drifted away , but I congratulate them on being here .
Frankly , I have to say that I am disappointed that so very few Members of our House have stayed for what is a hugely important debate .
Bearing in mind the turnout from the Commission , that needs to be said .
( Applause ) I look around the room and I recognize many Members from the Budget and Budget Control Committees who , of course , are committed to this cause of fighting fraud in the European Union ; but we are all clear that fraud in the European Union and the reaction to it amongst the people of the Union are a major political issue for every Member of this House , not just for the Budget and Budget Control Members .
I can only hope that those Members who are not here are sitting in their rooms reading the four volumes of the Committee of Inquiry 's report : I will be charitable .
But I do think it ill behoves us to go home and rail about fraud in the European Union and talk about what we are doing about it , when we have this excellent Committee of Inquiry 's report and very few people are here to debate it .
This report demonstrates the European Parliament at its best .
That is another reason why I regret that so few people are here .
Here we have the European Parliament acting - for the first time really , because this was the first committee of inquiry established under the Maastricht Treaty - and the way in which it has performed , the way in which it has been conducted , the evidence that it has taken from people from the Commission , from Member States and from individuals , is a model of the way in which we would want committees of inquiry to work in the future .
It has been deadly serious , combative certainly , and it has come forward with a range of proposals which do this House very great justice .
We should also be clear that what the Committee of Inquiry has exposed is the fact that the workings of the Single Market , the flagship policy of the European Union in recent years , have been exploited .
This report is all about the Single Market , and most of our citizens would have assumed that the Single Market was actually working in a way that demonstrated that none of this could happen .
There is clear evidence in this report of the failure of the Single Market at this moment , and of the need to tighten up .
But let us remember that this was the first committee of inquiry set up by this House , and that when , at the Conference of Presidents under the chairmanship of Klaus Hänsch when he was still President of this House , we were looking to first use our new rights under the Maastricht Treaty , we wanted to be sure that the first committee of inquiry set up was one that dealt with an issue where we could have a real impact on public consciousness .
Indeed Mr Martens initially came up with an idea that we should deal with fraud in the Union , and my group came up with the specific proposal about the area of fraud we should deal with .
That has allowed us to demonstrate the truly effective nature of this House in its role to monitor , to examine , to investigate and to expose .
If there is any message that the media of the European Union ought to take away from this , it is that the European Parliament is exposing this fraud perpetrated against the institutions of the Union in terms of its budget and , of course , against the Member States of the European Union ; that we are actually saying now to the governments and the parliaments of the Member States of the Union : ' Please now get on and do what you are supposed to do and follow up this report ' .
I hope the media will remember that and realize that it is not the European Parliament which is hiding or dissembling about fraud ; we are exposing it and offering that analysis to the rest of the Union .
I think it is fair to say that over the time that the Committee of Inquiry sat , the mood certainly changed from one , not of hostility but of a certain degree of scepticism , to one of great support and help from the Commission and from other bodies .
The key recommendations - and I will close on this - in the Committee of Inquiry 's report are really about the nuts , the bolts , the gears and the wheels of the Single Market , and we have got to take note of them and make it work .
( Applause )
Mrs Green , I should point out that the Presidency did strongly express the hope that large numbers of Members would attend this debate .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group and on my own behalf , I want to congratulate Edward Kellett-Bowman on his months of work , of which this extensive and welldocumented report is the tangible proof .
I also want to acknowledge John Tomlinson 's effective and probing chairmanship , which enabled us to extract more information from many witnesses than they initially seemed disposed to volunteer .
Underlying the problem of Community transit there is something more than crimes committed by organized mafias who corrupt the system for gain , which equates to loss for Community taxpayers .
The fact is , underlying the unsatisfactory functioning of the system there is also the clash of two different customs cultures .
One which favours maximum speed in putting goods through customs at the cost of control and the possible loss of customs duties and another which reverses those priorities .
Broadly speaking , this division distinguishes the countries where Community transit originates and the countries where that transit terminates .
The conflict between these two customs cultures has done much to degrade the Community transit system .
The temporary committee has demonstrated that customs cooperation between the Member States must be urgently strengthened .
It has also demonstrated that customs policy has frequently been used as an arm of trade policy , thus endangering the maintenance of the system , which is vital to the functioning of the single market .
The temporary committee has also demonstrated that fraud and smuggling is not sporadic , but is already a genuine Pan-European problem ; a striking example is cigarettes , where testimony after testimony has demonstrated that they are being smuggled throughout Europe .
We are aware that the development of the work and recommendations of this committee has been followed with interest from Commissioner Monti down to each and every one of the national administrations concerned , and those recommendations must be basic to the Council 's agenda to ensure that customs cooperation is strengthened and the system survives .
Beyond the timescale of the report lies the future of Community customs and the answer to the question of whether a single market can operate with five separate customs services or whether we should look for some way of advancing towards a common customs service which does not undermine national sovereignty but does deepen the Community dimension .
Above all , ladies and gentlemen , it must be clear that the European Parliament has detected a problem and that the various political forces will jointly and correctly analyse the causes and provide concrete solutions .
Like Mrs Green , I do not think there can be a better example of what this European Parliament is here for .
Madam President , let me say at the outset that the Committee of Inquiry has done a great job ; and I personally must join in the applause , which is not ritual but really is due to the rapporteur who managed to put it all together so ably and to reflect the unanimous view of that committee .
The committee worked with great determination and we must give credit for this to its chairman , Mr Tomlinson , whom I thank for his work .
Madam President , the evidence shows that there was an enormous amount of evasion , with significant losses to the Union 's budget and therefore also to that of the Member States .
We cannot hide the fact that in 1993 we saw a flight forward , in the sense that politics took precedence over reason .
A single market was established overhastily , without taking account of the devastating effects of 15 different organizations , with profoundly different customs systems .
In fact , the level of intensity of the controls differed and there were also very marked inequalities because of the significantly lower commitment on the part of some countries .
Italy , for example , which maintained its strict customs controls , was heavily penalized .
All this has had serious consequences , such as inadequate protection of the Union 's financial interests , major distortions of competition and the wide margins offered to organized crime , which has found new opportunities for making big profits .
We also note the egoistic approach hitherto taken by the states , which has resulted in the Council 's inability to act together with the inertia of the Commission ; in fact the Commission could often do no more than stand by and watch because it was unable to find any margin for the necessary discussions with the Council ; to our satisfaction , we hear from Commissioner Monti and Commissioner Gradin that the Commission is now beginning to move , and this is due - as we must recognize and as was honestly recognized today - to the new awareness created by the Committee of Inquiry .
The work of the Committee of Inquiry has stirred up the stagnant waters of those who preferred not to see and not to know .
The gravity of the situation is plain for all to see .
We must therefore immediately draft a customs protocol that defines an equal level of control in the 15 Member States in order to avoid the present extremely serious distortions .
We also need an efficient and rapid information system so that we can move away from the current paper-based system and switch to a computerized system and to the use of modern technology in order to monitor movements in Europe by satellite .
Finally , we must activate ' Customs 2000 ' as a first approach to reforming the transit system and to a single European customs system .
That is the only solution we can see for the future .
Globalization means more rapid trade , free of bureaucratic red tape ; this must be achieved without any serious losses of revenue or opening up new opportunities for organized crime .
The committee 's activities have shown up an alarming fact : if more people had been aware how inadequate the system actually is , there would have been even more evasion ; if the people of Europe had been aware of the scale of funds that disappear from the Union 's budget as a result of these inadequacies , that would certainly have increased their distrust in Europe .
So we can no longer tolerate this but must act and act at once !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , all too often in discussions I am confronted with the view that the European Parliament has too few powers , cannot make any real decisions and is basically not a proper parliament at all .
We know that these preconceptions are rooted in ignorance , but we also know that our public image will only change if we represent the interests of our citizens even more effectively than hitherto and are seen to be doing so .
To that end , the Maastricht Treaty gave us this new right of investigation , which has now been exercised by two committees of inquiry .
These two committees , on BSE and on fraud in the transit system , have considerably strengthened our Parliament .
Even a year ago , who would have thought that the House would carry a suspended motion of censure on the Commission for its scandalous mismanagement of the BSE crisis ?
How would have said just 15 months ago that fraud within the Community transit system and the related problem of organized crime were matters that concerned all levels of responsibility and could no longer be dismissed with platitudes about the smooth functioning of the single market ?
Both committees of inquiry have proved that when Parliament is granted a right it knows how to exercise it competently and purposefully .
We have been given a potent instrument here with which the Commission , the Council and the Member States can be subjected to close scrutiny .
In this way , things that were previously concealed are brought into the open .
Where supposition and unsubstantiated suspicion once prevailed , we are now able to prove which person in which post , by abusing his powers and neglecting his responsibilities , has inflicted damage on the Community or individual citizens and to indicate whether and how such damage can be repaired .
The crucial point , however , is that this right of enquiry is creating a European public who take an interest in what is happening in the EU .
In this way a two-way process is established , in which Parliament develops as a source of democratic control and consequently - or so I hope - the people of Europe gain confidence in the European institutions .
Nevertheless , if this right of enquiry is to be made even more effective in future , the existing loopholes must be closed and present weaknesses remedied .
To that end I propose the following five points : those in positions of political responsibility , whether in the EU institutions or in Member States , must have an obligation to appear and give evidence to the committee .
Surely it cannot be left to the discretion of Mr Hogg , the Minister of Agriculture , whether he justifies his actions to the BSE Committee or not .
Secondly , committees of inquiry must be granted a general right to summon witnesses , swear them in and impose penalties for infringements of the rules .
Thirdly , the power of investigation must be extended to cover the actions of individuals and corporate entities , even if they have not been operating on behalf of the Community or the Union , as for instance in the tobacco industry .
The fourth point follows from this , namely that individuals and corporate entities must also be compelled to submit documents ; the fifth point is that committees of inquiry will need to have their own right of access to all documents of the European institutions in future .
And one final point : the secretariats must be better equipped in future .
Michael Shackleton and his crew often managed to do the impossible , and the demands made of them sometimes bordered on the unreasonable .
For that we give them our sincere thanks .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we have all received the four volumes detailing everything which is going wrong .
Going wrong in the Community transit system .
It is a fascinating dossier and impressive in terms of the result .
Not only do we see what is going wrong , we also see what can and must be changed , and I must make a point here of paying tribute to reporter Kellet-Bowman .
He has been an outstanding reporter , and the secretariat too has done a splendid job .
I must also compliment Mr Tomlinson on his excellent chairmanship of this Committee .
We are talking about fraud totalling at least one billion , one billion ECU .
The system is totally out of date ; it is oldfashioned and actually invites fraud .
Organized crime has naturally homed in on the weakness of the system .
The Committee too concentrated on a number of very specific dossiers : cigarette fraud is one example and I am particularly pleased to see that a number of supplementary points , a number of comments I made , about fraud involving meat and livestock for example , were incorporated .
This dossier is concerned solely with fraud which uses road transport but one has to bear in mind that this is not the only route ; the mafia bosses are very inventive , they are switching in some cases to using air and sea routes .
They are also switching to other Member States , and to other tax havens ; Switzerland had and still has a very bad reputation in this regard , and Cyprus is now going the same way .
Many people at grass roots level advocate a single Community customs administration .
That is perhaps the ideal scenario , but it would be better , and the rapporteur agrees , for us to take more concrete measures .
Extremely concrete measures , practical steps towards co-operation .
UCLAF needs to be given a lot more scope .
It has already broken a lot of new ground : UCLAF is required not only to record everything that goes wrong but primarily it has to be a channel for information , a nerve centre and above all UCLAF must be empowered to forward dossiers to the judiciaries of the Member States .
Parliament must appreciate this and consequently UCLAF must be given a bigger budget so that it can be more directly in touch with the general public .
The report makes a whole series of specific proposals : for the setting up in the immediate future of an EU Customs Academy , the use of new technologies and the need for computer and IT methods to co-ordinate all areas of malfunction .
We need to do what can be done already .
It became apparent from our visit to Antwerp and Rotterdam that co-operation within Benelux is immediately feasible and co-operation in Northern Europe can be organized too .
The job is not yet finished , Madam President .
Fortunately the Committee on Budgetary Control will be taking the work forward and I shall make available to it my dossier which contains up-to-date figures for the United States plus statistics .
I am happy to say that Mr Kellet-Bowman and Mr Tomlinson are members of this Committee and they will certainly see to it that the work continues .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the report by the Committee of Inquiry is an admirable document in its account of the failings of the Community Transit System and the scale of the fraud .
In undertaking this substantial workload , which has taken thirteen months and involved thirty-seven meetings , the thirty-four members of the Committee of Inquiry - and its rapporteur and chairman - have , beyond doubt , complied with the mandate laid down for committees of inquiry in Rule 136 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure , which is , and I quote : ' to investigate alleged contraventions of Community law or instances of maladministration in the application of Community law ' .
Although I agree with the diagnosis thus arrived at , I cannot endorse the proposals made .
That is why I expressed a minority opinion , and I ask all honourable Members to read that opinion , which appears on pages 207 to 210 of the report .
My point is that I would have liked to see preference given to the swift introduction of effective measures .
To quote one example : the crucial problem of the illicit trade in cigarettes , on which the Committee quite rightly dwelt at length , is the subject of just one recommendation , the establishment of a working group .
Instead of this rapid introduction of effective measures , the Committee proposes as the main objective the establishment of a single customs service operating within a European framework .
This is an ideological measure , which the Committee itself recognizes would not meet the need for immediate results and would involve considerable structural upheavals .
So the report is a missed opportunity , typical of the attitude of this Parliament which so often denounces , criticizes and condemns but fails to go far enough in the search for effective solutions , preferring dogmatic and ideological ones .
That is why I voted against the final report and against the recommendation - in which , I am sorry to say , I differ from my colleagues .
Madam President , Mr Kellett-Bowman has produced an excellent report on this problem of transit , in other words free movement between one third country and another third country through the European Community with the suspension of excise duty , VAT , etc .
I would call this report a very handsome birthday present marking forty years of the Treaty of Rome .
On the very first page , Mr Kellett-Bowman summarizes the record of those forty years .
What is that record ?
Criminals cross borders ; the profits of unlawful activities do the same because there are no longer any borders !
Mr Kellett-Bowman continues by explaining that manpower in the customs services has been reduced , that there is a loss of morale among those who remain , and that , of course , the whole situation involves consequences which cannot be quantified .
Are we talking about ECU 750 million over four years , or are we talking about ECU 3 billion per year ?
Our inability to determine a figure is , moreover , a revealing indicator of the European Commission 's methods .
Mr Kellett-Bowman 's second gift is a paean of praise for borders - in the present case , customs borders , criminal law borders and health borders , too .
The report tells us that a single country , Poland , was able to send us 1000 lorries , 150 , 000 head of cattle and 6000 tonnes of meat - and that happened despite the outbreaks of foot-andmouth and swine fever , which have spread freely because there are no longer any borders .
I can tell Mr Mario Monti that if tax borders existed VAT fraud would not .
The common VAT system itself engenders fraud .
All you need is a false identification number in another country and you can go about your fraudulent business with impunity .
Mr Kellett-Bowman 's third very interesting contribution relates to the European Commission 's working methods .
The basic approach is very simple : a leap into the unknown .
Get rid of what exists and replace it with absolutely nothing .
Like the Commission , and like Mr Medina Ortega in the case of mad cow disease , Mr Kellett-Bowman confines himself to a reference to a ' substantial omission ' .
His fourth point relates to the consequences of excessive taxation , especially excise duty on cigarettes .
This creates an American-style prohibition situation .
It is obvious that fraud offers the chance of an 83 % profit when excise duties vary from 76 % of the price of a pack to 83 % in Portugal .
As for solutions , we are offered the panic advance - the revision of the transit system , a modest enough answer .
Mr Mario Monti tells us that ' the European judicial pillar will allow us to compensate for the deficiencies of the European administrative pillar ' .
A European supervisory body which will be just as inefficient as those we already have !
The reality is that fraud is an inescapable counterpart of European integration .
There has been fraud from the beginning .
Peoples have been deceived , sovereignty has been circumvented , lies have been told to the democracies in order to set up an oligarchy , from the Director of the Central Bank to the European Commission .
From the very start , Madam President , the nations and peoples of Europe have been lied to .
Europe , or Europa as she then was , was a young girl from Asia Minor , a Turkish maiden carried off by what she thought was a bull but turned out to be just Zeus .
The mother who bore the child lied , and its natural father was a lie himself .
How do you expect their offspring , 2500 years later , not to have lying bred in the bone ?
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , almost nobody , scarcely a single one of these 370 million citizens of the European Union whom we claim to represent , knows that there is a Community transit system and that it is not working .
We must recognize that .
We must bear it in mind .
Nevertheless , although no-one knows that it is not working , these 370 million citizens are well aware of the threat to themselves that results from the failure of the system .
As Mr Kellett-Bowman said , the main beneficiaries of the system have been criminals , and Pauline Green said this morning in the debate marking the 40th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome that disillusionment with the way the European Union operates is growing .
The feeling of being threatened , unprotected , of being deprived in one way or another of social and economic security , and even of physical security , by this Europe jeopardizes the development and future of our European Union and endangers its very existence .
In this broad panorama the fraud that is occurring within the Community transit system is but one small feature .
Yet it is a tile in the overall mosaic , and we should see it within this political context and treat it with due seriousness .
What I am about to say is not intended to absolve anyone of responsibility , least of all the Council and not the Commission either .
But the criticism we have made today - thorough , competent , based on 15 months of hard work - would surely be more credible in the eyes and ears of the European public if we included ourselves , this Parliament , the ' High House ' , as we like to call it in German , in this criticism .
The question is , ladies and gentlemen - and it is perhaps an advantage to be asking it now , when there are at least a few more ears listening - have we taken the matter seriously ? Have we said that this system was conceived for six Member States , but now there are 15 , with more to come ?
Have we asked the questions that need to be asked ?
No !
Of course we can criticize the Commission and the Council for not having asked these questions .
We do not take back one jot of that criticism .
But we should have been asking them , and if others fail to act , it is our responsibility to do so .
Commissioner Monti , you referred to the link between Customs 2000 and the committee of inquiry , and I know that the entire body of experts in this domain recognizes that link .
But have we as a Parliament taken that seriously ?
Did we conduct the debate on Customs 2000 with due diligence and care ?
So did we do that ?
No , we did not !
In point of fact , we had to fight to get it on the agenda at all !
That is the problem .
We did not grasp the whole picture .
To the 38 recommendations made by the committee , which I fully endorse , I should like to add one more . We are the European Parliament , and we wish to be regarded as such .
So let us please act in such a way that we can hold up our heads .
We sometimes treat our resolutions as if we were no longer responsible for them from the minute they leave the House .
But we bear responsibility , and that can be clearly expressed through the work of a committee of inquiry .
Nevertheless , it must also be expressed in our daily work , and we must take ourselves more seriously so that others will also take us more seriously , which will also lend more weight to any criticism we make of the Council and the Commission .
Madam President , allow me to finish on a personal note .
Commissioner Monti , during the meetings of the committee of inquiry I criticized you very directly and sometimes very sharply .
Since this criticism was public and is now being further publicized , I should like to apologize for those aspects of it that offended you .
I do not take back any of the substance of my criticism - on the contrary - but the manner in which you have spoken today , the change you have demonstrated , proving that such developments are possible , has won my deep respect , and I wanted to tell you that today .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the single market brought us the four celebrated freedoms .
Did it not also bring a fifth , namely freedom of movement for fraudsters , smugglers and black-marketeers ?
Finding the answer to that question was the task of the committee of inquiry , which investigated in the course of 16 hearings , various fact-finding missions and numerous meetings the devious routes goods can take after coming into the EU free of customs and excise duties under what is basically a regulated system and the way they can cross the entire continent , with the appropriate duties not being levied until goods reach their destination .
If I may go straight to the committee 's conclusion , to which several references have already been made here , the transit system is working badly at the present time .
That is hardly surprising in view of the fact that it was created in the late sixties , when the Community was smaller and the volume of trade was lower .
Today there are up to 18 million operations per year at some 3000 customs posts in more than 20 countries .
Drivers , hauliers and customs officials play an active part in the transit system , but there is also a passive role played by the beneficiaries of fraud , namely the final recipients of smuggled goods , most of whom belong to criminal organizations .
They derive their profits from the difference between the duty-free import price and the selling price obtained on the black market .
This means that heavily taxed items such as cigarettes are particularly susceptible to fraud .
A containerload of cigarettes has a customs and excise value of about one million ECU .
Fraud costs the EU and its Member States billions in customs duties , VAT and excise duties .
In spite of the single market , the diverse powers of the national customs authorities end at the borders of their respective Member States .
Their working methods are archaic , comprising ponderous paper exercises with documents and rubber stamps that are easily forged .
Cuts in staffing and resources prevent comprehensive controls .
Spot checks alone are not enough .
A lack of cooperation and reluctance to recognize evidence from other countries make it almost impossible to prosecute fraudsters .
Furthermore , the fact that VAT is levied in the country of consumption rather than the country of origin is virtually an invitation to commit fraud .
How could this have happened ?
In creating the single market , neither the Commission nor the Council considered this debit side .
Parliament , however , certainly did issue warnings , Mrs Wemheuer !
And for years the mounting losses were ignored .
The supreme achievement of the committee of inquiry under its dedicated chairman , John Tomlinson , consisted in bringing to light the abuses of the transit system .
Our sincere thanks are due to the rapporteur , Edward KellettBowman , and the secretariat for the enormous amount of work they have done .
Like a thread , Madam President , running through the committee 's 38 recommendations is its awareness that a European customs service ought to be the long-term aim .
In the meantime , however , measures are proposed with a view to creating a common framework for the transit system .
The Commission view on this has been very clearly expressed today , for which I am grateful .
The Commission has already taken initiatives , and I should like to put on record here my thanks to Mrs Gradin and Mr Monti .
Greater efforts , however , are also needed in the administration of justice , in matters such as judicial assistance and the treatment of evidence .
In general terms , it is apparent that some important aspects of customs procedure are political in nature and are closely associated with political reality .
That is why the Commission and the Council , which , I am gratified to note , is also represented here today , need to demonstrate their desire and their efforts to follow up the recommendations of the committee and to achieve progress in the context of the Intergovernmental Conference .
Parliament , and especially its Committee on Budgetary Control , will monitor and support such measures .
Thank you , Mrs Theato .
The debate is adjourned .
It will resume at 3 p.m.
Mr Martinez has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , in this very House , at the entry to the Chamber , there are young people handing out political tracts .
It 's not particularly relevant that they are directed against the French National Front - they might be against the Communist Party or against the Socialist Party - it would come to the same thing .
Mr President , I ask you to use your presidential powers to have an usher put a stop to a situation in which this Chamber is becoming a distribution centre for political tracts .
You are right , Mr Martinez .
Every Parliament deserves respect and of course - this building is very large - leaflets can be handed out somewhere that is not right in front of the Hemicycle .
Votes
I just want to say that in connection with this particular item I have a copy of a letter from the chair of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy which has my name on it as apparently agreeing to this .
I never indicated any such agreement .
Some similar process took place as we just now had and I did not have the space to indicate my disagreement with this proposal and I now do so .
Thank you very much , Mrs Ahern .
The statement you have just made will be included in the Minutes .
Mr President , I would like to remind Parliament that Amendment No 37 provides that the Commission cannot change substantive points that are in the annex .
It accepts a number of them which are basic to the directive , for example risk assessment , which is the core of the directive .
Unless that amendment is adopted , it will remain possible for committees to change the substance of the directive .
I therefore ask Parliament to adopt Amendment No 37 .
After the vote on the amended Commission proposal
Mr President , I should like to ask Commissioner Bjerregaard :
Firstly , whether she accepts the change of the legal basis , and I would like to remind her that on 19 February this House accepted the Commission 's statement on mad cow disease , and one of the Commission 's conclusions and proposals was that all acts related to public health should in future be based on the co-decision procedure .
Secondly , she told us yesterday that she accepts part of the amendment on risk assessment .
Which part does she accept ?
Because that amendment is the most substantive , it is the core of the Directive .
And I would like to hear that she accepts it in its entirety , because it really gives a correct assessment of the risk , and consequently the correct area for work with genetically modified micro-organisms .
Mr President , we were able to have a thorough debate yesterday on the proposal on which Parliament has now voted .
I explained then why the Commission was not in favour of a change in the legal basis .
I also emphasized that , on the other hand , the Commission was inclined to follow the amendment which meant that Parliament would exert its full influence on the annexes , something that was advocated by several speakers .
There has of course been no further development overnight , except that we must naturally look at the amendments which have been adopted here in Parliament .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )

Mr President , I consider it my duty to point out to the House an inaccuracy in relation to recital F. In Amendment 12 it is alleged that the European Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine expressly bans cloning and that this is the first prohibition of cloning in international law .
That is untrue , as many other Members are aware .
I consider it important that this is clear before we vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , the next vote on our agenda is with regard to the Renault closure .
In the gallery we have men and women trade unionists who , since yesterday , have been here , coming directly from the demonstration in Paris , representing the 3 , 100 people of the Renault factory in Vilvoorde who will be made unemployed if this decision goes through unreversed .
I think we should welcome them to the gallery and demonstrate our support for their cause .
( Loud and sustained applause )
Thank you very much , Mrs Green .
I know you understand the institutional limitations on the Chair , but your words will appear in the Minutes , with mention of the emphatic support of this House has given them .
Mr President , let me respond to Mrs Green 's friendly words of welcome to the ladies and gentlemen in the gallery by expressing my disapproval of the way she has chosen to draw the attention of Parliament to this situation .
( Heckling and applause ) We are all freely elected Members of Parliament , and I attach a great deal of importance to the right of a Parliament to decide freely without pressure from the streets and without pressure from the gallery .
That is what I wish to have placed on record .
( Uproar in the public galleries )
Silence in the gallery ! Silence in the gallery !
Ladies and gentlemen in the gallery ! Ladies and gentlemen in the gallery !
Silence !
Ladies and gentlemen in the gallery , please listen to me . Ladies and gentlemen in the gallery , you know that our Rules categorically prohibit demonstrations of any kind from the gallery .
So if you are not silent , it will be my sad duty to have you removed .
So please maintain silence .
And to you , Mr Konrad , I have to say that in this Parliament every Member has the right to speak .
And there is complete freedom in this Parliament to express opinions through the vote .
Ladies and gentlemen , the debate on this matter has already taken place , so we will move to the vote .
Please help me complete the vote successfully in the calm appropriate to such an important matter .
Joint motion for a resolution on the closure of the Renault plant in Belgium
Before the vote
Mr Giansily is asking for the floor .
He may speak after the vote .
( Mr Giansily insisted ) Mr Giansily , I must remind you that as long as I am in the Chair , I will make the decisions in this House , right or wrong .
I have told you I will give you the floor after the vote , so please sit down .
Ladies and gentlemen , if you do not respect the work of Parliament , I shall be forced to remove you .
Parliament 's work must be respected !
Ladies and gentlemen , as a section of the Hemicycle has already voted with its feet , let us get on with our work .
Mr Giansily , if you do not respect the Chair , I will have you expelled from the Hemicycle .
Leave the Chamber , Mr Giansily !
Ladies and gentlemen , pursuant to Rule 109 of the Rules of Procedure and after calling Mr Giansily to order repeatedly , I am using my powers under the Rules to expel Mr Giansily from the Chamber .

Ladies and gentlemen , please calm down .
The Chair has taken a decision in accordance with its powers under the Rules .
Mr de Vries is asking for the floor .
I think we are all aware that the issue we are about to vote on is extremely sensitive .
We are also aware of the fact that there are a number of important differences of detail which have to be resolved through the vote .
We owe it to the people of the Renault factory that this vote proceeds according to the standards of this House , quietly and in a dignified manner .
Mr President , as we all should , I fully respect your authority .
I do not wish to question your authority as President of this session .
I want to make that absolutely clear .
However , in view of the fact that it is now after 1 o 'clock , it might be advisable to take this vote at 3 o 'clock right after the lunch break , so that we can do it in peace and quiet .
Therefore , I propose that we suspend the session .
Ladies and gentlemen , I must remind you that if you accept Mr de Vries ' proposal , it will not be possible to take this vote this afternoon , and it will have to be taken tomorrow .
Secondly , I think we can calm down and make progress .
Mr Martens has the floor now .
( NL ) Mr President , I think the best thing Parliament can do at this time is to approve the resolution backing the workers at Vilvoorde .
But , Mr President , in order to restore order in the House and Parliament needs order to be restored , I would ask you to suspend the sitting and sort out the incident which has just occurred involving a member of this House .
So I would ask you to suspend the sitting so that this incident can be dealt with and we can vote on the resolution in a calm and orderly fashion .
Mr Martens , if I adjourn the sitting , then under the Rules of Procedure the vote will have to be taken tomorrow .
So given the importance of the vote we are going to take , I would rather resolve the situation if the whole House will assist me .
The incident began because Mr Giansily asked for the floor .
Ladies and gentlemen , please bear in mind , that during the resolute demonstration in the gallery , the Chair acted energetically , warning that if it happened again those responsible would be expelled from the gallery .
After that there were various interventions .
So as not to delay the vote , I told Mr Giansily I would give him the floor after it had been taken .
You have the floor , Mr Martens .
Mr President , it is perfectly possible to suspend proceedings for five or ten minutes to settle the matter and then let us vote .
Ladies and gentlemen , I propose that we suspend the sitting for five minutes .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.15 p.m. and resumed at 1.20 p.m. )

Ladies and gentlemen , after consultation with the group presidents , and irrespective of their assessment of this incident and their agreement or disagreement with the action of the Chair , we are going to resume the session and give each political group one minute .
I ask you to cooperate with the chair , because it is important that we get on with today 's voting .
Mrs Dury has the floor .
Mr President , I am glad you were able to find a way of resuming our sitting on a dignified basis , something we all want because we are anxious to vote on this motion .
Yesterday , I heard many honourable Members talking about social Europe and their support for the Renault workers in every country , not just at Vilvoorde .
I hope they will now give substance to their words by voting in favour of our motion .
And I am also looking forward to hearing them speak now .
I am very glad this solution has been found .
Let us cast our votes worthily , and with dignity , to show those who doubt us that the European Parliament can support a social Europe !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what we have to do now is the customary and proper work of this House , that is to say we must approve this resolution .
As I said just now , this is the most important thing we are required to do , and we must learn to behave like a proper and worthy Parliament .
Our main weapon here is the debate and an expression of solidarity in the form of these resolutions .
All of us feel for these workers whose livelihood is under threat .
So what we have to do is to show respect for the rules of Parliament and to conduct a fair and honest debate .
So let us now vote on this resolution .
Mr President , what happened just now is completely unacceptable . This is not a trade union meeting , this is a parliament !
We were in the process of voting .
You should not have allowed Mrs Green the floor .
You should not have allowed people in the gallery to speak , and when these incidents occurred you should immediately have suspended the sitting and ordered the galleries to be cleared .
I believe that in these circumstances , with this kind of pressure , it is impossible for us to vote .
If you continue with the vote I shall refer it to the group chairmen at the Conference of Presidents .
Having said that , I call upon my group not to participate in the vote but to leave the Chamber .
As has already been said , Mr President , the gravity of the issue we are dealing with requires us to fulfil our obligation .
We have already re-established calm debate in Parliament .
I congratulate you on the decision you took to resume the sitting and you have the support of the majority of the groups through our group presidents .
We will deliberate and take a decision .
Today we are celebrating the 40th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome and , after this morning 's fine speeches it would not be much of a celebration if we could not hold an ordinary though very important vote .
I have to add that our group was surprised at the wording of point 8 of the joint resolution expressing the hope that the management of the company will draw up , in agreement with the workers ' representatives , a company plan which will make the dismissals acceptable .
We cannot support this resolution , we withdraw our signature and we ask for rejection of point 8 so that we can support the resolution .
Mr President , please take note that we withdraw our signature from the joint resolution .
Ladies and gentlemen , when human misfortune spills over into this House , it is a matter of dignity for us to accept that , sometimes , the problems of society may make themselves felt even here .
I don 't think there 's anything to get worked up about .
Everyone knows how we are going to vote , because we have voting lists .
So stop the amateur dramatics !
Stop the circus !
Remember your dignity , and remember that there are millions of people unemployed !
Let 's get on with our job !
We are well paid to do it .
Let 's vote !
Let 's vote !
You will vote against , we will vote in favour , and History will be the judge !
My thanks to the gentlemen on the Right for bringing the class struggle into Parliament !
Ladies and gentlemen , the Renault crisis is so serious that it is easy to understand these demonstrations of emotion and a certain amount of excitement .
But precisely because this is a very serious business , our duty is to keep calm , as others pointed out just now .
Our job today , our responsibility , after debating this matter , is to vote upon it .
Some may vote one way , others the other .
That is our political responsibility .
Whatever may be the procedural incidents in connection with the Rules of Procedure which occurred at the start of voting , and which we can return to in due course , I believe we must now vote - very calmly , very peaceably .
Mr President , you are responsible - as Jean-Claude Pasty said just now , and he was right - for the incidents that have occurred .
You cannot , in this Parliament , continue giving preference to particular speakers .
If you give the floor to one Member you should give it to another if he asks for it , at the same time on the same subject .
That is called democracy .
In a democracy , giving preference to some Members over others is forbidden .
Next , I have a question to put , first to you and then to the Bureau .
There are visitors in the gallery .
I myself brought two groups of visitors here this week .
The seats in the gallery are booked , as of now , until December .
Which Member allowed entry to the people responsible for the demonstration ?
Out of which quota ?
When did he reserve them ?
That is a very specific question .
You allowed - and I am not challenging the presence of the people who are there - but you , quite simply , allowed them to be applauded although they were not an official delegation .
You have not put Mr de Vries 's motion to the vote , although under Rule 111 you must put it to the vote .
I now ask you to put to the vote the motion tabled by Mr Pasty that the sitting be suspended under Rule 132 .
Mr President , I personally am delighted to see the Renault workers here with us .
But I am not going to tolerate your giving the socialist Members an opportunity to conduct electoral propaganda when we all known that the Renault works was shut down by Mr Schweitzer , who is a socialist himself and a friend of Laurent Fabius .
I say that for the benefit of Mrs Dury , and I warn the Renault workers that the socialists are going to take up their fight , although if they are unemployed it 's because of the socialists .
Secondly , for the benefit of Mrs Green , who has taken advantage of her position to conduct electoral propaganda .
I would remind her that the United Kingdom has caused much suffering to Belgian workers , since , in the 1980s , the British Leyland works was also relocated to the United Kingdom .
On that occasion thousands of Frenchspeaking Belgian workers were put out of work , and nobody cared .
We , for our part , defend the workers , and we do not do what the socialists have done today : lying and cheating as they always do .
Thank your very much , Mr Féret .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy has formally requested a suspension of the sitting , and I must put that to the vote .
I shall now put the request to suspend the sitting to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the request ) Ladies and gentlemen , we will therefore proceed to the vote on the joint motion for a resolution tabled by five political groups , as Mr Puerta has just told us the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left has withdrawn its support for the joint motion for a resolution .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr Giansily has the floor for a point of order .
Better late than never , Mr President .
Mr President , my actions just now were not prompted by any aggressive intent as far as you were concerned - I simply wanted to ask you what Rule you were using to suspend the vote in order to give the floor to a Member who just happens to be the chairman of the largest group in this House and cause us to vote on an important motion under pressure from a number of individuals in the gallery .
In doing what you did , Mr President , you did no service to this House .
Our Parliament lacks credibility outside these walls .
It is regarded as a quaint assembly .
There are people here who , when they were thirty , were shouting ' let 's smash it , let 's smash it , let 's smash it ' and now those same people this morning are saying ' let 's vote , let 's vote , let 's vote ' .
I believe , Mr President , that all those who are present here voted for you in the election for the vice-presidents because there was a consensus , and it seems to me that the consensus in this House is , first , to show respect for its Members .
And when you get into an absolutely incredible situation where you have people in the gallery shaking their fists at Members of Parliament , and your response to this is to say that the Member concerned should be excluded from the Chamber , that , Mr President , means that you have failed in your duty and that if you were an honourable man you would resign immediately .
Mr Giansily , I always aim for institutional balance when I am in the Chair .
I can make mistakes , but I am not aggressive either with you or with anyone else , and I am always willing to learn .
So although your words are unmistakably aggressive , I shall try to learn from them and I hope to do better in the future .
Mrs McIntosh has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , on a point of order , not only have you damaged the dignity of this House , but you have called into question the office which you have held today as President of this House .
Rule 127 is extremely clear .
A Member may be allowed to draw your attention to any failure to respect Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
A request to raise such a point shall take precedence over all other requests to speak .
I would like to know under what Rule Mrs Green spoke and was called to speak .
I would also like to know why when Rule 126 with the request to suspend the sitting was raised , it was not immediately taken and put to the vote ; and why , when Rule 101 ( 3 ) was abused by the people in the gallery , not only disrupting the dignity of this House but then continuing to conduct television interviews in the gallery and make telephone calls on mobile phones which are strictly illegal in this building , you did not immediately evict them before the vote was taken under Rule 101 ( 3 ) .
I would also like to know why a colleague of mine who was trying to exercise his right under Rule 127 was not allowed to speak and why you , Sir , did not vacate the chair under Rule 111 and immediately suspend the sitting until order was restored .
Thank you , Miss McIntosh .
I said earlier - and I will say again now - that , in application of paragraph 1 of Rule 19 , I take full responsibility for what has happened during this sitting and I am prepared to answer to the Bureau of Parliament and the Conference of Presidents at any time .
Miss McIntosh , I have worked to paragraph 1 of Rule 19 and as long as I am in the Chair I will continue to do so , however hard it may sometimes prove to be .
Mr Falconer has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , there speaks Miss McIntosh .
Now we understand how lawyers end up in places where politicians should be .
My point is that the way you have conducted business in this Chamber today was correct .
Mrs Green spoke in favour of the resolution which was put to this Chamber .
You then allowed someone from the other side to speak and that speaker opposed what Mrs Green had said .
You therefore had a speaker for and a speaker against .
Given that it is their livelihoods that are at stake , people in the gallery quite rightly expressed resentment .
It was not outrageous .
Anyone who has been on picket lines or involved in industrial disputes will know that this was not outrageous .
So , Mr President , you conducted business quite correctly .
You did not allow Mr Giansily to comment because you wanted to proceed with the business .
I just wanted to say that the way you have conducted the business today has been to your credit .
I would ask Members of this House to remember that they are here as politicians and should not be so thick-skinned as to be unaware of the concerns of ordinary working people who may be put on the dole queue as the result of the whims of multinationals who care not a jot about their livelihoods .
Mr President , I want to place on the record of this House that during this afternoon 's discussions , particularly during the distressing scenes , Members of the British Conservative Party were seen making obscene gestures towards people in the public gallery .
I strongly deprecate this , and I would ask that at some point in the future , some sort of disciplinary action is taken against those Members .
It is quite wrong that Members of this House behave in that disgusting manner towards people who have just lost their jobs .
Mr President , the order and authority of this House depend on respect for the Chair and the decisions taken by the Chair .
Under Rule 109 , if the President excludes a Member from the Chamber for disciplinary reasons , he or she is not allowed to return to the Chamber for the remainder of the sitting .
In the case of the Member whom you did so name , not only did he return to the Chamber , he also took part in the votes .
I would therefore ask that his vote be deleted .
He was also given the right to give an explanation of vote .
I do not want to further inflame what is already a tense situation , but the respect for our Rules of Procedure which is fundamental for the conduct of this House 's business requires that even that particular part of the Rule be respected .
For if that is not respected - that is , the final bottom line when it comes to the authority of the President and order in this House - then we will degenerate into mob rule .
Thank you , Mr Corbett .
I have to say again , and to you too , that the Chair assumes every one of its responsibilities including those you have just pointed out .
When positions differ in the House the Chair must take a decision and cannot please everyone .
It must try to do so in what it considers the most correct way , sometimes in the way that will defuse the situation , always in line with the Rules of Procedure .
So I was actually trying to stop the debate opening up again , and progress the vote - I did not succeed and I called the House to order - and then I took a different view with the group presidents , who helped the Chair extricate us from a tense situation .
I do not want to reopen that tense situation .
I shall allow all who ask to speak to do so , but I think we have succeeded , if not in resolving the incident satisfactorily - it is still open for further consideration - at least in moving our work forward and taking a vote which everyone , absolutely everyone , considered very important .
Mr Pasty has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , your first duty as the president of the sitting is to ensure respect for the Rules of Procedure .
Well , you should not have given the floor to Mrs Green because we were voting .
Mrs Green made a political speech .
She was not making a point of order or an explanation of vote , she was making a political speech .
Once that had happened , all Members were within their rights in asking for the floor .
All .
One per group .
And that was what you did not do .
You actually refused to do it , which is a very serious matter .
Then we had some even more serious problems , because there were disruptions in the gallery .
We respect the people in the gallery , because they are our guests , but they must respect the Members of Parliament .
Well , the behaviour we have witnessed was an attack on Members of Parliament .
And you , Mr President , should immediately , and without waiting for someone to ask you - that is what the Rules of Procedure say - have suspended the sitting , because that was the only way to re-establish order and call for the galleries to be cleared .
You failed to do so .
I shall refer this matter to the Conference of Presidents .
I also want the Bureau to consider it , because your behaviour was unacceptable .
I would even call you a repeat offender , because I can recall another incident , also involving the gallery , when you were in the chair .
That was a problem about people without papers .
So this is not entirely a coincidence , and I want this matter to be referred both to the Conference of Presidents and to the Bureau , because it is intolerable that vice-presidents should behave as you have .
Thank you , Mr Pasty .
I take note of your remarks which will appear in the Minutes .
I have repeatedly said that I hope you will discuss this matter wherever and however you think appropriate ; but I do think that we should put it to one side now . Still , I am feeling generous at the moment as there are no more votes to take .
Mr Cox has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , I asked to make this brief intervention following the observation of Mr Corbett .
I am sure that in the strict technical detail of the Rule he cited he may be correct .
But as a political observation the point lacks any utility .
Today 's comedy of errors and misjudgments would be gravely compounded if the error of naming Mr Giansily for expulsion was on some technicality to be followed through .
He had the right to intervene and I regret that he was not facilitated as others were .
Were he to be expelled on a technicality , as an act of solidarity I would wish to be expelled with him .
Thank you , Mr Cox .
Mr Seppänen has the floor for a point of order .
( FI ) Mr President , I support the procedure you followed in this case , but I should also like to point out that Mr Giansily was expelled from the Chamber on a decision by the President .
In my opinion the speech made in this connection is justified .
We cannot expel a person from the Chamber and subsequently allow him to take part in votes and make use of his speaking time .
The person in question belongs to the same group as Mr Pasty , who on a former occasion voted on behalf of another member in this Chamber .
Now a member of the same group does not leave the Chamber even though he has been expelled , but subsequently takes part in the debate and the vote .
In my opinion this matter ought to be brought before the Conference of Chairmen , if this kind of thing is to be permitted , it would mean that anyone could be present , even if he or she had been expelled from the Chamber .
Mr President , I think we should come back down to earth .
You criticized Mrs Green .
But you did then call Mr Konrad .
Mr Konrad saw fit to be provocative .
I found his remarks provocative towards these guests who have come here with their emotions running high , fearing for their livelihood , with their jobs on the line , with families who do not know what will happen to them .
Whereupon , Mr President , you also criticized these guests and told them to be quite otherwise they would have to leave the gallery .
We know that it is not right to agitate from the public gallery , but these people were surely unaware of that !
Let us come back down to earth !
What lies behind these emotions ? Why are they so anxious ?
Should we not be pleased - and this question concerns the very identity of this House - that people who are troubled , who are fearful , who expect political action from our Parliament , have come to us .
And then to demand , as several Members have done , that they be expelled is , in view of the problem facing these people , in extremely bad taste .
Secondly , I should like to make a personal statement .
A Member called Féret , a representative of the Front National , called both Mrs Green and myself fascists .
I utterly repudiate that !
It was a Member representing the Front National , mark you , who used the term ' fascist ' to describe a Social Democrat and a Green .
That , I believe , speaks for itself !
Mr President , I have sat quietly since my first intervention in this .
I must say that I was astounded at the reaction to that intervention because it is normal practice , as everybody in this House knows , for Members to draw the attention of the House to the fact that there are people in the Gallery during debates on certain items in which they are interested .
It was nothing other than that .
I was astounded at the reaction at simply having a delegation from the Renault factory here when we were about to vote on that resolution .
It seems to me a completely extraordinary and disproportionate reaction .
However , I must say , Mr President , that , having taken Mr Konrad , whom you did - in other words , one speaker in favour , one speaker against - and then trying to stop the clear disruption in the Gallery , you acted with great dignity , and what followed after that was quite out of order .
I would be delighted if Mr Pasty brings this up in the Conference of Presidents .
I should be happy to debate it with him there .
I am sure the Vice-Presidents of this Parliament - many were here - will be happy to support your action in the Bureau .
Mr President , you were quite correct , you acted with dignity and finally calmed the situation down , and allowed the vote to be taken , which was what this was all about .
Mr President , my concern is not with your behaviour , or indeed with the behaviour of the demonstrators in the Gallery .
My concern is with Mrs Green 's behaviour , because she knows perfectly well that it is not the tradition of this House to make interventions designed to influence the outcome of the vote immediately before the vote .
It was Pauline 's decision to engage in that piece of street theatre , using the very emotions and concerns of those demonstrators to make a political point at an inappropriate moment in the conduct of this House 's business , which led to the subsequent chaos .
If anyone is culpable for this morning it is not you , Mr President , it is not the demonstrators , it is not the Members of this House , it is Mrs Green for putting us in an impossible situation .
If she thinks that is the kind of behaviour that will reassure people that the Labour Party is ready for government , she has a lot to learn .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am afraid we are going to have a Mediterranean lunchtime , but all the same , each and every one of you who asks for the floor will be able to speak .
At this point I would like to apologize to the interpreters .
We are abusing their services .
I am sure they will continue to work with us , but I do want to apologize to them .
Mrs Green has the floor on a point of personal explanation .
Mr President , I was named and abused by Mr Spencer and I am entitled to respond to that .
If he is telling me that he never at any stage engages in politics in this House , I am mightily surprised .
Last night we had a discussion with the Renault workers .
It is appropriate that we should acknowledge the fact that these people were here .
Let us face it : what is wrong with actually being able to come face to face with people who are being thrown out of work ?
I do not know whether Mr Spencer finds some embarrassment in the fact that the British Conservatives voted against the resolution .
Perhaps that is the basis of his problem : he was confronted with people who are losing their jobs and who saw that he and his Members were voting against the resolution .
Well , I am sorry if he is embarrassed , but he knows very well that there are often people in the Gallery from industry who are actively encouraged and supported by Members from that side of the House and people who come from all other lobbies .
Is that not the same sort of thing ?
Why is it when it is trade unionists whose jobs are on the line that this is somehow an embarrassment or difficult ?
Thank you , Mrs Green , but I have no way of closing this debate today while people are still asking for the floor .
Mr Spencer is asking for the floor again .
I would ask him not to make personal allusions or we will never finish .
Mr Spencer has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , it is not a question of playing politics in this House , it is of seeking improperly to influence a vote , using a piece of street theatre , which I know Mrs Green will come to regret .
That is my last word on the exercise .
But it was Mrs Green who initiated this shambles .
Mr President , I think that attempts to improve matters often make them worse .
There are a number of us here waiting to give explanations of vote .
I think that rather than continuing with a debate which should not be taking place , it would be a good idea to proceed with the explanations of vote .
You are right , Mr Bourlanges .
This report continues the debate on the use of genetic engineering , a matter that arouses conflicting feelings .
Our opinion is that the directive now being discussed is too vague in raising the political issue and is instead extremely technically orientated , concentrating on detail and creating a misleading picture .
The question concerned , which after all is somewhat ill-fated , requires clarity and order , not least so that citizens are able to follow the debate .
We have nevertheless decided to support the report including most of its proposed amendments and can only regret the vagueness with which the report has been put forward .
In recent decades a new threat has appeared on earth , the uncontrolled and unthinking interference in complex systems which nature itself took hundreds of millions of years to perfect .
In the name of scientific progress and the fight against disease , people are trying to intervene in the genetic codes perhaps of all living creatures , including human beings .
Nobody can guarantee that the number of possible diseases that can be dealt with by genetic interventions will be larger than the unforeseen new ones that emerge from laboratory teratogenesis .
The possible consequences from mutated species are neither foreseeable nor immediately apparent .
They will become apparent as the result of the disasters they create .
There is a very serious risk that genetically modified organisms will become the pollution of the future , a pollution with the ability to reproduce , migrate , transform , multiply , and worst of all , antagonise the natural species that have neither the time nor the ability to resist and create defence mechanisms , since natural development takes thousands of years , while artificial development takes only months .
The accidents from the military and peaceful applications from nuclear energy will look like harmless fireworks compared with the invisible and silent conquest of entire continents by the higher neogenetic order .
On the other hand , it is very difficult and dangerous to suppress and control what the human mind has already discovered .
It is not our purpose to reject new discoveries and technologies absolutely and out of hand , but to demand uncompromisingly that technological development should not go against nature , part of which is mankind , but that they should be compatible with it .
It is dangerous , in the name of ensuring the operation of the internal market and the smooth function and improvement of competition , to ignore the probable consequences and promote procedures and legal frameworks essentially concerned only with the multiplication of economic activities , the creation of a market and the securing of competitive investments , which allow dangerous margins for deviation from the control mechanisms and provide no guarantee of respect for ethical imperatives .
In that spirit , we believe that the Council Directive on genetically modified organisms should be reviewed throughout .
It is essential to set up a pan-European scientific body with the participation of citizens , to assess the appropriateness of programmes , assess risks and benefits , establish strict regulations and maximum safety conditions , and monitor compliance with them .
It is urgently necessary to enlighten public opinion completely objectively concerning the potentials and use of genetic engineering , so that these issues , which are so important for the future of mankind , may be understood , seen in the correct perspective , and so that their consequences may be appreciated .
I very much fear that what has been attempted so far , mainly by large multi-national companies in the food sector , is focused on the reassurance of public opinion , the elimination of risk , and the creation of a climate of acceptance .
In many respects , the proposals by Mr Trakatellis are an improvement on the existing proposal for a directive , and they have the feature of requiring more restrictive legislation in this sector .
It is a good thing for the precautionary principle to be applied and for a general assessment of the classification of the activities in question to be carried out .
However , I cannot support the proposal because of the amended legal basis .
The Committee on the Environment is proposing the use of Article 100a as the legal basis , whereas the Commission 's proposal is based on Article 130s . It is being said that this amendment of the directive is not in fact a matter of environmental protection , but of harmonizing the rules in this sector .
I do not agree .
Research into the use of GMMs has many possibilities , but these activities must take place under conditions which safeguard human health and the environment as far as possible in future .
It is thus absolutely essential for the individual Member States to be able to make their legal requirements stricter at national level , as allowed by Article 130s .
I am therefore unable to vote in favour of using Article 100a in this case - the only thing that would be achieved by this is that Parliament would gain more responsibility .
Unless a different legal basis is applied , this means that individual Member States will lose the right to maintain stricter legal requirements , and that is not appropriate .
Mr President , I have supported this report today as , like many people , I am concerned that genetically altered organisms are already in the food on our supermarket shelves .
In the light of the recent spate of food safety scares , we need as much information as possible about the scientific progress of genetic modification techniques .
Who is altering which plants , animals and foods ?
What are the potential benefits or dangers for human beings and the wider environment ?
These are the kind of questions which people need answers to .
So I welcome the report 's emphasis on preventing threats to people and the environment , rather than just limiting them .
The report also rightly points out the need to strengthen health and safety measures in this area of science .
The supply of information to the public is also rightly stressed .
I do not doubt that this area of scientific development offers potential benefits to us all , but like every concerned consumer I want the maximum information possible so that I can make up my own mind .
Genetic modification is a complex field , but that is not an excuse for keeping people in the dark about its implications for their lives .
Soulier report ( A4-0065 / 97 )
Mr President , I must first congratulate my colleague André Soulier on his excellent report , which was adopted unanimously by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
The European Parliament had already delivered its opinion on 16 April 1996 , on the basis of a first report by André Soulier and approved a multiannual programme intended to promote international co-operation in the energy sector .
Today , we should place on record our amazement at the attitude of the Council , which amended Article 8 on commitology , and decided to consult Parliament again .
The result of this change of method was not only to create a delay but also to introduce a substantial change , since the initial budget of ECU 10 million has been reduced to ECU 7 million for 1997 .
I entirely approve the position taken by the rapporteur , who considers that the sum voted through by Parliament and the Council should not be reduced .
However , in order that the SYNERGY programme should not be further delayed , and pending an in-depth debate on the subject , I am in favour of my colleague 's report .
Arias Cañete report ( A4-0061 / 97 )
The Swedish Social Democrats strongly object to the rapporteur 's proposal that the subsidy granted to squid suppliers in the Canaries should not have a time limit imposed upon it .
The group has therefore chosen to reject the report .
Cunha report ( A4-0013 / 97 )
The fishing agreement ought to be designed so as to benefit the parties and to guarantee ecological balance .
Several of the fishing agreements with third world countries are expensive for the Community and at the same time too much of the catch is not taken by local fishermen .
The Swedish Social Democrats are therefore cautious about this fishing agreement and are of the opinion that this and similar agreements should be paid for by the fishermen who will benefit from the fishing rights thus negotiated .
The Greens have voted against these fishing agreements for two reasons .
First , we feel that the basis on which these agreements are negotiated is not acceptable .
Such important matters as scientific assessment of the impact of fishing on the target and non-target species , control and surveillance of fishing activities , coherence with the development and environmental policies of the European Union and impact of the landing provisions on local markets are given insufficient attention in EU fisheries agreements with developing countries .
Second , we share with many of our colleagues a resentment against the procedure , which presents Parliament with a fait accompli for each agreement .
We are asked our opinion long after the negotiations have concluded and the boats have begun fishing .
We protest this situation with a vote against the two agreements .
Faced with declining fish stocks in its own waters and overcapacity in its fishing fleet , the EU has chosen to buy itself fishing rights in third countries .
We need to ensure that we have sustainable fisheries in EU waters , but the same applies - and even more so - in the developing countries , where fish are one of the few resources to which the poorest people have access .
Small-scale fishermen from African countries who are engaged in inshore fishing have expressed their concern at the effect of EU vessels fishing in their waters .
It takes longer to fill a boat with fish , and they are forced further and further out to sea in vessels which are not really suitable for the purpose .
The question is whether the EU is actually in the process of exporting the EU fleet 's ruthless exploitation of fish stocks to the waters of third countries .
It is alarming that whereas other ACP countries are reducing the EU 's fishing of shrimps and prawns , Angola has kept it at the same level .
For bottom and surface longliners , the fishing opportunities have been increased .
And new species have been included .
Is this because Angola is simply not following the general trend ?
Or is it because the fisheries agreement between Angola and the EU does not take sufficient account of the real state of fish stocks and , more generally , of the developments in the fisheries sector in Angola ?
It is also a matter for criticism that the opinion of the Committee on Development has not been taken into consideration .
Here I am thinking in particular of the committee 's insistence that such agreements should ensure mutual benefits for the parties , and that a certain percentage of the catches should be landed in the country of origin .
It is a good thing that the budget for the development of the fisheries sector in Angola has been increased .
But here too , there are questions to be asked .
There is no specific information on how these resources are to be used .
Without this , we cannot be sure that they are being used to develop a sustainable fisheries sector in Angola .
I shall therefore abstain from voting , because the Committee on Fisheries has taken only very little account of the opinion of the Committee on Development , despite the fact that Angola is a developing country .
And I believe that all fisheries agreements with developing countries should include a binding code of conduct .
Macartney report ( A4-0385 / 96 )
The fishing agreement ought to be designed so as to benefit the parties and to guarantee an ecological balance .
Several of the fishing agreements with third world countries are expensive for the Community and at the same time too much of the catch is not taken by local fishermen .
The Swedish Social Democrats are therefore uncertain about this fishing agreement and are of the opinion that this and similar agreements should be paid for by the fishermen who will benefit from the fishing rights negotiated .
Waddington report ( A4-0056 / 97 )
Through the medium of Mrs Waddington 's excellent report , I congratulate the European Commission on the presentation of the White Paper .
It is true that the modernization of our education and training systems will enable our European society to meet the challenges of the future ( the information society , for example ) .
Also , in my capacity as a local councillor , I am sensitive to the action that the European Union might take .
By way of example , in January 1996 , we set up for my town of Istres the third plan entitled ' information technology - schools ' .
This project , which places a strong emphasis on multimedia , marks a significant step forward in terms of the number and power of the software packages made available to teachers and pupils , and the opportunities for accessing them .
So , at the beginning of the school year in September 1996 , we conducted a successful experiment involving linking head teachers to the town 's central server , on which is installed the database on children attending school ; this aspect of the information technology plan also helped the main parties concerned - school services , head teachers and the inspector - to have better control of events at the sensitive period at the start of the school year .
If it is desired to ' change up ' and connect to the Internet , it is certain that the local authorities alone will not be able to bear the financial burden of such a project .
The European Union 's activities should be at this level , focusing on the allocation of substantial financial resources .
I hope that the Commission 's action plan really will take account of the needs of local authorities and will not be confined to aid for projects which small or medium-sized communities would not be able to implement within a reasonable time .
The Danish social democrats voted in favour of the Waddington report on the Commission 's White Paper which , as we know , deals with general education and vocational training .
A number of criticisms are made of the White Paper in the report , for example that the Commission focuses exclusively on young people in its analysis and does not take account of the ageing of the population in Europe .
The report also expresses the fear that the gap between ' those who know and those who do not know ' will become wider .
To prevent this , there will be a much greater need in future to focus on the concept of ' lifelong learning ' .
The report therefore seeks initiatives from the Commission to increase the population 's opportunities for further training both within firms and in the education system itself .
The Danish social democrats take a positive view of the debate introduced by the Commission 's White Paper and the Waddington report .
However , they would stress that , like the rapporteur , they are critical of implementation of the White Paper 's proposals for establishing ' second chance ' schools at EU level for groups which are especially vulnerable to exclusion from the information society .
We believe that adopting educational policy measures is a national matter .
This is an area which is covered by the principle of subsidiarity .
Lindqvist ( ELDR ) , Gahrton , Holm , Schörling ( V ) , in writing .
( SV ) We have voted for the report - Teaching and learning - towards the learning society as it contains favourable proposals and constructive criticism of the Commission 's White Paper on education .
We cannot support the proposal in the report ( items 49 and 55 ) which says partly that we should combine education and vocational training within a relevant EU policy and partly urges the Commission to prepare detailed action plans for education .
This action should be reserved for Member States .
Is Europe fit for the 21st century ?
Have those in positions of political , economic and social responsibility understood how we can hold our own in international competition ?
Or have calls for flexibility and mobility , further training and foreign-language skills been falling on deaf ears ?
In her excellent report , in which many amendments proposed by our PPE Group were included , Sue Waddington presents an opinion on a Commission White Paper which totally omits the social aspects of education .
While the interests of young people are at the heart of the White Paper , the educational needs of women , older people and the marginalized do not feature .
We need an educational offensive - on the one hand to enable us to compete in the world and on the other hand for the personal development of the individual .
The consequences are :
1.For the EU : The resources for LEONARDO and SOCRATES must be augmented . The European Parliament will support Commissioner Monti in this endeavour .
In view of the need for budgetary discipline , phased annual increments make good sense.2.For the Member States : The depletion of research and development budgets must be stopped .
Short-term policies must give way to strategic thinking and action.3.For businesses : Anyone who only pursues cost-saving strategies is squandering his future prospects .
If businesses are to identify market niches and improve their products , they need motivated staff who benefit from appropriate further training inside and outside their place of work.4.For schools : There must be an end to narrow specialization .
With a broad basic curriculum and with a grounding in abstract reasoning , young people will be able to engage in several different occupations in the course of their lives .
European policies must be based on the undivided responsibility of the Member States for developing the substance of education policy .
At the same time , however , Europe should supplement and support national measures .
To that extent I welcome the announcement of proposals for plans of action designed to capitalize on the SOCRATES and LEONARDO programmes .



The following action is needed in the domains of general and vocational education :

In view of the rapidly changing economic and technological environment , the acquisition of new knowledge should be encouraged.-Schools and businesses should be brought closer together.-A campaign should be waged to eliminate social exclusion . The Committee on Social Affairs and Employment of the European Parliament was right to be sceptical about the model of separate second-chance schools .
In the discussions I referred time and again to the danger that this could create ' ghetto schools ' .
There are in fact already refined systems for assisting disadvantaged pupils in many Member States . In Germany , for example , the mechanisms range from the liberal regulations governing access to the sandwichcourse system through the establishment of vocational preparation years and the second-chance system of certificate courses for adults to the so-called Disadvantage Programme under the Promotion of Employment Act of the Federal Republic.Time and again during the discussions held to date in the European Parliament , emphasis has been placed on the links between various policy areas , and rightly so .
The foremost task in economic , social and education policy is to fight unemployment at both national and European levels . What is certainly true is that the jobs shortage is only one side of the coin ; another reason for unemployment is a lack of vocational qualifications .
Educational exchanges between countries can serve to underline the importance of a close link between professional experience and training received in school .
This applies not only to initial training but also to more advanced levels .
Nothing could be further from the truth than the phrase that is often heard after final apprenticeship examinations in Germany and Austria , ' I 've finished my training ' .
On the contrary , the situation now - especially in our modern technological society - is one of lifelong learning .
According to Mrs Waddington , the social partners have a crucial role to play in providing access to lifelong learning .
The importance of their function is also emphasized by the LEONARDO programme .
Europe the business location does not only need the latest high-tech machines ; it also needs employees who can operate them .
People at the age of 40 must not be weeded out , written off like old machinery and consigned to the dole queue .
The LEONARDO programme should promote model pay agreements in which the fruits of economic progress are not used exclusively for material investments and pay increases but also for the continuing vocational training of employees , for investments in human capital .
I voted for the Waddington report because it is a step towards the implementation of the positions and demands I have outlined above .
The White Paper on Education and Training has been generally welcomed and has attracted largely favourable comments .
I too believe that it represents an important stimulus for the education debate that is necessary at European and national level .
I am not entirely happy , however , with the title of the White Paper .
The use of the term ' kognitive Gesellschaft ' for ' learning society ' in the German version is imprecise as well as inadequate , because general education must not be purely about cognition but must also comprise emotional , social and ethical learning processes .
We must not lose sight of the aim of instilling values .
For that reason I moved that the subtitle be amended to ' Teaching and learning - an ethically defensible way towards a knowledge-orientated society ' , but that , unfortunately , was not adopted by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media .
Be that as it may , I am pleased that another of my amendments was incorporated into the opinion of the Committee on Culture and is also reflected in Mrs Waddington 's report - albeit in less emphatic form than I should have wished .
It is about the importance of pre-school education for all , and especially for disadvantaged children , as a means of enhancing equality of opportunity and hence of preventing social exclusion .
The nursery school , as the initial stage in the education system , must be the focus of far greater attention than has hitherto been devoted to it in most European countries .
The findings of brain research show that a large number of skills and inclinations are established during the first six years of human life .
The earliest possible introduction to general education , with special emphasis on artistic elements and on exposure to foreign languages in the context of games , promotes creativity and lays the foundations for a broad educational spectrum .
This type of pre-school education can also prevent social exclusion , since it ensures that all children are given an appetite for learning through fun and games even before they begin primary school .
This makes me hopeful that the Commission 's ' second-chance schools ' scheme , which - contrary to the wishes of the Member States - has already been launched , will become increasingly superfluous as the target of integrating all young people into the mainstream system comes closer to fulfilment .
I agree with Mrs Waddington that , instead of ' second-chance schools ' being set up as separate institutions , the conventional education system ought to be enhanced so that it is capable of offering a sufficiently wide range of courses and qualifications and of guaranteeing a global system which offers opportunities for everyone .
I also believe that the role of teachers in the information society must assume far greater importance than is accorded them in the White Paper .
Many teachers still regard the use of modern information technology as unnecessary , as something of a ' gimmick ' that can be used on a voluntary basis , a passing fad that will not assume any great significance in years to come .
They often feel uneasy at the prospect of all the new demands these innovations will bring .
It is obvious that the role of teachers will change considerably with the introduction of these new technological developments . Although teachers will not entirely lose their conventional role as ' founts of knowledge ' , they will certainly have to see themselves as more than this ; they must teach individual pupils how to select , understand and use the data offered to them .
Part of teacher training must therefore be focused on the increased use of new technology , which must also be the subject of continuous in-service training .
In addition , the White Paper must place stronger emphasis on the key function of parents and the family , who must be drawn into the whole process of meeting these new educational demands .
As the main representatives of our society , they must ultimately accept and support the new developments , though without losing sight of the important task of inculcating values .
That is why I advocate a system of intensive training for parents .
Finally , I should like to add a few words about the aspect of acquiring foreign languages .
It is desirable , of course , that language training should be promoted , but I nevertheless consider it unrealistic to set our sights on a situation in which everyone speaks at least two foreign languages .
I am intrigued by the Italian approach of primarily supporting the passive command of a language .
That would lead to greater understanding between nationals of different Member States without the need for them to acquire fluency in the other language .
It is unquestionably true that passive mastery of a language is far easier to achieve than active mastery .
I find this approach interesting and worth pursuing in future discussions on the subject of language learning .
On the whole , I am in agreement with the proposals in the White Paper , but I do believe that tangible measures will have to follow soon .
I also welcome the report by Mrs Waddington , who addressed many other important issues .
Cloning raises deep ethical , philosophical and practical questions concerning the use and abuse of genetic engineering and the commercialization of human genetic research .
The cloning of human beings , whether experimentally , in the context of fertility treatment , pre-implantation diagnosis , tissue transplantation or for any other purpose whatsoever , cannot under any circumstances be justified and must be banned .
Until a consensus is reached in our society as to whether cloning techniques should be permitted at all , cloning of humans and animals for all purposes should be banned in the EU .
The patentability of such techniques and the resulting biological substances must now be prohibited and the proposed directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions amended accordingly .
There must be an immediate withdrawal of all EU funding for research or development , whether provided directly or indirectly , for cloning techniques in animals and / or humans and the publication of a list of all such projects which have received EU funds .
Mass production of animals through cloning techniques inevitably leads to the narrowing of genetic diversity of domestic animals , undermines the ecological basis of food production and debases the ethic of husbandry of these animals .
The cloning of domestic animals leads to a new level of rationalization of livestock production , further stimulates the industrialization of agriculture and undermines any of the current attempts to reorient the CAP towards sustainable agriculture .
We must convene a citizens ' conference in each Member State to consider these questions and we must have a Human Genetics Commission to monitor and advise on all future developments .
As a Green Deputy I was unable to support the compromise resolution which made no mention of animal cloning .
In a debate provoked by Dolly the sheep , it is unbelievable that the other groups chose to omit any reference whatever to animals and settled for a weaker version of the resolution passed unanimously by this House in 1993 on human cloning .
As politicians , we have a responsibility to address the difficult issues as well as the easy ones .
The interrelationship between human and animal cloning is evident and as the previously insurmountable barriers between the species becomes invisible , we need to have the courage to call a halt to cloning all animals , not just human ones .
The economic instruments which drive the research agenda include the protection afforded by patient law .
If we are to ban cloning , then we must give practical effect to that ban by including a comparable ban in the patent directive .
On the structure of an ethical review , I think we have got the emphasis completely wrong .
It should not be a matter of which committee of experts is more expert than the other .
It should be a matter of broad public consultation and debate in order to establish consensus in our societies as to the future direction and application of new reproductive technologies .
The citizens should inform the administrators , not the other way round .
Amendments to meet these objections have been rejected here today and I have abstained in protest .
The new research findings from Scotland are frightening .
Our opinion of this is totally clear : We cannot accept the cloning of either humans or animals .
For us the ethical aspects carry great weight and we demand a total ban not just on the cloning of humans but also the cloning of animals .
Cloning of animal tissue is totally contrary to our view on animals and how we should treat animals .
The cloning of animals intended for slaughter leads to a further rationalisation of animal production , more far-reaching industrialisation of agriculture and also undermines our aim to change agricultural production in order to achieve an ecologically sound agriculture .
It is important to establish that reseach projects within the EU should involve research into cloning .
If this proved to be the case , these projects should be terminated immediately and all funding repaid to the EU .
As a Green deputy , I was unable to support the compromise resolution which made no proper mention of animal cloning .
In a debate provoked by Dolly the sheep , it is unbelievable that the other groups chose to omit any reference whatever to animals and settled for a weaker version of the resolution passed unanimously by this House in 1993 on human cloning .
As politicians , we have a responsibility to address the difficult issues as well as the easy ones .
The interrelationship between human and animal cloning is evident and as the previously insurmountable barriers between the species become invisible , we need to have the courage to call a halt to cloning all animals , not just human ones .
The economic instruments which drive the research agenda include the protection afforded by patent law .
If we are to ban cloning , then we must give practical effect to that ban by including a comparable ban in the patent directive .
On the structure of an ethical review , I think we have got the emphasis completely wrong .
It should not be a matter of which committee of experts is more expert than the other .
It should be a matter of broad public consultation and debate in order to establish consensus in our societies as to the future direction and application of new reproductive technologies .
The citizens should inform the administrators , not the other way round .
Dolly , the world 's first clone of an adult animal , may be a photogenic sheep , who looks well on the front pages of newspapers .
But behind the nice photographs lurks a sinister threat to genetic diversity , the most fundamental principle of nature .
Animal cloning should be viewed in the context of the BSE crisis and the negative effects of industrialized agriculture .
Cloning would encourage excessive inbreeding and could lead to a rise in mental and physical disorders among livestock .
How are consumers going to be shielded from the consequences of genetic pollution in the food chain ?
Dr Ian Wilmut , the scientist at Edinburgh 's Roslin Institute responsible for Dolly , has stated that there was nothing to stop the techniques he used being applied to human embryos .
The idea that humans should be cloned would seem more akin to Hitler 's thinking about the Aryan race than any responsible application of scientific progress .
Cloning of animals also raises serious ethical issues about the cruelty which humans inflict on animals in the name of science .
Later this week the European Parliament will debate a report about the Commission 's failure to agree plans to phase out animal tests on cosmetics .
There seems to be no political will on the part of EU leaders to stamp out the unnecessary suffering of animals and cloning will only lead to further experiments on animals and greater suffering for them .
Cloning is the biggest problem currently facing the European Parliament , not so much because identical animals can be reproduced , which is necessary for the good of mankind that is always seeking a way of feeding itself , but because man himself is in serious danger , man who is unique and unrepeatable .
Commissioner Cresson assured us that ethical and moral principles would be respected .
However , we have to clarify what ethical and moral mean .
Sometimes , if not frequently , it is the majority in the European Parliament that decides what ethics and morals are .
Moreover , Mrs Cresson assured us that the Commission was consulting experts on the question of cloning , including high-level experts .
But we need to quantify the experience of these experts and check where and in what environment they acquired it ; we need to know where they come from and how they acquired their expertise , what their concept of ethics and morality is , whether they are from the left or the right or somewhere else .
Only if we receive replies to these questions can we be sure of what the Commission tells us .
I will vote in favour if I see genuine respect for ethical principles , real ethical principles , respect for the natural order , in which man is regarded as unique and unrepeatable , in which there are clear rules and definite norms that do not distort the created world .
As a Green deputy I am afraid I cannot support this motion for a compromise resolution .
I should gladly have supported any declaration that was at least as rigorous as our decision of 1993 in condemning the coordinated irresponsibility of industrialists , scientists and politicians which has now been demonstrated in the cloning of animals .
We must not wait until the first wave of attacks has passed before we set about protecting the dignity of mankind .
Human dignity is already under threat when animals are reduced to mere carriers of biological material , to the living meat factories extolled by Mr Pradier .
With ideas like that , it will not be long until people are also categorized on the basis of their utility , with the superior beings gathered into the fold and allowed to live their lives in a world governed by the insane ethics of the possible and the inferior beings treated as walking sources of organs for spare-part surgery - an idea that might sound familiar to you .
These are no Green delusions along the lines of Huxley 's Brave New World but ideas expressed in the Bioethics Convention and reflected in the views presented there on the merits and demerits of human beings .
That is why I personally feel very strongly that the European Parliament must emphatically and consistently oppose any attempt to erode this ethical position and must stand together against the cloning of any living being whatsoever and against any research to that end .
On the scale of fundamental values , liberty is at the heart of any ethical debate .
That is why , in health matters , the consent of the patient is an absolute prerequisite for any treatment affecting him .
But if circumstances dictate that his consent cannot be obtained , then the consent of his parents or guardian may be obtained instead , at least if the expected results of the treatment are sufficiently clear and probable for this power to be delegated .
On the other hand , if the treatment offers no benefit to the patient , it must be prohibited , because the starting point here is the principle that the consent is refused since it cannot even be obtained .
That is the case with human procreation by cloning , whatever may be the method used .
After all , when it comes to medical assistance with procreation , there is already a particularly serious ethical objection raised by the technique of micro-injecting spermatozoa into an ovum , since it involves a choice , a deliberate selection of reproductive cells .
In the cloning of human beings , whether by segmentation of the egg or by transgenic technology , as was the case with Dolly the ewe , an absolute prohibition must be maintained .
After all , the genetic characteristics of the new human being would be totally predetermined .
It would be impossible to imagine a more comprehensive assault on his liberty .
Insufficient thought has been given to this fundamental characteristic of human procreation : the fact that natural fertilization is totally indeterminate apart from the single voluntary act of the parents , which is their act of sexual union .
This indeterminate nature of fertilization is the strongest original defence of human liberty .
It has been partly set aside by medical assistance with procreation .
What society has felt to be tolerable in order to remedy the infertility of a couple is already , in itself , a violation of this protection of human liberty .
That violation must not go further .
It should also be emphasized that both medical assistance with procreation and cloning methods confirm that the fertilized egg is indeed a human being .
Contrary to the conclusions which some people have seen fit to draw from the spontaneous segmentation of the egg which produces identical twins , the uniqueness of the original egg which then gives rise to the existence of two human beings does not prove that that egg is not a human being .
It is a human ' strain ' , which then gives rise to two human beings , each with a different personality though with the same genetic material .
But the difference between identical twins resulting from spontaneous natural segmentation and identical twins resulting from artificially induced segmentation is precisely that the former are indeterminate while the latter are under human control .
The frontier which separates these two events is the same frontier that separates the sphere of human freedom from that of total slavery .
The prohibition of cloning must , in any human society , be as fundamental a prohibition as the prohibition of incest .
The main debate on the social consequences of scientific research established the need for social control over science . That may raise a conflict between freedom of research and other social values , but no-one should be scandalized .
Science is not just an intellectual explanation of nature .
Science is part of the praxis and its economic and social consequences in today 's world are immense .
They also represent power .
These external consequences are the theoretical legitimation of regulating science by law .
The regulation of scientific activity implies its integration into the social framework generally .
Far from being restricted , freedom of research finds its fulfilment under the law . Only the law can reliably ensure the principle of freedom of research .
Parliaments are responsible for good order in society and cannot tolerate the development of any scientific and technical activity without the necessary mechanisms being in place to evaluate risk and deal with undesirable consequences .
If restrictions have to be imposed , that is an imperative of the democratic state .
The social impact of genetics and public anxiety about uncontrolled advances underlie regulatory action at national , European Union and world level .
So it is essential for the European Parliament to make a statement at this time , to reaffirm the right of each individual to receive a genetic heritage which has not been manipulated , to ban the cloning of human beings and to call for criminal legislation against any attempt to violate that law .
That is essential if human dignity is to be genuinely protected .
Having said that , it is important to forestall confusion about the current debate on control of techniques and cloning .
A careful distinction must be made between cloning human beings and cloning cells and animals , which is an essential tool in biomedical research .
Every ethical and legal safeguard must be put in place so that the essential rights and values of our society are preserved at all times , but we have no right to paralyse scientific progress when it is helping people fulfil their destiny as human beings .
The equivocation demonstrated by many Members here on the cloning issue evidently stems from two ( historically linked ) fallacies :
The first of these is the ontological fallacy , which reduces reality to objects ; these are then contrasted with subjects , which are regarded as something quite different and inexplicable .
This in turn makes the idea of identity a virtual impossibility , reducing it to the objective category of sameness .
Leibniz 's metaphysical principle of the identitas indiscernibilium paves the way for an indifference observable in the domain of engineering science , an attitude of ' What I cannot tell apart , I have no hesitation in calling identical . ' At some point , this ' undermined ' identity is then quite conveniently repudiated , and the individual becomes the victim of his own technical reproducibility .
The second is the ethical fallacy of absolving us humans from any type of responsibility for our fellow creatures , which are regarded as mere ' things ' or indeed ' machines ' , from any bonds of sympathy we might feel towards them .
That engenders an attitude of systematic denial of responsibility for anything extraneous to ourselves , an egocentric withdrawal from the full implications of our own practice .
That also throws the door wide open to misanthropic practices . Anyone who artificially defines us humans as something entirely detached from the community of living beings , of ' sentient beings ' , to quote the succinct English expression , is capable of making other , no less artificial distinctions , for instance between mere humans and ' superhumans ' or between ' subhumans ' and ' proper ' people ...
Renault factory
Mr President , my explanation of vote comes at an appropriate time following the serious incidents and manipulations that have just taken place in this Chamber .
The decision by Renault to close an industrial site at Vilvoorde should have been an occasion for careful consideration of the chain of causes and apparently irresistible forces that drove this reputable company to act in such a manner .
Instead , all we were vouchsafed here today was a deluge of wrong diagnosis , hypocrisy and rabble-rousing .
I have heard speakers saying that the only solution was to integrate the social protocol into the Treaty and establish a social Europe where decisions would be taken by majority voting .
Yet social directives in themselves cannot save jobs when purchasers are finding products too expensive .
In this respect , the European Parliament seems to me to be nourishing somewhat irrational notions of economics .
I was also sorry to hear from certain quarters in this House , including some on the Right , calls for the demand to be supported by the restarting of the Structural Funds , a solution which amounts to stripping the tax-payer to dress the consumer , and even calls for job-sharing , a solution which again usually amounts to stripping the tax-payer , as always , but this time in order to dress the worker .
I also heard speakers on the left casting doubt on efforts at budgetary restructuring , probably with the implication that it was necessary to be in a position to subsidize Renault in order to retain jobs .
Unfortunately , that idea would merely take us further into the cul-de-sac .
If we really want to make the human dimension Europe 's priority concern , we have to pose the problem differently .
The real situation is that although Renault is no doubt a victim of its own mistakes , it is also , like so many other enterprises , a victim of the global policy of free trade to which the Union has so recklessly opened its doors .
The public are well aware of that , just as they are well aware that the single currency will call for even harsher adjustments and will thus increase the power of the steam-roller of globalization .
For all these reasons the public are well aware , without needing to be told , of the responsibilities of Brussels which , throughout this debate , this House has made every effort to conceal .
Mr President , I am bound to say that the fury of the socialists reminds me of Oscar Wilde 's phrase about the rage of Caliban seeing his own face in the glass .
After all , why are the socialists so vehement about this business unless it is because the Renault management was brought in by a socialist government , because it is made up of socialists , and because it is undertaking - extremely clumsily , I must say - institutional responsibilities entrusted to it ?
I think the main issue here is the desire of the socialists to escape their own responsibilities .
I voted against the motion .
It did contain some very good things , but I voted against , because I believe we are making a mistake that mirrors the mistake made by Renault .
We are rightly accusing that company of having misunderstood its role and the provisions of the law in acting as it has acted .
But we are stepping outside our ground when we presume to give it advice and tell it that one particular strategic situation must be preferred to another .
We are not paying the bills , so we must not make the decisions .
Mr President , the Renault workers were in the gallery earlier , but they could well have been preceded by the miners , because the coal mines have also been closed and coal is to be brought in from Australia and Vietnam .
They could also have been preceded by those workers in the steelworks whose blast furnaces have been quenched to enable steel to come in from Thailand .
And they could have been preceded by the textile workers , because the European textile industry has been shut down so that textiles can be brought in from SouthEast Asia .
And how hypocritical it all is , because if Vilvoorde is being closed it is because of Japanese transplants - five Japanese factories in the United Kingdom - because there are Japanese transplants in Spain and in Germany , because there are Korean cars .
So , clearly , the structural funds have been used - that is to say that the European tax-payer has paid to create unemployment in the car industry , just as he paid for Hoover , which was relocated to Scotland and left France .
As for reality , Ford understood what reality meant when it paid its workers so much .
If the car industry is being closed down , the reason is that no one is buying cars , and if no one is buying cars , the reason is that there are 20 million unemployed , and if there are 20 million unemployed , the reason is that free trade in Europe has put them out of work .
The motion for a resolution is a signal of solidarity with workers now being threatened by the closure of this factory .
Just over a year ago we had a debate on an identical case of a decision to cut staff in readiness to close down a factory and move a production line away from Setubal . This was a decision taken by Renault .
The same Renault factory , which enjoys Community aid and is closing production units built in the first place in order to receive them .
This case demonstrates the existence of double standards in the Commission : the strictest rigour in order to apply liberalising competition rules ; but no rigour in order to have European social rules complied with ( rules on collectives dismissals and European company boards ) .
It also dramatically confirms the fact that a social Europe comes behind the Europe of the market and currency .
The strong reaction by European socialists means that we do not go along with policies which entail firing workers against Europe and breaking the social consensus which is the very foundation of the European Union .
Fortunately Renault workers in different countries have understood that their fight to face up to ' globalised ' capital has to be united on an international scale and that the solution is not by withdrawing behind national frontiers .
Unreservedly supporting their fight for the right to work , we also wish to say that it is identified with the fight for a social Europe and a policy based on active participation and in the popular fight .
Having due regard to the quite appalling conditions under which Parliament voted on the motion for a resolution regarding the closure of the Renault works at Vilvoorde , we felt we should not take part in the vote .
We would have preferred this vote to be taken in circumstances appropriate to the serious nature of the problem .
To our very deep regret , that was not the case .
The USA and the Far East are benefiting from the additional difficulties which European business is experiencing due to the closing down of the Renault car factory in Belgium .
Many company boards are now discussing whether to move planned investments outside Europe .
Renault should have followed the rules and consulted its employees before deciding to shut down the factory .
However , the resolution from the European Parliament takes the matter even further .
The claims and the condemnations will bring further difficulties for companies and consequently reduce their willingness to invest .
The European Parliament aims to improve social conditions and employment , but the methods used are doing exactly the opposite .
Employment in Europe will never benefit from companies being prevented from adjusting their position to face up to new competition ..
We should instead be facilitating new company start-ups and attracting new foreign investment in Europe .
Increased competitiveness , rather than more regulations , will make it possible to avoid ' the European model ' collapsing socially .
Renault is a State-owned company which has left it too late for any necessary changes .
The fact that a multinational company like Renault has been subsidised by the EU highlights the drawbacks of those company subsidies from the EU which the EU itself actively encourages on a large scale through their own Structural Funds .
The method is certainly deplorable , as Mr Chirac and Mr Juppé have asserted - it was the least they could say - but the substance of the affair is much more serious , and there are lessons to be learned for the future of Europe , if there is to be a future .
Although I would remind opponents of the European Union and of Maastricht that Europe is not responsible for this intolerable situation , it is demonstrating its limitations and its inability to prevent the situation , just as it demonstrated its inability to prevent the relocations of undertakings from one Member State to another .
Of course we must support the Belgian and French employees of Renault , and I do support them .
But we must also provide support to the European car industry , and fight for a social Europe which prohibits such actions by management .
The way to achieve this is through new European powers , new directives , stronger unionization of Europe and the mobilization of all Europeans who want different European policies and reject unbridled free trade .
For this reason , although I unreservedly support the motion , I say that it is not enough .
There are political responsibilities to be accepted .
It is illogical to deplore the closure of a Renault works while accepting total liberalization elsewhere .
Enough crocodile tears !
The resolution adopted a moment ago on the closure of the Renault factory in Vilvorde is a most important document in relation to European social policy .
It is important because it goes beyond the case in point and reflects the relationship between European Union and industrial policy .
The resolution does not deny either the problem of competitiveness or the need for restructuring , but firmly calls for respect for the rules .
In fact , this restructuring and arbitrary closure contribute not only to rising unemployment but also to creating an economic insecurity that may have a serious impact on the growth of consumption , social conflict and , in short , economic growth in general in the European Union .
It is important because it condemns the use of dismissals alone to resolve the crisis without patiently seeking alternative solutions , which is inconsistent with our attempt to construct a Europe that is more attentive to the problems of its citizens .
It is important because it points out that the closure of large companies has a very adverse effect on the entire environment they have created and on the local area in which they operate .
It is important , above all , because it blocks any multilateral decision-making and does not involve social consultation , which is typical of the unbridled capitalism that is breaking up the European social model .
But this resolution is also important because everything that is said and written about Renault also applies to all the other identical or very similar situations that have occurred in Europe , even if they do not all come before the European Parliament .
To give just one example : hundreds of workers in Monza are facing the same dramatic situation because Philips is moving its plants elsewhere .
We are now in the process of negotiation and we hope that this very strong resolution will also help resolve the difficulties facing other workers in Europe .
First , I must strongly condemn the methods employed by the Renault company , whose abrupt decision shows a scandalous disregard for the human aspect of the crisis affecting the company .
I also acknowledge that the attitude of the management has been contemptuous towards the workforce , whose feelings of anger and confusion I understand and share .
However , I also deplore the fact that the European Commission has not succeeded in providing for situations like this , and that the industrial policy pursued by the European Union has been incapable of dealing with the economic and social consequences of the necessary restructuring of certain large undertakings , especially those in the motor industry which have been so seriously hit by the crisis .
In order to prevent any recurrence of this kind of situation , I hope that the European Union will in future take more effective action and encourage and support solutions which are less expensive in human terms .
The EU has over a long period of time given priority to matters relating to the economy , trade , markets and competition .
The time has come to push other questions higher up on the agenda , e.g. social and employment issues .
To prioritise these matters is not the same thing as decisions being made by a supranational majority .
On the contrary , these issues should be dealt with by Member States .
The EU can for example set targets for employment while the measures to reach such a target are developed and carried out at the national level .
The closure of the Vilvoorde site is just one more tragedy in a long list of works that have been closed down .
Not only that , but this is a very high-performance unit , which has just been modernized .
It all amounts to an intolerable economic and human waste .
How can anyone fail to understand the absolute necessity of a European Union strategy of industrial policy ?
Economic cohesion and social cohesion are indispensable and must go hand in hand .
The European Parliament has been fighting for this for years .
It is the globalization of markets - and not the integration of Europe ! - that is forcing companies to make choices , to give notice of restructuring , to conclude alliances with third countries .
To defend a make , know-how , jobs ?
You might think so ....
And yet the descent into the red , following years of profits , acts as a compass for the company concerned at the expense of the economic and social life of towns or even whole regions in France , Belgium and Spain .
Information and consultation are first and foremost an expression of respect for another individual , for his work and for his rights .
Back in the 1980s , the European Parliament had considered this question in the context of the social Europe that was to be constructed .
There was much reluctance among most of the governments of the Member States !
We had to wait until September 1994 before the directive on European works councils became official !
Renault anticipated the European law and set up its own European works council in 1993 .
Do we have to remind Renault , which long seemed to be a jewel in the crown of the industry and of social progress , what that council implied ? Article 1 of its constitution reads :
' The council of the European Renault group shall be a structure for information and dialogue relating to the strategic orientations of the group in Europe , in the economic , financial and social fields , and to major developments at European Union subsidiaries in so far as they have an impact at European level . '
Dialogue and consultation would have made alternative solutions possible .
That is why our Parliament is calling for a study of the possibility of reducing working hours in accordance with the Rocard report , which was approved by our Parliament .
Continuing training measures will also have to be proposed .
Last week 's Europe-wide strike is a real gesture of awareness by the workforce in favour of social Europe .
The solidarity of the French and Spanish workers with their Belgian colleagues is something new !
I have always believed that a social Europe could not simply be constructed on a ' top-down ' basis through regulations and laws .
Are we seeing the start of a new balance of power between the European unions and the transnational companies ?
I wish to express my deep solidarity with the thousands of Renault workers who were completely excluded from their management 's tragic decisions , and with all those employed by the subcontracting companies which would then have to face the dreadful economic consequences of this closure .
We have voted in favour of the resolution opposing the shutting down of the Renault factory in Vilvoorde .
The resolution is an important statement by the European Parliament against an employer who has been shown to be ruthless and brutal to its employees .
We identify ourselves with the Renault employees ' fight for their right to work .
As regards the resolution , we do not agree with the proposal to make the social protocol a part of the Treaty as that only would strengthen the supranational development of the European Union .
Social rights can be guaranteed and made obligatory at interstate level , which is preferable .
I deliberately took no part in this vote , to demonstrate my disagreement in principle with this kind of text .
It annoys me that this House sees fit to adopt resolutions on any topical subject .
While I would not go so far as to call it interference , I do think the subjects covered in these motions are really inappropriate .
Of course I keenly deplore these lost jobs , and the methods employed by the company .
And I hope that the European Parliament will not adopt resolutions of this kind in future , resolutions which simply record the facts and pass judgement on them . I hope that instead it will contribute to an effective industrial and social policy which will make it possible to avoid situations like this , which unfortunately bear witness to the serious crisis through which some sectors of industry are now passing .
I should like to say something about the principles on which the independence of our proceedings are based , Madam President .
At the end of the previous sitting we had a very long series of points of order .
I shall not raise them again , of course .
A good number of them referred to the independence of Parliament 's proceedings and the fact that no influence of any kind should be exerted on them .
I would now like to remind you of another principle , citing what the French call the principle of secularity , and what one might call in any language the neutrality of public institutions with respect to religious influences .
On leaving the sitting just now , at about 2 p.m. , I found - not for the first time - a religious choir performing in the entrance to the European Parliament .
A talented choir , but a religious one .
I am not disputing their talent or artistic quality , just ...
( The President cut of the speaker )
Mr Hory , I do not know what happened there .
We have a very full agenda , and we must press on with it .
Perhaps you can let the Bureau have something in writing .
But what you are doing just now goes beyond the Rules of Procedure .
I am afraid I must rule you out of order .
Madam President , I am citing the Rules of Procedure .
Yes , I know you said which point was at issue , and that is clear .
But if you wish to give more information than you have just done , then please do it in writing .
We shall then take note of it , but we shall not have any further discussion on that point now !
Community Transit System ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on
the report ( A4-0053 / 97 ) on the Community transit system by Mr Kellett-Bowman , on behalf of the Committee of Inquiry into the Community transit system , -the draft recommendation ( A4-0054 / 97 ) on behalf of the Committee of Inquiry into the Community Transit System on the report of the Committee of Inquiry on the Community transit system .
Madam President , as one of those who took part in the work of the Committee of Inquiry into the Community Transit System , I too must compliment Mr Tomlinson and Mr Kellet-Bowman on the way in which they did their job .
I think that this report satisfied a need which was felt on all sides .
I was struck by the willingness of customs services and forwarding agents to take part in the various discussions we held .
I wonder if it might not be a good idea to see whether we could not put in place some form of structure which would allow these two groups to meet and discuss regularly under the auspices , for example , of the European Commission .
The goodwill is there and I think we should make use of it .
As regards the report itself : I find it so comprehensive that it is hard to know what to add .
There is no doubt in my mind that if we have European rules , they need to be overseen at European level .
So I think ultimately we shall have to have some form of European customs administration or other .
I say ultimately , because it is unlikely to be possible for the time being .
First there has to be co-operation , under the guidance of the European Commission .
I think the role of UCLAF must be strengthened and the European Commission might also consider , though this is not mentioned in the report , the extent to which co-operation with Europol might be improved .
I remember during the 1989 election campaign , when we were looking to complete the single market , that everyone was talking about strengthening customs checks at the Community 's external frontiers .
As we have seen , quite the opposite has happened .
One of the first things to be done is to strengthen the external borders and I too am very much in favour of more checks by flying quads , of checking wherever checking is possible , throughout Europe .
Greater use of computer methods , certainly .
Special emphasis has been given to Switzerland .
It is a weak link in the system .
I think we should pay particular attention to Recommendation 29 which says that the Commission should produce an annual report on co-operation with Switzerland in the area of justice and all the rest of it .
We now have this report .
I think the real work is only now beginning .
So I look forward with interest to the report which Commissioner Monti has promised us by the end of April .
I think we can then embark on the long job of strengthening customs controls in Europe which lies ahead .

Madam President , Mr Kellet-Bowman and Mr Tomlinson have already covered the substance of the report most excellently this morning so I am left with the slight problem that there is little else to add .
One needs just to read the report .
That is essential , because then the context becomes clear .
But I have a couple of points to make .
So far very little attention has been paid to the issue of the 100 % guarantee for sensitive goods .
And one think which the report tells us is that the system for transporting sensitive goods by road has jammed up completely because of this 100 % guarantee and that these goods are now looking for other ways round , including smuggling .
So I should like to hear a little more from the Commission about the prompt courses of action which might be taken .
Listening to Commissioner Monti this morning , I had the feeling that he was rather dismissive of the problem of Switzerland .
Because I do not think that we have solved it with our co-operation agreement between the customs administrations .
Switzerland is a far more serious problem .
It is of course too absurd to see professional butter smugglers on German television , standing proudly in their gardens telling ZDF how they do it , when we can do nothing at all to stop them .
So we shall have to be rather tough in our negotiations with the Swiss , given their missed opportunity for honorary membership , on this question of those who protect the fraudsters operating on Community territory or with the territory of the European Union .
The Dutch presidency was not represented at our previous debate on the Inquiry .
It seems to be the case again this time too .
I am doubly pleased because I think that when it comes to another section of this report , namely the need to improve investigation and prosecution , this is an area for the IGC .
Without wanting powers in respect of investigation and prosecution to lie exclusively at European level , it is vital that Member States should agree on ways of making the European Union function as a kind of clearing house both for investigation , and thus the collection of information , and for prosecution .
I have already heard it suggested in Dutch circles , by the Justice Minister I think , that there should be a European magistrate attached to Europol .
I believe this kind of idea needs to be taken forward as a way of resolving the problems entailed in transit fraud .
It seems to me , Madam President , and I hope this will be possible at the IGC , that we must devote all our energies to this whole problem , because it has not been addressed with sufficient vigour so far .
Madam President , in the short time available to me I should like to point to the European Parliament 's achievements in the context of the Committee of Inquiry 's operations .
And first of all , of course , to say that it has justified the idea of those who thought of the idea and undertook the responsibility of setting up a Committee of Inquiry in the European Parliament .
Madam President , I must say that those achievements are :
Firstly , that the Committee of Inquiry established the groundrules , mainly procedurally , concerning how Committees of Inquiry ought to function .
This Committee of Inquiry solved many procedural issues and in essence interpreted the Inter-institutional Agreement in the best possible way .
Another achievement is that it succeeded in upgrading the problem of the transit system from a purely technocratic issue to a political issue , as indeed it is .
I must say that if the Committee of Inquiry had not intervened , the impasse in which the European Union 's technocrats had become trapped , would have persisted and led to a collapse of the system .
We were literally able to save the system .
A further achievement is that as a Committee of Inquiry , we were able to extract political commitments .
This means that the Commission - and later , I think , the Council - have for example committed themselves not to extend the system until its computerization has been completed and unless the necessary reforms are carried out at the same time .
Finally , I should say that not only did we secure political commitments but , in parallel , we have been able to differentiate the existing policy .
I must tell you that we were faced by the following phenomenon : on the one hand , we had those mixed committees or groups between Member States and Commission officials concerning customs issues , which always agreed among themselves , but on the other hand , when we received answers to questionnaires from the 15 Member States , we found profound disagreements between the Member States , in flagrant contradiction with what the representatives of those countries had said and declared in Brussels in those mixed committees and working groups .
In other words , the system was totally unreliable .
I now hope that the Committee 's conclusions will demonstrate that .
Let me finish with two comments : first , the subject of Switzerland .
I address the Commissioners and refer to Recommendation No 29 , which Mr Mulder also mentioned .
Secondly , Recommendation No 23 , with which we call for an extension of responsibility to the guarantee system .
Guarantees cannot possibly be given on the basis of any ' freight forwarder 's ' ' word of honour ' .
The carriers too must be involved , as well as the owners of the goods transported .
Madame President , this is a good report that is being presented , the result of thorough and extensive work .
We have learnt a lot about how the internal market , through deception and fraud , has become a profitable market for organised crime and especially how Switzerland is being in this context .
Both legal and illegal economic players have taken full advantage of the internal market .
The European Union and Member States have lost several billion ECU in VAT , duties and excise to the benefit of the organised criminals .
As mentioned earlier by Mr Tomlinson : if a mere 1 per cent of the transits are fraudulent then 4.5 billion ECU will be lost to us , or in the case of 2 per cent , up to 9 billion ECU will be lost to us .
The Commission must be criticised for being passive for so long .
We have not reacted promptly to the increased number of frauds resulting from an out-of-date system .
The collaboration between national Customs Departments must operate as if they were one and the same authority .
So far , this has not been the case .
The Commission must in agreement with Member States introduce a common policy for physical control applicable throughout the European Union , not just at the border points and there must be limits on journey times , as well as route restrictions .
These regulations must be applied consistently by Customs Departments in the Member States .
The first step is to computerise the outdated 1968 transit system .
A computer system is however not one-hundredper-cent safe against tampering .
The Commission must therefore also utilise other high level technologies such as for example optical cards .
These are based on laser , cannot be erased and are able to store an enormous amount of data .
They are of high quality , durable and can be connected to all types of computers .
Criminals are well organised and exploit all of the system 's loopholes and are at present one step ahead of Member States and the European Union .
Together with the Member States it is now high time for the Commission to accept the implications of the free market .
All the loopholes in the regulations of the European Union must be plugged .
An effective physical control system at all borders as well as selective controls throughout the European Union must be introduced .
New technology is a must .
The Customs Departments in Member States must cooperate as if they were one and the same authority .
Organised crime cannot be allowed to flourish any longer .
It is time for the European Union and Member States to act .
The Commission and Member States must actively carry out the recommendations made in the report .
Madam President , the elimination of internal frontiers resulting from the single European market as of 1992 marked the take-off of the Community transit problem .
In parallel with the vast and undeniable benefits derived from free movement since 1993 , criminal organizations and unscrupulous economic operators have begun to find loopholes in the system and take advantage of the virtual absence of frontier controls .
The high fraud figures , involving loss of fiscal income , are just the tip of the iceberg in terms of existing fraud . This is seriously depleting Community coffers and also means potential losses for law-abiding businesses .
What is more , business , national authorities and the European Commission continue to contradict each other about the total figures for fraud , demonstrating yet again the depth of confusion and the urgent need for serious reform of the Community transit system .
An illustration of that confusion is the extension of the Community transit system to the Visegrad countries .
I want to put on record here that that decision was taken administratively , and not politically as such an important decision should have been .
And the extension of the transit system to the Visegrad countries is a clear example of the need to deepen rather than widen .
Computerization must be the first objective in the context of reform of the system , with over 18 million annual transit operations to be handled .
It is clear from every point of view that the current system of despatching documents from one customs service to another is archaic , produces enormous delay and facilitates forgery of those documents and the stamps that accompany them .
I must not fail to recognize here the giant strides made by various countries , including Spain , in the process of computerizing the system .
The reform of Community transit ought to simplify operations for businesses as well as find mechanisms for customs and legal cooperation especially in terms of detection of fraud , imposition and implementation of sanctions , and control of discounts and exemptions .
To conclude , I want to mention that many witnesses at the temporary committee of inquiry on the Community transit system talked about Switzerland or the Isle of Man .
I want to talk about tax havens like Gibraltar as well .
The Rock authorities are so lax that it has become a territory that encourages the problem we are dealing with here through money-laundering .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report presented to the House by the Chairman of the Committee of Inquiry , Mr Tomlinson , should not have had the title ' On transit fraud ' .
It would be better named ' Report on self-delusion ' .
The self-delusion in question is that we think we have succeeded in setting up the internal market .
However , Mr President , the word ' internal ' contrasts one area with another , external area , from which it is supposedly distinguished by some effective dividing line .
In the case of the internal market , the dividing line is the single list of tariffs .
But it is not sufficient for a single tariff list to exist .
It must also be applied in an effective way .
And the effectiveness of its application must be judged with reference to carriers acting in bad faith , because those acting in good faith will comply with the law through their own volition .
If we ask any smuggler of Marlboro cigarettes what difference he sees between the market in Detroit and our own internal market - and such surveys in depth have been carried out by our committee - he would answer that the only difference perhaps is that in America he pays some taxes , while in Europe he pays no tax at all .
The report has also sketched out the anatomy of the reasons for that situation .
The explosion of fraud is due to fragmentation of the Community 's customs services .
Responsibility for compliance with the tariff list rests with 15 different customs services .
Among those services we have removed a large part from the frontiers they had learned to guard , and in that way , we deprived them of part of their mission .
However , we have not asked them to guard a real Community whole , we have not given them a true Community mission , we have not given them a sense of Community purpose , nor a Community conscience , nor even a service organised at Community level , which would of course settle the issue of a Community conscience .
It is hardly surprising that chaos has ensued .
Until we create a common customs service , let us not be surprised that smugglers move freely through our internal market .
And that , I think , is the main message of the report presented to you .
Correct and logical proposals for the reform of transit will not solve the problem if we continue trying to implement them within the framework of this fragmented customs service .
Faced with this situation - which does not just apply to customs , since the situation is more general - many countries have decided that specially reinforced cooperation is needed between them .
However , before having recourse to that last resort , would it not be right to consider where matters might have matured to the point when we might be able to establish a cooperation common to all ?
And this , before we have recourse to reinforced cooperation , which is simply a euphemism for the hard core , to succeed where we can .
What would be more logical than to have a common customs service covering a real , common , integral Community ?
Madam President , Mrs Green said she thought it rather poor that so few people were present here at the start of this debate .
I find it rather good that we can now work in an atmosphere of calm .
Because what we saw here a short while ago was anything but calm .
So I prefer to have Parliament as it is now .
I think the Committee of Inquiry has been a very good thing .
I myself am terribly alarmed .
I am not a member of the Committee on Budgetary Control , and when you find yourself in the middle of all this without being a member of that Committee , it give you quite a fright to see what bad shape the transit system is actually in .
If you had wanted to dream up a system offering maximum opportunities for fraud , this is the system you would have thought up , I think . I cannot account for it otherwise .
The sums involved are staggering , as the report tells us .
The Dutch Government has admitted that in the Netherlands alone there are outstanding tax and import duty arrears to a total of one billion guilders .
A second point I wanted to emphasize was the question of the 10 % which Member States are allowed to retain for the purposes of setting up an efficient customs system .
Most Member States retain more .
The Netherlands fortunately does not , but nevertheless three-quarters of the entire customs and excise service is paid by Europe , a point which the Finance Ministry conveniently forgets to mention , though it is always quick enough to mention the sums it has to pay out to Europe .
I think our Inquiry has shown up another potential problem , namely the danger that under the single market Member States may lose out on revenue , thereby depleting the tax basis so that as a result even more tax has to be drawn from that ready source of revenue , income tax .
And in the context of jobs and the labour market that is the last thing we want .
It is unfortunate that co-operation by the customs administrations is so poor .
Many honourable members have already mentioned this .
Likewise the case of those countries which cause us truly enormous problems , and here I fully agree with Mr Dankert who said that Commissioner Monti rather shrugged them off , I refer to Switzerland , the Isle of Man , Cyprus and Gibraltar too , countries which provide shelter on a large scale and refuse to co-operate in any way whatsoever even though they know that the European Union is being defrauded of tax and customs duties on a huge scale .
Something has to be done about this .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , our committee of inquiry has proved that the European Parliament intends to fulfil to the letter its mandate to defend the interests of the taxpayers , and our task now will be to ensure that we actually put into effect the results of the excellent work performed over these last 15 months , a task that has to be undertaken together with the Commission and the Member States .
But it must be remembered that , at a time when budgets are being consolidated in the Member States , our fellow citizens are suffering under so-called savings packages and that nobody can expect them to go on enduring cuts in pensions , in social security payments , in education , etc . , while this Union and its Member States leave the door open to this type of fraud racket and look on as billions in tax revenue are lost .
Another consequence for us will have to be that we begin at long last to formulate our policies along with those affected by them .
We established that the Member States have cut thousands of jobs in the customs services .
It is perfectly plain that those who remain there feel frustrated .
At the same time we must take on board their experiences of this imperfect transit system .
We shall have to speak at some time during the next few months , Commissioners , about our position on the system of preferences .
That cannot only be a foreign-policy decision ; we also have to know how to implement such a system , how to control it .
We still remember well several customs people telling us that the various regulations of the common agricultural policy are virtually an invitation to fraudsters .
Here too the Commission will have to make appropriate proposals .
You will find that we , as Members of Parliament and of this committee of inquiry , will be on your side as you undertake this work .
Madam President , I am pleased that I have been able to participate in the work of this temporary Committee of Inquiry ; indeed , of having played a small part in bringing it into being .
It was some two years ago , in the early months of 1995 that I collected the signatures of 25 % of the Members of this House to call for a Committee of Inquiry into the problems of Community fraud .
I took that initiative because my constituents certainly do take seriously fraud against the Community , as Mrs Green said this morning .
I remember an interview I had with former President Hänsch , when little seemed to be happening as a result of that request , and he said we should only use those powers if we were sure they would be successful .
I can now say to the President they have indeed been successful .
I pay tribute to the chairman of the committee and the rapporteur .
That success has already prompted change in Community transit practice by the Commission , the customs services , transporters and freight forwarders themselves .
It has even caused the smugglers to change as they have reverted to old-fashioned smuggling rather than Community transit fraud .
But further work needs to be done .
The Committee on Budgetary Control must keep hold of this .
I have little doubt that Mrs Theato will see that will happen .
It is simply disgraceful that the system is not yet computerized .
There is not a bistro in this city where a cash card cannot be linked by remote link to a central computer .
We must give customs officers at least as much modern technology as we give the average French bistro .
The temporary Committee of Inquiry has exercised its powers as it did into BSE as an important new power of Parliament .
These two committees have treated their role differently but in my opinion both demonstrate the value of the new procedure .
I am pleased to see that the Council of Ministers has attended our debate and I thank them for that .
On the conclusions : the Committee of Inquiry was right to hold back from proposing a single customs service .
Just because the cooperation currently is not adequate , it does not follow that a single service would have worked better .
The message , however , is clear to national customs services : we benefit from the single market , we want cross-Community trade to grow , and we want the customs services to cooperate , as it says : to operate as if they were one .
That is not a bad aim for the customs services .
It is not a bad aim for Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to express my thanks to Mr Perry , because of course it was his initiative that led to the appointment of this parliamentary committee of inquiry .
The first committee of inquiry worked hard , and its work is starting to bear fruit .
If you keep in touch with the media , in the Swiss , the Austrian , the Spanish media , across the whole of Europe , you will learn about cases that were once more likely to be swept under the carpet .
Cigarette-smuggling , the smuggling of vegetables , livestock and meat , are on the agenda , and if we assume that a container of cigarettes can yield a profit of one million ECU , a container of alcohol can fetch ECU 400 000 , a container of butter or meat ECU 45 000 , or a container of sugar 12 000 , it becomes apparent that smuggling is certainly a lucrative business .
Individual States and the European Community are defrauded of tax revenues and excise duties , but honest dealers also suffer - the ones who pay their taxes as a matter of course and who end up having to pay higher taxes because the fraudsters have spared themselves that expense .
And of course the insurance institutions also come off worse , which results in higher premiums .
It is the European consumer who foots the bill .
The European Parliament is a protector of the European consumer , and that is why it was necessary for the committee of inquiry to subject this whole issue to intensive scrutiny .
It is also the case that the Community transit system entails expenditure , especially for those Member States whose territory adjoins the eastern border of the EU and which therefore have to assume a disproportionate share of the cost of customs controls .
Consideration should be given to a compensatory payment to these countries from the Community budget .
On the other hand we also concluded that the European Commission needs to engage in new activities , that the focus must be on ways of making these activities efficient , on potential streamlining measures , and I believe this would be of real benefit to the European Community purse .
But another key point is surely the question of training .
We urgently need the customs academy that was referred to , and it would be logical to establish that academy at a border , where the customs people , the types of officer who will be the trainees ' superiors in practice , can provide training in customs clearance procedures .
It is also important that a forgery-proof basic document should be issued , one which can also be copied , that the stamping process should be based on the latest high-tech methods , and that the paramount aim should be to organize considerably simpler , faster , more efficient , more transparent and far cheaper procedures - far cheaper for business and for the Community .
Madam President , I too thank the rapporteur for his excellent work , together with the committee and its chairman .
I must also say that from the Commission 's initial replies it seems to appreciate that work and to have given an important undertaking .
I want to emphasize one particular aspect raised in recommendations 14-20 , judicial cooperation , because there is a very close link between the proposals on this and the more general strategy to combat fraud , a fight we know must be waged and where we are sadly making slow progress .
I believe we must look at things as they are .
We cannot try to combat fraud properly with palliatives or cumbersome instruments such as those we normally adopt within the third pillar , including conventions .
The recommendations also refer to reciprocal recognition of proof .
This aspect which seems to me to be raised in point 16 is directly related to the construction of a European legal area which will enable the judiciary to cooperate directly , unlike the present situation ; as you know and as the appeal judges of Geneva whom we received here in the European Parliament recently noted , today the average number of replies to applications is between 2 , 3 and 6 % .
A judge who asks a foreign colleague for proof of criminal acts does not receive replies in more than 10 % of cases .
Because we cannot tolerate all this , I believe that when we come to revise the Treaty we must set out a specific legal basis which will provide for this kind of judicial cooperation and lay down the conditions for a legal area confined for the present to the question of fraud , given that fraud undeniably involves large sums of money and comes under the competence of the Union .
I would therefore call for these recommendations to be flanked by a strategy for putting the renewed fight against fraud at the top of the third pillar during the Intergovernmental Conference .

Madam President , I want to congratulate Mr Kellett-Bowman , Mr Tomlinson , the committee , and indeed the staff who have worked so hard on this particular report .
As other speakers have said , it does show Parliament at its most hard-working and efficient .
I endorse the recommendations in the report and I think the report clearly shows that cigarettes offer the fraudster a huge mark-up between the duty-free price and the actual sale price right throughout the European Union .
Illegal trade in cigarettes in my own city of Dublin accounts for 10 % of the total market .
That is a huge figure , 4 % nationally , 10 % in Dublin .
We should reflect also on the fact that it is not only organized crime that prospers : cheap cigarettes on the black market can help the manufacturer expand its market share at the expense of rivals .
It is a very depressing feature of the availability of cheaper cigarettes that it encourages young people to smoke - and especially young females now who are beginning to smoke .
Finally , I would appeal to those people who buy black-market cigarettes to remember that they are putting money into the hands of ruthless criminals who are possibly also engaged in laundering money from drugs .
Madam President , the problem of fraud in the evasion of customs duties is one of the great unresolved challenges facing the European Union .
This form of fraud costs the EU billions annually .
It is as evident in my country of Ireland as in any other EU Member State .
As has been said by the previous speaker , on some of the main shopping streets of Dublin illegal tobacco is openly sold , and this represents a considerable loss to the Irish exchequer .
But it is also a source of frustration and anger for law-abiding citizens .
I hope that this report represents the first stage in a concerted battle against this type of fraud .
The wide-ranging recommendations contained in the report should be implemented , and soon .
However , the most crucial ingredient in tackling this fraud is political will .
The present situation , with 15 different Member States implementing 15 different customs regimes , is not conducive to success .
It is now vital that the EU establish a framework for customs services effectively functioning as if they were one .
This point is explicitly recognized by the Committee of Inquiry .
It is now up to the Member States ' governments to take the initiative provided by this report , and I urge the Dutch presidency to examine this issue as a matter of some urgency .
The other vital ingredient , of course , is resources , and the excellent proposals contained in this report will not become a reality without adequate financing .
Again , this is a serious matter for consideration by the governments of the Member States , and finance for these measures would be a good investment on the part of the EU .
The initial expenditure required to tackle this fraud would be more than compensated for by the gains in revenue by the Member States .
There is a key role for EUROPOL in the implementation of this report .
There is no doubt in my mind that the same individuals involved in this trade are also involved in drugs and other such activities .
Striking a blow against transit fraud would also represent a positive step against organized crime , which is one of the greatest problems facing the European Union .
Madam President , the Temporary Committee of Inquiry into fraud in the Community transit system has investigated thoroughly and produced a very readable report .
My compliments to it for this .
It emerges very clearly from the report that when the single market was being put in place neither the Member States nor the Commission had the slightest idea of the opportunities for fraud it created for those whose intentions were dishonest .
The fact that customs administrations were cut back instead of measures being taken to offset the disappearance of the internal borders speaks volumes here .
I am happy to endorse many of the recommendations which the report makes for measures to counter customs fraud .
But I emphatically distance myself from the call for a Community customs service as referred to explicitly in the Treaty and implicitly in the recommendations .
In this regard I support the minority opinion at the end of this report , which recommends primarily that co-operation by Member States should be intensified .
I also disagree with the report 's recommendation that UCLAF should be converted into a European fraud detection agency .
It is striking that the Committee of Inquiry says that failure to set up a Community customs administration is a violation of the subsidiarity principle .
But that principle applies only to policy areas in which the Union shares powers with the Member States .
Justice affairs and investigation are not part of them .
Nor must they be .
They represent vital functions of the sovereign national states which make up the Union .
All things considered I shall vote in favour of the draft recommendations because they include several good ones and because ultimately a European customs administration is not in fact included .
I have listened with great interest to the debate which the House has just held on the report of the Temporary Committee of Inquiry into the Community transit system .
May I start by complimenting you and congratulating you on completing this report .
I am grateful to the Committee of Inquiry for this most important investigation .
The Committee was the first to get down to work since the European Parliament secured the right of inquiry under the Maastricht Treaty and my particular thanks are due to Chairman Tomlinson and not least to reporter Kellet-Bowman .
Speaking personally , I should like to extend my tribute to Parliament as a whole .
I think it was a good choice of subject here .
Secondly , the timing was right , thirdly the job was tackled in a practical manner and , fourthly and very importantly , useful information has been gathered from society itself .
I think that this should be the norm in future inquiries .
I am glad that a precedent has been set .
The fact that the report you have debated broadly involved all the parties concerned and that the views of the business world were widely canvassed as well , will undoubtedly have been helpful in this analysis of the problems which have beset this sector for ages now .
This involvement also reflects the importance which Parliament attaches to the link between governments , business and industry and ordinary people in Europe .
More generally , the efforts of the Committee of Inquiry have once again made it plain that Parliament too wishes significantly to boost efforts to tackle fraud involving EC budget funds .
The Council too , together with the Commission and European Court of Auditors of course , is committed to this .
High priority must be given to countering fraud and to the better management and scrutiny of Community resources .
After all , fraud and the poor management and waste of these resources undermine Europe 's credibility in the eyes of its citizens .
Measures against these things are of paramount importance .
For this precise reason I repeat that I welcome this Inquiry .
Transit fraud involves a number of aspects .
On the one hand the very basis of the single market is threatened and particularly the free movement of goods .
This is crucially important to prosperity in Europe .
On the other hand , and the report points this up as well , there are complex problems in customs co-operation which play into the hands of the fraudsters .
Please understand if I refrain for the moment from commenting on the substance of these on behalf of the Council .
The report has not been discussed by the Council so any comments on it by myself would be premature .
What I would say is that in the recent past , partly as a result of the Committee of Inquiry 's activities , much has already been done at both Community and national level to combat transit fraud .
In 1995 the Council adopted a resolution calling for computerization of the transit system by 1998 .
And agreement has recently been reached on a customs cooperation treaty between the European Union and Switzerland .
This opens the way to solving part of this problem .
I should also say that since the European Council in Dublin the high-level group on organized crime has been set up . This will shortly be reporting and will shed considerable light on these matters .
It has addressed the strengthening of Europol 's role in this kind of matter and the question of contact magistrates and justice cooperation which Mr Dankert mentioned .
I will of course brief my colleagues on today 's debate .
It goes without saying that the Council will give close consideration to the report and its recommendations and will attach its own conclusions .
The presidency will endeavour to get the report placed on the agenda as soon as possible .
The same goes for any proposals which the Committee may wish to make .
At the end of the current presidency a progress report will be given on these activities which I shall ensure are pursued with the utmost vigour .
Measures against fraud are a top priority .
The European citizen is after all entitled to powerful and efficient protection of the funds in Europe 's coffers .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President of the Council , I have listened with great interest to the statements on Mr Kellett-Bowman 's report and on behalf of the Commission I want to sincerely thank all the speakers for their important political contribution to the debate .
It is clear that at this point the debate is looking towards the implementation of the reforms of the transit system and , more generally , the reform of the customs policy .
First of all , it has emerged very clearly that the transit problems are not technical , sectoral questions but represent a political problem that involves the entire customs system ; secondly , the functioning and very credibility of the single market , the core of European integration , are at stake here ; thirdly , a problem of this scale , with such major implications , calls for global solutions that combine all the planning , prevention , management , monitoring and control measures in a unitary strategy .
The completion of the single market depends on this reform and on a range of changes to customs policy and , I would add , to the policy on duties .
These aspects must and will take up their rightful place in the action plan on the single market which the Commission will be presenting to the European Council in Amsterdam .
It is also clear from Mr Kellett-Bowman 's report and from the debate to which we have all listened with great interest that it is rather artificial to draw a distinction between the first and the third pillar and increasingly difficult to defend doing so .
We need effective measures at European Union level in order to protect the interests of the European tax-payers and the European citizens .
Investigation into fraud is most important , as some speakers have pointed out , but prevention is equally important and the Commission intends to confront this challenge head on , together with the 15 Member States .
Let me emphasize that the Commission is prepared to assume its responsibilities .
Parliament has clearly demonstrated its commitment in this matter ; I hope the Council and the Member States will do the same - and we have just heard an important statement from the President of the Council - by making their political contribution and rapidly adopting the proposals put before them .
Finally , let me give warm thanks for the words of appreciation addressed to the European Commission , which I would also like to extend to our services , who have worked very hard with me .
For the rest , we will all continue to cooperate fully with the European Parliament .
Let me once again congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Kellett-Bowman , and the chairman , Mr Tomlinson .
Madam President , I just wish to address a word of thanks to both the Dutch presidency and the Commission and add a sentence with a question to each of them to take away with them .
First , to the Commission , because it has reminded us that there may well be additional costs involved if it follows the recommendations - and I heard it from both Commissioners .
I just ask them to ensure that the Commission , as a collegiate body , accepts its responsibility for including those costs in the preliminary draft budget for 1998 and not to leave it to Parliament to do its job for it .
Second , to the Council : I noted very clearly and welcomed very much that the Dutch presidency said it would draw its conclusions and will produce a report .
I should like to ask the Dutch presidency to ensure that that report is formally and officially communicated to Parliament so that it can be taken into account in the continuous monitoring of the follow-up .
With those two questions , I thank both the Commission and the Council for their active participation in this debate .
Thank you , Mr Tomlinson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Albania
The next item is the situation in Albania , with Council and Commission statements followed by a debate .
Madam President , partly in reply to oral questions to the Council from MEPs Ahlquist and Bianco , I am happy to report in detail on the alarming situation which has arisen in Albania and the steps which the European Union has taken so far as a result of it .
To enable us to understand the situation , let me outline briefly the background to the present crisis .
To begin with , the political and economic reforms in Albania which followed the upheavals of 1990-1992 proceeded smoothly , but in the run-up to the parliamentary elections of May / June 1996 the pace of the reform programme slowed .
Fiscal and monetary policy became less rigorous , leading to an excessively large budget deficit and a rise in inflation .
Consequently Albania no longer met the criteria of the International Monetary Fund and new tranches of the structural adjustment loans provided by the international financial organizations were frozen last year .
During the 1996 parliamentary elections the OSCE observers identified irregularities which favoured the Democratic Party of President Berisha .
The Government of the Prime Minister , who has now resigned , was thus very short on legitimacy and credibility .
The present political and economic crisis prompted by so-called pyramid investment schemes has to be seen against this broader background .
These pyramid schemes began a few years ago when Albanian workers living abroad transferred their earnings back into the country , a country which did not have a properly functioning banking system .
Most of these schemes involve little if any economic activity and are purely speculative .
Most of the Albanian population invested in them .
They put in not only their ordinary savings , but often sold their houses , livestock and so on .
The total amount invested in pyramid schemes is not known , but the International Monetary Fund puts it at about one and a half billion dollars or 40-60 % of Albania 's current gross domestic product .
When these schemes collapse in a country which is still extremely poor , the economic and social consequences are thus enormous .
It is feared that hyperinflation and massive poverty may result .
There are also major political repercussions , especially as the present Government ignored the warnings of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank and some members of the Government may also have been involved in the pyramid schemes .
Confrontations in the country quickly became acute after the beginning of the crisis at the end of 1996 .
Between Government and opposition parties , between the north and south of the country and between Government and people .
The public is demanding that the Government compensate them for their losses .
The Government cannot do so .
Government and opposition parties accuse each other of seeking to make political capital out of the crisis .
Particularly in the south of the country where the socialist party , the erstwhile communists , traditionally have their power base and where the pyramid funds have since gone bust , the tensions are at fever pitch .
Countless citizens have looted weapons from the army and police .
There have been killings and woundings .
It is feared that sizeable numbers of refugees will flood into Greece and Italy and that the tension may spill over to the Albanian population in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Kosovo .
Constant talks are going on between the European Union embassies and Albania about foreign nationals living there .
Unless foreigners have pressing reasons to remain in Albania they are being advised to leave the country until further notice .
As regards measures by the European Union , I can tell you this .
The European Union held consultations about these alarming developments at a relatively early stage .
This prompted the decision of the General Affairs Council on 24 / 25 February to send a high-level official joint mission of the presidency of the European Union and the Commission .
This mission took place on 27 / 28 February .
In talks with its opposite numbers in Tirana it particularly stressed the need to refrain from violence and to respect democracy .
All political forces in Albania were also urged to resolve the crisis through dialogue .
In talks with President Berisha , Prime Minister Meksi and Minister Sheru and the leaders of various opposition parties , the mission also found the attitudes of both Government and opposition to be extremely inflexible .
Since then , following that mission , the situation in Albania has worsened further .
The Meksi Government offered its resignation on 1 March , on 2 March a state of emergency was declared , on 3 March President Berisha got himself re-elected by parliament for a new five-year term .
Press freedom has been curtailed by extensive censorship .
The work of journalists , both Albanian and foreign , has been made impossible .
In the light of this further worsening of the situation the European Union has sought , through closer consultation with all the parties involved , to help control the political conflict and create conditions for stability so that the country can resume its process of reform .
Given the special position of a number of Member States of the Union , the Council President , Mr van Mierlo , accompanied by the European Commission , held consultations in Rome and Athens on 6 March on the situation in Albania and then went on to Tirana for talks with President Berisha and members of the Albanian opposition .
Shortly before the EU presidency arrived in Tirana President Berisha and the political parties agreed on a statement .
This pledged support for the restoration of public order and called for people to surrender looted weapons within 48 hours .
The President promised an amnesty to citizens who obeyed this call and had not committed any crime .
Military operations would also be halted against those in control in a number of towns in the south .
The President would , on the basis of as broad a consensus as possible , start consultations for a new government and a new prime minister .
Lastly , a committee would be set up to ensure transparency in respect of pyramid schemes .
The parties to the statement announced their intention of holding the dialogue in public .
During the visit by the Council President meetings were held with President Berisha and representatives of six political parties .
Mr van Mierlo also met twice with his Albanian counterpart Sheru .
In all these talks he deprecated all forms of violence and pressed for human rights to be upheld .
In his talks with President Berisha the EU President emphasized the need to restore freedom of the press , including access for all parties to state television .
Given the present Government 's lack of legitimacy and inadequate democratic credentials , Mr van Mierlo told President Berisha that if order was to be restored a parallel course had to be set offering the prospect of a new parliament and a government with sufficient support .
To this end democratic requirements had to be met such as a new constitution and a new electoral law .
An interim government , as broadly based as possible , should ensure these developments and restore order to the economy .
The EU presidency urged the President to announce elections quickly , to be held at a time acceptable to all parties .
The OSCE would have to be closely involved in this process of democratization .
The President was then urged to hold prompt consultations with the personal representative of the OSCE President-in-Office , former Austrian Chancellor Franz Vranitsky , who was due to visit Tirana on 8 March , the day after the visit of the EU presidency .
In addition to these parallel lines leading , on the one hand , to the restoration of public order and , on the other hand , to the opening of perspectives for democracy , the problem of pyramid investments needs to be settled .
Cooperation with the IMF and World Bank would seem appropriate here .
The presidency urged this course of action too .
In talks with members of the opposition the EU presidency took this same line .
They were made aware of their heavy responsibility to prevent further violence and were asked to use all their influence to prevent further violence in the south and to ensure that weapons were surrendered .
The presidency also endorsed the recommendation of the Council of Europe , which had a parliamentary mission visiting Tirana at the same time ; this urged the opposition , out of respect for the principles of democracy , to take their seats in the Albanian parliament and take part in its work .
To conclude : unsurprisingly , the views of President Berisha and the opposition were very different .
President Berisha was unwilling to yield to violence and thought that the calling of elections at gunpoint would set an undesirable precedent .
He thus saw no reason for concessions until such time as weapons had been surrendered .
The opposition , however , believed that by handing in its weapons the south would put itself completely at the mercy of President Berisha 's Government which it considered undemocratic .
Without extensive concessions beforehand the people would not accept this .
They also denied having enough influence in the south to persuade the people not to use violence .
Given these diametrically opposed positions , it follows that the significance of the aforementioned joint statement of 6 March by all the political parties was not clear .
The presidency told the Government and opposition parties that the European Union was prepared to provide further support for economic and democratic development in Albania , as long as the country made it possible for the EU to do so by restoring order and making internal changes .
If necessary the Union could also provide emergency aid , but I would make the point that Albania has already been receiving considerable aid since 1992 , per head of population actually the highest amount given to any country in Central and Eastern Europe .
The presidency hopes that the progress made in recent days can be consolidated .
President Berisha has indicated his agreement to a government of national unity and early elections and has in the meantime appointed a member of the opposition to form a broad coalition government .
This is an important step towards a more lasting solution .
And I welcome the efforts being made by the Italian Government to foster dialogue between the Albanian Government and the opposition further .
The presidency will liaise closely with its colleagues in the EU and the OSCE to monitor the situation and where possible to take further steps to end this serious and unstable situation .
Madam President , the Council President has given a detailed and clear account , so the Commission can be brief .
Naturally I endorse Mr Patijn 's words and , as you heard , the Commission was part of the missions to Tirana .
I think I can say that this debate is most timely .
Now that a compromise has been reached between the Berisha Government , between President Berisha and the opposition , partly at the prompting of the Council presidency of the European Union , of OSCE missions headed by former Chancellor Vranitsky and missions from the Council of Europe , it is vital now that pressure is brought to bear to ensure that this agreement is indeed adhered to rigorously , both by President Berisha and the opposition parties .
The agreement provides for a transitional government of national unity which is being formed now and subsequently for measures to prepare for general elections in June .
Madam President , I strongly urge the European Parliament to pass a resolution calling on all the parties to act on this hard-won compromise and to adhere strictly to its terms .
And I have my reasons .
We have in the meantime spoken to members of the opposition who have the feeling at present that the rebellion cannot be suppressed unless President Berisha resigns .
That would be a direct breach of the agreed compromise .
Consequently , whatever one may think about the legitimacy of the Berisha Government , or what it has or has not done in the past year , whatever one thinks about the precise motives of the various parties making up the opposition , all of which together concluded this compromise with President Berisha , one thing is certain : if this compromise is not complied with , anarchy will reign in Albania and the rebellion will indeed be uncontrollable .
It is thus for President Berisha and for the opposition to urge the rebels to lay down their arms and re-open the way to normal democratic relations .
If that does not happen , we fear that the future looks black for Albania , and the only ones to suffer will be the people of Albania itself .
Madam President , Mr President of the Council , Commissioner , I cannot but endorse your appeal for support in your endeavours , at least on behalf of my own group , although I am sure I speak for every other group too .
I also agree with you that all parties must now signal their determination to make this compromise succeed .
To that end , it must be made perfectly clear both to President Berisha and to the other parties what will happen if it does not succeed .
I assume you have the full backing of Parliament on this point .
Now is certainly not the time for criticism or for asking whether the signs could or could not have been read in time .
But I should like to state briefly that some factors must make us think , must make us wonder why we are suddenly faced with this desolation in the Balkans .
All of us - I say ' us ' deliberately , for I do not wish this to be perceived as referring to a handful of people - have relied very heavily on one person .
In other areas of European security policy too , it sometimes happens that , when our interlocutor is a person at the head of the State , a person we can trust , we believe that this is enough to make things happen .
Albania has proved that this is not the case .
I was in Albania myself .
I also spoke to President Berisha .
We really have allowed undiluted capitalism - I might almost say exploitive capitalism - to develop after the dictatorship , in the wake of the most inhuman system seen in Europe in recent times .
The so-called freedom under exploitive capitalism - perhaps even in conjunction with the political system - has ultimately impoverished very many people .
I therefore believe it is time to pursue a preventive policy here .
If I consider the explosive situation that could develop if a spark were to fly towards the neighbouring region of Kosovo , which will also be the subject of a resolution here , Mrs Pack having been there with a delegation a short time ago , it is not only legitimate but also absolutely essential to initiate political intervention and to try and guarantee human rights - which is precisely what have been unable to do in recent years in Albania , as elsewhere - and prevent the emergence of huge floods of refugees .
We are all aware of the suffering this causes , and we all know from our own countries how people 's basic attitudes can become a problem when unnecessary influxes of refugees occur .
That is why I believe you have decided on the proper course of action , and we can continue with political intervention if we pursue it vigorously with the support of the entire European continent .
Albania is ablaze and Kosovo is in turmoil .
If the spark flies , there may be nothing left to save .
Let us extinguish the flames of crisis in Albania before it is too late .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in Albania is extremely difficult , as we have just heard .
Unfortunately , many Western press reports from that country have done nothing to clarify the situation but have confined themselves to laying the blame on President Berisha and his Government .
Let me say , however , that the source of the troubles in southern Albania is not political , but lies in the collapse of the pyramid investment schemes and in President Berisha 's attempt last autumn to put an end to Mafia activities , especially in the southern part of Albania .
Many speculators and crooks who were defrauding ordinary people saw their financial success evaporate and exploited the misery of these people for their own ends .
Sadly , the opposition , consisting largely of old Communists - whom not even their political soul mates in the Socialist International would accept as members - also used this situation for the political purposes they had failed to achieve through the ballot box .
I do not share the opinion of the Council representative that everything went wrong last year .
The fact that the local elections in September produced the same results as the elections in March shows how the outcome of the March election is to be judged .
I am not speaking of the irregularities , which were eradicated , and I believe you should also take account of that .
For these reasons , when you speak of the Berisha Administration , you must proceed on the assumption that it is a legitimate government .
The proclamation of the state of emergency has to be understood , or so I believe , in the light of the despotism to which the people of the south have been subjected .
Which Western Government would stand by and let that happen in its own country ?
May I say to the representative of the Council that the dismantling of a legitimate Government with Western assistance is , I believe , unprecedented .
When similar things were happening in Russia , not one of you would have dreamed of cutting Mr Yeltsin adrift .
The idea that the old faces of Communism , who bear responsibility for the lack of democratic traditions , are now supposed to establish democratic conditions under pressure from abroad is grotesque .
The Berisha Government has made considerable progress towards democracy and a market economy , as this Parliament unanimously acknowledged last autumn .
It is therefore wrong to lay the whole blame at President Berisha 's door .
We know full well that he is not without fault .
But the reasons for the terrorism and anarchy in the south are to be found elsewhere .
It must also be said that we have scarcely any conception here of the antagonism which has existed for hundreds of years between various regions and is now erupting into open hostility .
The arrangement that has now been concluded between President Berisha and the opposition parties must be implemented by both sides , and so I cannot accept being approached today by anyone asking me to help ensure that Mr Berisha leaves the country and receives asylum somewhere or other .
I do not believe that this is the proper way to honour an agreement .
The European Union must help to create democratic structures , to promote education and training , to establish market structures backed up by a genuine system of social protection and to promote investment and thus create jobs .
Should the arrangement that has now been reached by President Berisha and the opposition fail to take the heat out of the situation , which I must sadly assume , since the origin of the crisis is not political - a fact we are trying to demonstrate here - an international task force will have to be sent in to restore peace .
There is one point on which I am in full agreement with the Council representative : I too am in favour of a thorough examination of the occurrences in Albania .
Madam President , the chaos prevailing in Albania is not new .
The rising is spreading and moving northwards . On the television we all see people bearing arms - yesterday on the television I saw young children with weapons - and moving around all over the country .
These are very threatening things . At the same time , the government seems increasingly unable to control the situation .
I do not agree with Mrs Pack .
The economic scandal was a reason , but one that was the tip of the iceberg .
The crisis was older than that , the situation was explosive even without it , and we too bear some responsibility .
Sometimes , when I look at some of the Union 's policies , I get the impression that we are like those parents who think their duty is done when they have filled their children 's pockets with money .
They themselves are never there , and they never supervise what that money is used for .
That is what we have done with Albania , to which we granted aid - and very rightly so - and which we must continue to aid if it is to emerge from the present crisis .
But we must maintain a presence and know what happens to the aid we give .
On the other hand , we supported President Berisha , sometimes provocatively so , under the impression - which is something I do not understand at all - that he , as he says , was not formerly a communist .
But President Berisha has not appeared out of nowhere !
The situation in all those countries is peculiar .
We supported him without warning him about certain consequences of his acts , and the results they would have - and we have seen those results .
Now , the chaos is threatening to spread all around . We all know very well how problematic the area is .
We know what is happening in the countries neighbouring Albania , and we know that two of them , which are Member States of the European Union , Greece and Italy , could be facing direct problems . Indeed , Greece shares a common boundary with Albania .
What must happen now ?
We must help , of course , we must talk with all the political powers in the country , because otherwise developments could surprise us greatly .
And this , as the Commissioner said , in a spirit of compromise .
But we must at long last work out a long-term policy and maintain a presence , not just keep paying out .
Madam President , it would take too long - and we do not have the time - to examine the distant causes of the extremely serious and devastating crisis that has hit Albania , the decades of economic weakness and total lack of democratic or even basic structures .
The situation we are confronting is clearly extremely difficult : there is a danger that outbreaks of violence could spread to neighbouring Kosovo , with the risk of mass migrations towards Greece , Italy and other European Union countries .
But it would take too long to go into all this again .
I believe that today Parliament has something to say to the Council and the Commission .
In our view the relations that have been established are correct and timely and the line taken by the Council and the Commission over the past weeks of worsening crisis is a positive one that deserves Parliament 's support .
This line involves three demands , that are also set out in the document to be submitted to Parliament tomorrow for its consideration : firstly , a government of national unity , and it seems to me that this has been achieved with the appointment by the President of the Republic of a prime minister from the opposition ; secondly , the holding of new elections ; thirdly , the undertaking given by the European Union , and by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank , to give financial aid to Albania , subject to full respect for freedom of the press , the reestablishment of democratic rights and economic normalization measures in that country .
We believe these three points are fundamental .
Of course certain countries , such as Greece and Italy , play a particular role , but we want to emphasize that they must do so in the framework of the European Union 's policies .
Madam President , the events taking place in Albania do not come as a bolt from the blue .
In our opinion , at least , they are the result of the policy exercised towards Albania and its people by the governments of some Member States and by the European Union 's bodies .
They are the result of the many-sided aid and support given to Mr Berisha 's antipopulist and autarchic regime .
The elections marked by violence and irregularities , the despoiling of the peoples ' savings and the country 's very economy by the unscrupulous Berisha regime , have not only received no condemnation by the United States and the European Union , but on the contrary , I think they have even had and still have substantive support and approval .
Some of us here , therefore , share responsibility for the explosion of the Albanian people .
Despite this , we are still unable to draw the necessary conclusions and we continue along the same slippery path , trying to solve the problem by suppressing the popular rising and by comprehensive and all-round aid to Mr Berisha .
We cannot understand that in Albania there is now a new reality imposed by the people 's rebellion , which is already finding political expression .
Madam President , Albania 's people are up in arms and are calling for two things : Mr Berisha 's departure and the return of their money .
If the European Union really wants to show solidarity towards the Albanian people , it must adopt and demand promotion of the following four points , which have already been stated with related amendments :
First , the Berisha regime must come to an end .
The electoral process must establish a new President and a new Parliament .
Second , the people rebelling in the South must be represented in the political processes , through their political representatives .
Third , the leader of the Socialist Party and all political detainees must be set free immediately .
Fourth , generous military and economic aid must be provided at once , aiming both to compensate the citizens and to strengthen Albania 's economy .
Finally , I would like to express my complete opposition to any plan for the intervention of international military forces in Albania , a thing which could lead to unforeseen situations all over the Balkan area .
Madam President , we are facing a truly dramatic situation , with the risk of civil war in Albania , a risk caused not only by the collapse of the pyramid investment schemes that we discussed last month too , but also by the reactions of a government , Berisha 's government , which has little by little proved to be more a regime than a government , reacting with authoritarian measures to the popular demonstrations by the Albanians and ending with intimidation of the opposition press , a government whose representative , Berisha , no longer represents the people , as we saw from those demonstrations , and which had already shown signs of lack of democracy when we condemned the elections that were held in a manner that was anything but democratic .
Despite all this , he found nothing better to do than to have himself re-elected President of the Republic for another five-year term .
In face of this situation we must not forget either that a month ago we as the European Parliament had expressed our serious concern : the day after those elections , which were rigged , we expressed our deep concern about the consequences this could have , consequences which would , to say the least , prejudice the democratic dialogue between majority and opposition .
As early as 8 February 1994 , the Member who preceded me in this Parliamentary seat , Alexander Langer , stated that Albania was not yet a normal democratic state , that ordinary democratic life was not yet fully developed , and called on all the European Union institutions to confront this situation , for if we are not able to confront a situation such as the Albanian one , how can we hope to confront all the problems of Eastern Europe as a whole ?
For these reasons , the European Union , the Council and the Commission must undertake to promote a new détente based on the formation of a new government , on new elections held under the aegis of the OSCE ; we also propose the appointment of a special Council envoy for south-eastern Europe to monitor the situation and to represent the European Union there on a permanent basis .
As has been said , if this crisis widens , it could have disastrous consequences for Kosovo , for Macedonia , and ignite the entire Balkan area .
Clearly , Parliament cannot fail to support and approve of the attempts to reach a political settlement to the civil tensions presently afflicting Albania .
The Group of the European Radical Alliance therefore supports the process of national reconciliation agreed upon by the various political forces in Albania ; however , this process seems as yet to have failed to convince the Albanian public , which has risen up against the outrage perpetrated against it by the so-called pyramid saving scheme , a demonstration of all the worst excesses of a free economy .
Furthermore , we have learned that within the last few hours the anti-government insurgents have apparently begun to march on Tirana .
Might we take this opportunity to question the relevance and validity of European Union policy , which has already been found lacking on several occasions in this region ?
We had felt that the collapse of communism would automatically lead to democracy .
The reality is that it is the hardest possible way of learning democracy , amid all the after-effects of communism .
We had also believed that all anti-communists would necessarily be democrats .
The reality is that we had so ruthlessly abandoned half of Europe to its fate for forty-five years that the only anticommunists whose voices could still be heard were , in some cases , the wilder variety of liberal economists or adherents of some form of ethnic or religious obscurantism , or even autocrats - unrepentant former communists in many cases .
Today , there are three political conclusions we can draw from the Albanian crisis .
The first , emphasized by Mrs Daskalaki , is that we must stop allocating European aid without worrying about the use made of it in societies that are ill prepared for liberalization .
The second is that we should as a matter of urgency establish a European military force capable of intervening , at least , in crisis situations arising within Europe .
The third , more general , is that we should stop bickering and push ahead with the enlargement of the Union without which Europe will remain an amputee , cut off from half of itself , and that in order to achieve that we must encourage regional regroupings instead of imposing a totally unbalanced procedure of dialogue on weak and isolated nations .
Madam President , once again , sadly , the European Union has bungled , as it has done in so many cases .
The mistake it makes is always the same : unable to find a united and effective political line rapidly , the Union hopes to make up for its political deficit by opening its purse , but money alone does not help resolve problems and sometimes even exacerbates them .
It happened in Bosnia , in Mostar , in Zaire , and it is happening in Albania today .
In October , when the first signs of the Albanian crisis emerged very clearly , Europe responded with : ' let 's give Albania some money ' , i.e. , give it to the Berisha regime , closing its eyes to the obvious abuses and electoral rigging by the president .
Since then , in the space of a little more than four months some ECU 500m have poured into Albania , the most generous per capita aid the European Union has given .
It hoped that this injection of funds would stem the tide of the crisis , whereas it actually precipitated it ; when the crisis worsened a fortnight ago , the European Union merely mouthed words and did not even manage to convene the summit of the foreign ministers of the 15 called for by Greece and Italy .
A week after the start of the insurrection , a technical committee met - note that this was a meeting not of ministers but of ordinary officials of the EU Member States - to identify a common line of action for the Political Committee .
At present the Council seems to be flying a little higher ; what I have said represents a further condemnation of the lack of a common foreign policy ; in its absence , we cannot talk of Europe or of integration .
Madam President , the President-in-Office told us that we have granted vast amounts of aid to Albania and indeed over the past five years we have given that country 450 million ECU .
The question is , what good did that do to the Albanian people , and of course to us .
I think I can tell you : it created a savage and barbarous capitalism in that country , which has incited its citizens to rebellion .
And secondly , we created an autarchic and anti-democratic system .
Furthermore , between 1992 and the present day , there has been an orgy of arms and drugs smuggling in that country .
We also know about the economic structures that were created , the pyramid .
Over that period , those five years , we devoted very little time to what should have engaged our attention , namely unemployment , the flight of hundreds of citizens to neighbouring countries , and of course , we did nothing about the elections in May 1996 .
We Socialists at that time called for the elections to be repeated . Unfortunately , you took no heed of us .
And without any reason , we accepted that law about genocide , which excluded dozens of opposition politicians .
Even today , we still tolerate the imprisonment of Fatos Nano .
I think we should call for the immediate release of the only person who could probably still restrain those who have rebelled .
The events in Albania have shown us how difficult things are in Balkan Europe .
And I think there is one positive factor : the Presidency has acted correctly .
It listened to the countries with experience and a prolonged presence in the area - Greece and Italy - and operated effectively .
I think the Commission 's actions have also been positive .
However , we must persist .
The problem is indeed a political one .
If Mr Berisha really loves his country , he will have to let others in his party and from the other parties govern that country , and he ought to leave calmly and quietly so that the Albanian people can solve their own problems .
Madam President , I must say that the slogan we all ought to adopt , not just Parliament but the Council and the Commission as well , is ' not another Bosnia ' .
The experience , the bitter experience we all have from the way we handled matters there should lead us to act differently from the way we acted in Bosnia .
I listened carefully to what the President-in-Office of the Council said , and of course all that is correct and we agree , but he proposed nothing specific .
My question , to which I would appreciate an answer , is this : is there a mechanism ?
In other words , has the Council decided to create a mechanism for the solution of the crisis , which is now being applied and has specific mandates to take decisions on subjects related to the solution of the crisis in Albania at a political level ?
And is the same thing happening on the part of the Commission , which manages the economic aspects and of course includes a Commissioner who has proved that he knows how to deal with external issues ?
That is the kind of information we want , because here in Parliament , as tomorrow 's vote will I hope show , at this stage we are avoiding the adoption of positions and any criticism of either side , considering that the situation in Albania is so fluid that the most important thing is to be able to maintain some level of political dialogue .
I call upon the Council not to rest easy on any of these matters .
It cannot be left to Italy and Greece to solve that problem .
The Council must create a framework within which those two countries can operate - as Mr La Malfa too said earlier - the Commission , and above all the Council must address the issue .
Inactivity must cease , the Ministers must be convened , to create a group that will work on a solution to the crisis and will remain constantly vigilant and make its presence felt in Albania .
Parliament will I hope decide to send to Albania the Delegation on Relations with South-Eastern Countries for an on-the-spot investigation to keep the European Parliament informed .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the dramatic events of the past seven weeks , during which Albania has been sliding ever deeper towards breakdown and chaos , as a result of the economic disaster caused by the swindle perpetrated by the finance companies more than ten years ago , which has put thousands of families into penury , are being observed with great attention and concern by the international community and in particular the neighbouring states , Greece and Italy , which risk an influx of waves of refugees whose circumstances could be exploited by criminals .
Mrs Pack is right to call on us not to make hasty or partisan judgments , such as some I have heard in this Chamber .
President Sali Berisha agreed with the opposition on guidelines for a political solution and managed to achieve an agreement on setting up a government of national reconciliation made up of all the political forces and working towards national peace ; at the time , the opening of a dialogue was greeted with shouts of joy and of rage by the rebel towns .
Under the agreement , the president called on the parliament to pass a new law granting a general amnesty to all civilians or soldiers who took part in the revolt following the collapse of the finance companies , provided they handed in their weapons , and announced new elections within two months , monitored by international organizations , as already happened in the last administrative elections , which were proved to have been fair .
He also called for financial aid for reviving the economy and humanitarian aid for the hardest-hit parts of Albania .
In Valona there is currently no light or water and living conditions , especially from the health point of view , give cause for concern .
In the light of all this it is therefore necessary to make the utmost effort to approach this delicate problem in a balanced , calm and unbiased manner in order to resolve the situation and continue the process towards further democratization , paying particular attention to the cultural integration of this important part of the Mediterranean basin .
Madam President , it is great to hear that a transitional government has been agreed , that elections will be held within two months thanks to European pressure , but despite this the news reported by the media is not exactly good .
I am afraid that civil war is imminent and I wonder how the Council and Commission and indeed all of us can prevent that .
Anyway , I am glad that the Council President laid it on the line to President Berisha last weekend .
Berisha 's authoritarian and undemocratic behaviour is one of the reasons for this crisis .
The Council President was right to warn him against using force and quite properly urged him to respect press freedom and democracy , an admonition which he will probably ignore , as observers expressly complained he did at the time of the elections .
Madam President , the Union is a big neighbour of Albania and its biggest provider of aid .
Per head of population it is the Albanians who have expected and received the most from Europe .
I am curious to know how these promises for the future will stop the Albanian Government and the Albanians themselves from cutting each others ' throats so that we end up with a situation of a little country with big poverty .
The Union must remind all the parties where their responsibilities lie , must show military restraint and point towards democracy .
Let us hope this is not the last time we get to talk about Albania , but that next time we do so on a positive note .
Madam President , I listened both to the President-in-Office and the Commissioner , and I hope that all they told us will take place and progress in the best possible way .
I would just like to express once more three minor reservations , because if I remember rightly , we had the same debate about the Bosnian situation .
Firstly , are you taking account of the complete split that exists at this time in Albania between the central political scene and its machinations , and the armed insurgents devoid of leadership ?
Today , Commissioner , as we speak , they are just 40 km from Tirana .
Secondly , are you aware of Mr Berisha 's complete untrustworthiness within and outside the country , in economic matters , and in every respect ?
He shares the blame for the pyramids . He did nothing to stop the pyramids , as you told us .
He shares complicity in the highest degree .
How can you contemplate any sort of agreement with him ?
And thirdly , unless there is some promise on our part , not from the Albanian regime which is completely untrustworthy , that those who lost their money in the robbery of the century - 35-40 % of Albania 's national income - will get back at least their starting capital , do not expect any optimistic outcome in Albania .
Madam President , I too regard it as a notable success of the European Union 's recent initiative that the majority and the opposition have accepted the path proposed to them , the path of agreement , of national reconciliation in two important points : a more united government and the announcement of new elections .
At the same time I consider it regrettable that the Dutch presidency , in its recent statement of position , did not refer to Parliament 's February resolution which foresaw the risks of the situation in Albania and pointed the way forward by agreement .
Let me add that , unfortunately , the agreement on the formation of the new government was reached with some delay , in a situation in which the two parties no longer control the country ; we must be aware of this because otherwise we run the risk of discussing an imaginary situation .
This aspect must therefore be firmly underlined and brought to the attention of the Commission and the Member State governments .
We must realise that there are not just two forces in play in Albania now , but that there is a third force , the rebels , weapons in hand , whose violent action we have rightly condemned and must continue to condemn .
However we know that this force , which will be difficult to silence by the agreement , does not regard as sufficient the two points of the agreement between the majority and the opposition to which we referred ; it also demands the disappearance of Berisha from the scene .
So new complications can still develop in this situation .
We must not think we have reached a definitive political solution .
We have merely opened the way for a possible political solution which , among others , must be pursued immediately so that the government can be formed rapidly .
Further steps will have to taken towards effective stabilization .
I believe that the European Union must intervene directly and play a major mediating role , seeking also to make contact with the third force in play , the armed rebels , in order to persuade through negotiation to lay down their arms .
Throughout this phase we must of course coordinate economic action with political action .
As Mr La Malfa said , economic action and political conditions must go hand in hand .
I also believe that the Albanian question should lead us to reflect on the limits of monetarism , which was quite clearly and evidently a fiasco here , and to realise the need for political action to re-establish a Europe that is political and not just monetary .
Madam President , I too believe that this Parliament must not turn away from the essential question , which is to restore a minimum of authority in Albania so that order can be restored in a situation of crisis that risks sparking off a dangerous civil war .
I agree with Mr Occhetto that there is a third force in play .
At present the rebels control 13 towns and have occupied a quarter of Albania and they are in possession of a large quantity of arms , so that Albania risks becoming a large arms depot without any guards , as one member of the opposition put it .
The situation risks going beyond the control of both Berisha and the national coalition government .
So I cannot agree with Mr Occhetto when he says that the disappearance of Berisha from the scene could ease the situation .
Let me draw your attention to a comment made by a member of the opposition , namely that at this moment Berisha is essential to the restoration of a minimum of law and order , which would otherwise become more difficult , and that the weapons stolen by the nine thousand rebels in the north could lead to a risk of civil war between north and south , along the lines of ancient linguistic and tribal divisions .
So what is needed is to bring all the components together .
I agree with the proposal by Commissioner van den Broek to try to create a minimum of legality , starting from the agreement reached between Berisha and the new opposition government and the job entrusted to a representative of the Socialist Party who , coming from the south , could try to finalize this agreement .
The European Union and the Council must take all the appropriate measures ; in this context I note that the WEU , when it met in Athens , expressed its own practical position on the question .
As the President said , we must not only observe events but act with far more determination to achieve at least the minimum objective of avoiding the present serious risk of civil war and the breakup of Albania .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President of the Council , I believe that what has been greeted as a success for Europe , the very fragile truce achieved in Tirana , is nothing of the kind .
Indeed , the European institutions should cry mea culpa for their inertia up until today , leaving aside the disbursement of a whole range of economic aid , which was in many ways useless and at times schizophrenic : first we abandoned Albania politically , then we elected Berisha a national and international hero , then we dropped him on the grounds of fraud and undue pressure during the elections .
Today we should not be surprised to see the situation suddenly worsen : the factions are out of control , out of any kind of control , either by Berisha or by his opponents . Nor do I believe in the genuine nature of this revolt against what was the culmination of the famous financial fraud ; rather I believe that , in the south at least , political , partypolitical factors in a certain part of the country were at play .
I therefore believe that at this point Europe must assume its responsibilities for the future , especially for what was not done in Albania .
We should not be surprised if the various situations in the Balkans worsen politically and then degenerate into civil war .
That is why it is so very important for Europe to say mea culpa and to conduct itself in a different manner .
Let us follow the example of those who invest in peace , in stability and in human rights !
Madam President , in my view the compromise reached is , at this point , the only instrument that could put an end to the violence .
I therefore join in the Commission 's appeal to Parliament - and will do so in the resolution tomorrow - to press for its implementation .
It is true that the riots have not ended : in reality there is no truce , there is simply an agreement that needs to be implemented and there is the risk of Kosovo becoming embroiled .
I agree with Mr Occhetto that we need to take direct measures for the south of Albania , as the Italian government is endeavouring to do through the presence of our ambassador in the south .
I believe that Europe therefore has every reason to attend to this aspect , in order to put an end to the riots and help the country hold new elections .
In my view the European Parliament 's main task is to bring about the announcement of new , orderly elections . We all know these would be the first orderly elections given that - and we too are guilty here - we supported a government and a president although we knew the election had been rigged ; we decided on this approach , this support , in the name of monetarism and financial commitments .
We made mistakes , yes , but we must not make new ones : we must therefore encourage orderly elections .
Let us see whether , with the direct support of certain governments - I am thinking of the Greek and Italian governments - and a major commitment by the European Union , we manage to make the necessary contribution , for otherwise , as has been said , there is a risk of civil war .
Madam President , the Members who spoke before me have indicated that the situation in Albania has gone completely out of control .
An undemocratic regime , combined with unscrupulous economic exploitation , has reduced the entire population of that country to destitution .
Although it is impossible not to sympathize with these people , and although their sense of despair is more than understandable , any resort to arms must be clearly and roundly condemned .
Civil war would be no solution in this situation .
It would only further exacerbate the crisis .
A way out of this dilemma must be found now .
The escalation of violence has to be halted .
It is good that the first move has been made to resolve this crisis together so that democracy can finally be given a chance in Albania too .
The creation of an all-party coalition and the announcement of democratic elections are first steps along this path .
We very much hope that all parties will now comply with the agreement , but these are all only first steps .
What is more important is that the new Government that is subsequently elected and the new Parliament should also make it their duty to implement democratic and economic reforms .
It is obvious that people in Albania will only be prepared to lay down their arms if they are offered a democratic and prosperous future .
The European Union bears responsibility not only for the development of Albania but also for the development of the entire region .
It is regrettable that in recent years almost every time we in the European Parliament have spoken about developments in the Balkans it has been in connection with crises .
Although we have concluded cooperation agreements with many countries in the region and even association agreements with some of them , and although we are trying , through the PHARE programme , to give active support to the reform processes in those countries , developments there have repeatedly taken us by surprise .
As this debate draws to a close , the request I should therefore like to make to the Commission is that in future we , that is the Council , the Commission and Parliament , discuss how democratic and economic reforms in those countries can be better and more effectively supported and how we can target the PHARE programme more selectively .
I believe we can help the population more effectively in that way than by merely appearing as firefighters whenever there is a crisis .
Madam President , we face a situation of the utmost gravity .
Neither President Berisha nor his government are blameless in the existing situation .
As you know , the OSCE / ODIHR report criticized the recent elections .
Everyone agrees the failure of the investment pyramid-schemes has been a tragic occurrence for numerous Albanians who have lost their life savings .
The government has allowed this to happen .
But we must get this matter into perspective .
There are still in the country numerous individuals who are members of the Hoxha regime .
There is strong evidence that in the south of the country there are links with the Albanian mafia , with their drug smuggling operations to Italy and elsewhere .
I remind you that one of the main reasons behind the problems arising in the town of Vlorë was the impounding of 100 high-powered speedboats , many used in trans-Adriatic smuggling operations .
The EU must show understanding of the situation .
More than ever there is a need for a cohesive approach amongst all Member State governments and international organizations to this problem .
President Berisha has shown some belated wisdom in bringing an all-party coalition government , and now a socialist prime minister , into office .
He needs to be supported , not castigated , but he , for his part , must be helped to recapture the confidence of the Albanian people by showing absolute respect for the law and the constitution , enforcement of human rights and the holding of fair elections .
These should be carefully monitored with assistance from the European Parliament amongst others and the media , too , should be supervised by the European Institute for the Media .
The implications of civil war and escalating violence are of immense and imminent proportions , not just because of Albania itself , but because Albania is a powder keg .
In Kosovo , already a tense situation , over 80 % of the population are of Albanian origin .
In Macedonia a substantial minority are Albanian .
Both these countries could become involved .
Neighbouring Greece can be sucked into the problem .
Madam President , to conclude : we need to see a cohesive , balanced and strong approach to the plight of Albania .
Disunity , delay and weakness can set the Balkans alight .
This must not happen .
We cannot allow another Bosnia through lack of resolve : we must set up a crisis mechanism ; we must have a single body for dealing with the situation .
We hope to see action upon these things .
Madam President , the European Union 's policy in Albania , with its support for Berisha , was a mistake .
If the Council had heeded the European Parliament when Fatos Nano was arrested and had done something about that , if it had listened to the European Parliament after the irregular elections , if it had taken note of the European Parliament 's resolution last month and acted immediately , or even if it had kept its distance from the Berisha regime like the United States , things would perhaps have been better today .
This legitimacy of the Berisha regime cannot now continue .
The President-in-Office of the Council cannot come here and say ' yes , we are calling for new free elections , because the previous ones for the Albanian Parliament were not free ' , and then accept a President who was elected by that illegal Parliament under conditions of martial law .
And that is not all .
Mr Berisha must go , and the sooner the better , because that is the basic demand of all those who live in the South of the country and because it could bring an end to the process of civil conflict and unrest in Albania .
With this in mind , I call upon the President-in-Office , if he wishes to be constructive , to say ' yes , the Dutch government is prepared to give all the necessary guarantees and immediate political asylum to Mr Berisha , so that the situation in Albania can be unblocked ' .
And one more question : are the Council and the Commission going to raise with the present Albanian government the issue of freedom for the political detainees , and especially Fatos Nano ?
I would like an answer from Mr Van der Broek .
Following my detailed statement I will repeat that the presidency and the Council are monitoring the situation in Albania hour by hour .
In so doing we call on the EU embassies in Tirana and we maintain very close contacts with the governments of the European Union Countries most directly affected , in Rome and Athens .
At the same time we are continuing unrelentingly with our initiatives vis a vis the Berisha Government and the other political parties .
Our parallel objective is the restoration of public order in the immediate future and that can only be done if we pursue our second objective : the credibility of the Government must be restored by means of democratic reforms and elections within a period of a few months .
It is primarily in the interests of the Albanian people that total anarchy should not take over in Albania .
Secondly , it is important for the region as a whole that this most unfortunate situation should not produce a ripple effect .
In answer to the previous speaker 's specific question about political prisoners , I can confirm that the subject was raised by the Council President during his visit to Tirana .
Madam President , I am happy to echo the words of the Council presidency and would add that in Albania the fuse is smouldering .
The explosive situation there is a threat not only to Albania 's own people but also to her neighbours and the whole of the region .
So I think we have to ask ourselves whether it is not time to consider how far President Berisha and the previous Government and indeed the opposition parties or others are responsible for the serious acts of violence we have seen .
Whether it is not time to consider and to press , collectively and with one voice , for the advice which we ourselves gave to the President and opposition parties that they should form a government of national unity and announce elections , whether it is not time to insist forcefully that the political compromise reached should be carried out as it stands .
Since that is the only chance which the people of Albania will in fact have in the short term of having a democratic say in how their future should be and also of coming to terms with the past .
Lastly , Madam President , surely we must see to it that the parties to the compromise , the parties which signed up to this agreement , not only carry it out rigorously and faithfully , but also that each of them calls on the rebels to lay down their arms and put an end to the violence , expressing their opposition via the ballot box rather than the gun .
If Council , Commission and European Parliament can send that powerful message a last chance will perhaps remain .
If it does not work we shall have nothing to reproach ourselves with , but it seems to me that efforts to undermine the compromise which we ourselves recommended does no service to the credibility of the European Union .
Madam President , a number of speakers have referred to the coup d 'etat developing in Albania .
A number of organizations - the OSCE , the European Union , the Council of Europe - have been to Tirana and have engaged the government in discussions .
What concerns me if there is a developing crisis that may have an effect on other countries , is that there should be some mechanism for crisis management between these organizations and including defence organizations like NATO and WEU .
Can the Council confirm that at the meeting on Saturday of foreign ministers this point of crisis management and coordination - contingency planning - will be on the agenda in case the situation gets worse ?
Albania does not feature as such on the agenda for the informal meeting of foreign ministers , but it will certainly be discussed .
Given the current situation I think the ministers will be forced to consider it .
I can neither confirm nor deny that military preparations have been made by NATO , the Western European Union or any other organization .
I do not think it helps to clarify the position of the European Union countries if I speculate on military intervention in a civil war .
That seems to me one of the last priorities which we in Europe should have .
Madam President , I just want to remind the President-in-Office of one question . He could answer me with one word .
I asked him whether the Presidency has taken or is taking an interest in the release of all the political detainees , including the leader of the largest opposition party , the Socialist Party , Mr Fatos Nano .
I would like an answer from the President-in-Office as before , particularly about Mr Fatos Nano .
I thought I had already covered the honourable member 's question .
The matter was raised by Mr van Mierlo during his visit to Tirana .
This gentleman , Mr Fatos Nano , was also expressly discussed .
The debate is closed .
I have received seven motions for resolutions tabled on the basis of Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Welcome
On behalf of Parliament , I welcome a delegation of Members of Parliament from ten Mediterranean States which are signatory to the Barcelona Convention .
We welcome them .
I am sure you would also want me to say to them on your behalf how much importance our Parliament attaches to increased co-operation with the Mediterranean countries .
We know that this offers us a prospect of stability and peace , and this Parliament is devoting as much effort to consolidating its relations with the States of the southern Mediterranean seaboard as it is to strengthening its relations with the eastern States .
We are well aware that peace depends on this balance .
Welcome , ladies and gentlemen !
( Applause )
Follow-up to the Barcelona Conference
The next item is the report ( A4-0027 / 97 ) by Mr Sakellariou , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the joint report by the Presidency of the Council and the Commission on Mediterranean policy - follow-up to the Barcelona Conference ( 7987 / 96 - C4-0414 / 96 ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , just under 16 months after the Barcelona Conference of 27 and 28 November 1995 and a good month before the follow-up conference in Malta , we are to debate in the House today a report which seeks to evaluate the results of the first Barcelona Conference and to put forward new proposals and requirements for the follow-up conference , which will be held in Malta this time .
I should like to start , Madam President , by saying how delighted I am that today 's debate is taking place in the presence of our fellow parliamentarians from the Mediterranean countries with which we founded this special EuroMediterranean partnership in Barcelona .
I believe we are experiencing the start of a special form of parliamentary cooperation that can enrich the Barcelona process and generate fresh momentum to the quest for peace , security , economic development and understanding between our cultures for the benefit of our peoples on every side of the Mediterranean .
I bid a warm welcome to our colleagues in the gallery .
In the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy and in the Committee on External Economic Relations , as well as in almost every relevant delegation and joint committee , we have been holding detailed discussions on the various aspects of our Mediterranean policy .
I have received a wealth of suggestions and support from other Members . I should like to thank my colleague and friend , Giorgos Dimitrakopoulos , whose name stands for many others and whose opinion on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations provided very valuable additions to the report before us .
Ladies and gentlemen , the results of Barcelona , in the form of the unanimously adopted Barcelona Declaration and programme of activities , but also the results of the work that has been carried out since the conference , are particularly encouraging .
Especially in the domain of the political and security dialogue , which has become one of the main pillars of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership , impressive results has been achieved .
A list of confidence-building measures has been drawn up and a plan of action devised , which serves to guide the work of the competent departments of the Commission .
But I believe that the core element in this domain is the formulation of a Euro-Mediterranean charter for peace and stability , through which dialogue and crisis-prevention are to be institutionalized .
That is precisely what this Parliament is seeking too .
For this reason I believe that , in our debates in the European Parliament as well as in our dialogue in the framework of the parliamentary Euro-Mediterranean forum , this charter should serve as a focal point .
A whole series of other valuable proposals in this domain are on the table .
It is the joint responsibility of Parliament , the Governments and , of course , the Commission as well to ensure that laudable declarations of intent are turned into specific practical policies , serving to promote peace and security for all nations of the region .
From the huge catalogue of tasks for the Euro-Mediterranean partnership , I should like to refer in particular to one point that I personally believe to be extremely important .
Migration has always played a prominent role in cultural exchanges between the two sides of the Mediterranean .
That will not change in the future either .
But the increasing economic disparities between the countries which people are leaving and those to which they are migrating , compounded by unresolved employment and social problems in the latter , have resulted in a combination of cheap populism and crass racism from intolerant die-hards , which has given rise to increasing discrimination against immigrants .
The position of the European Parliament against racism and xenophobia is not only well known but also exemplary .
It should serve as the basis for a policy of non-discrimination within the scope of the new partnership .
We need a contractual framework for regulated immigration , and we must formulate together - a task which I regard as eminently suitable for a parliamentary Euro-Mediterranean forum - a charter of immigrants ' rights , in which the differing interests of a governmental and humanitarian nature would be harmonized .
I shall conclude now by taking the liberty of switching to Spanish , in order to address Vice-President Marín in his own language :
In conclusion , I would like to thank the Vice-President of the Commission , Manuel Marín , for his support and his personal commitment to Mediterranean policy .
Your staff and you yourself have always given us inestimable support .
I hope this fruitful cooperation will continue and indeed increase in the future .
Ladies and gentlemen , I look forward to the debate on my report and thank you for your attention .
Madam President , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Sakellariou on a very comprehensive report .
I would also like to join with him in the congratulations to Commissioner Marín for the efforts he has made in relation to this subject .
Also we must not forget the initiative taken by the Spanish presidency which got the Barcelona Conference off the ground .
Clearly in the situation following the fall of the Berlin Wall , where we are looking at security in a broader framework of political , economic and social stability , the Mediterranean initiative is of vital importance if we are to maintain and build the security of the region .
However , there are a number of observations I should like to make .
Firstly , there is no doubt , despite all the efforts contained in the Mediterranean process , that unless we guarantee the peace process in the Middle East , everything we do will be undermined .
So we must keep the importance of that peace process very much in our minds .
Secondly , it is important that Member States of the European Union show their commitment to this process by ratifying the association agreements which have already been agreed ; and I underline the importance of Amendment No 14 which Mr Sakellariou tabled .

Thirdly , what governments can do is by its nature limited .
The key to success in this initiative will come if we attract private finance .
It is therefore incumbent on the recipient countries - if I can call them that - to ensure that there is a proper legal and political framework to attract capital .
In particular , we must ensure respect for intellectual property rights , appropriate tax regimes , effective competition policy and maximum transparency in the relationship between public and private institutions .
For our own part , we must place much emphasis in the assistance we are giving on ensuring that the proper framework is established , in particular in relation to banking and the finance sectors .
Fourthly , we must intensify the dialogue on human rights .
This is not a bolt-on addition .
It is the essential requirement of modern economic expansion .
Freedom is both a political concept and an economic one which is vital for the development of the region .
Fifthly , we must intensify the cooperation on water supplies .
That represents a great challenge but also a great opportunity , and I will be interested to hear the Commission 's response to Mr Sakellariou 's suggestion of a European Mediterranean water agency , which seems to me to go beyond the Declaration of Marseilles of November of last year .
Sixthly , we must intensify regional cooperation in order to ensure that countries are working very closely together so that they become very much inter-related .
Finally , it is important that we develop greater mutual understanding .
We need to explain what the European Union is trying to achieve with the single currency project and with enlargement to Central and Eastern Europe .
We also have to explain to our citizens what we are trying to achieve with the Mediterranean project because , as Mr Sakellariou has already indicated , there are many misunderstandings about our aims .
Therefore we need to increase publicity about the objectives of the European Union .
Madam President , I wish to join colleagues in welcoming this report and congratulating Mr Sakellariou .
I took the opportunity of looking at the list of speakers in this debate and I see that the overwhelming majority are from southern Member States .
I wish to say , therefore , that the success of the Barcelona process is not just important to the south of Europe , but to all of Europe .
My own country has been fascinated by developments in Mediterranean policy for many centuries .
This is a process in which the whole of Europe is engaged with the whole of the Mediterranean .
Secondly , I wish to echo those who have supported the parliamentary dimension of this process .
It is right that we should honour and welcome the work done by ministers , Commissioners and civil servants .
But if this process is to be a success , it has to be a meeting of minds and a meeting of peoples , and that needs to involve the parliaments of the states .
In the next two days we will try , with the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy and our distinguished guests , to work out what the framework of a Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Forum would look like .
Finally , I welcome what might be called the holistic approach of the Barcelona process - its multidimensional nature .
The problems of the Mediterranean demonstrate , more dramatically than perhaps anywhere else , that foreign affairs is not just a series of unconnected and unpredictable crises .
Those things which we call politics , which we call foreign affairs , respond to underlying trends .
We know that demographic , environmental and economic issues interrelate to produce the political problems and the migratory flows to which Mr Sakellariou referred .
They build on the complexity of the historic cultural legacy of many millennia of interaction in the Mediterranean .
It is perhaps dangerous for a politician to advise other politicians to study history , because we all have our favourite national historians .
However , I recommend that anyone involved in this process should study the work of that great French historian Braudel and his classic study on the Mediterranean at the time of Philip II .
There they will see clearly laid out the interrelated system of culture and economics that is and always has been the Mediterranean .
Mr President , I warmly thank Mr Sakellariou for his good work .
His report fully recognizes the strategic importance of the Mediterranean .
I too welcome our friends and colleagues from countries on the other shore of the Mediterranean .
I believe that it is absolutely essential to shift the balance of European policy towards the south because the Mediterranean area is particularly vulnerable to the emergence of a new wall of incomprehension between north and south , between the Christian and the Muslim world , between the rich and the poor world .
This has to be avoided and in this context the Barcelona process is most important , as is partnership with the countries on the other shore of the Mediterranean .
I also agree with Mr Dimitrakopoulos when he says that genuine Islam must not be regarded as fanaticism or intolerance but is to be regarded as a culture , based on tolerance and respect for the opinions of others .
If we are to make progress along the road towards political partnership , I believe there are several important preconditions , among them the fact that Europe must become a unitary political interlocutor that is able in some way to bear its great burden of freedom and democracy , as reflected in the Convention on Human Rights , the Court of Justice , the principles of the rule of law and democracy , pluralism and tolerance .
I am concerned about an economic aspect .
Although a champion of the free market and economic liberalization , I believe that in the case of agricultural products we cannot move from protectionism and international agreements of a dirigiste nature to the liberalization of trade .
That would be extremely detrimental to Europe and in particular to the European countries bordering the Mediterranean .
Mr President , the follow-up to the Barcelona Conference has to be the next step in the dynamic process of rapprochement between Europe and its neighbours around the Mediterranean Sea .
But the prevailing climate is not calculated to raise expectations overmuch .
The Middle Eastern peace process is in trouble , and that in turn affects the Barcelona process .
The aspirations voiced in Mr Sakellariou 's report are very laudable , but I maintain that they are not very realistic .
We have to move forward step by step with concrete plans and not lapse into fine speeches .
Regrettably , our Group thinks that many of the proposed amendments to the Sakellariou report go too far .
Of course this House must give a lead and ultimately the OSCE model must be practicable and the Euro-Mediterranean stability pact has to be an interesting idea .
But first of all we should concentrate on rounding off the bilateral agreements with our partners .
And the Barcelona process is useless unless we are consistent .
For example , the recent statement by a number of senior Christian Democrats that the Union is a Christian community , so that Turkey , for example , cannot join , will have hit a nerve throughout the Mediterranean region .
And I totally repudiate that statement .
The Union does not judge people by that kind of outdated criteria and we must insist on respect for human rights and democracy and make it clear to Turkey , for example , what criteria she must meet if she is to join .
Those criteria are valid both for Turkey and for a number of other countries in the region .
Mr President , supporting the Barcelona process today means deepening it , in the first instance politically , where Europe must build genuinely autonomous regional security with its Mediterranean partners , by reducing to the maximum the presence of powers alien to the area - remembering the United States bases and fleet - and by making promotion of democracy and respect for human rights the fundamental aim - remembering Turkey , Algeria and Morocco . We must also implement measures to promote trust , stability and conventional and nuclear disarmament , which calls for a regional organization based on similar principles and procedures to the OSCE .
Security in the Mediterranean will be impossible without adequately solving a number of open conflicts , completing the Middle East peace process , self-determination for the people of Western Sahara , and reunification of Cyprus .
Barcelona cannot go against itself .
The Union must sponsor economic and commercial integration in the region , but not on the basis of free trade at all costs , which ends up destroying the quality of life of the working classes or financial support to International Monetary Fund adjustment plans , but , on the contrary , promoting models of sustainable development from which to reduce problems like debt , promoting gender equality and youth employment , combatting the deep causes of migratory flows , which must not and cannot be tackled by policing or restrictive and quasi-xenophobic frontier policies , and restoring an extraordinarily degraded environment .
All that should be present in the Barcelona process and sponsored in the next meeting in Malta together with three other measures : promotion of cultural understanding between the north and south coasts , introduction of mechanisms to involve the public , and the creation of a permanent interparliamentary forum with powers of consultation and proposal .
If all that is fulfilled , the Union will be laying the foundations of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation in which all participate , which is essential for its own stability and which is not perceived as a mere strategy to gain market quotas or impose neo-colonial ideas .
Mr President , I want to point out that many of us had expected rather more of the Barcelona Conference , such as a shift of balance southwards of European Union policy , which is all too often aimed rather more towards the eastern countries .
Perhaps one of the limitations of the Barcelona Conference is that it demonstrates the absence of a genuine European foreign policy .
In fact it has been concerned mainly with creating a large free trade area without constructing a solid and durable system of wider and more structured forms of regional association .
The causes lie in the fact that participation in the system is limited only to 12 African coastal states , excluding Libya , Albania and the countries of former Yugoslavia , that the aim is to promote the free movement of goods while in fact hindering the movement of persons , and that there is no genuine democratic dialogue between all the components of civil society on both shores of the Mediterranean .
However , the Barcelona Conference was a first step , which we cannot dismiss , towards the necessary approach to relations between the Mediterranean countries .
For that reason we Greens endorse the report by Mr Sakellariou and congratulate him on his excellent work .
In particular , we regard as most important the call on the Commission to draw up a special report on the human rights situation in the 12 non-EU signatory states and the proposal on the establishment of a European civil peace corps in order to strengthen humanitarian action , achieve a peaceful resolution of conflicts , prevent the outbreak of new conflicts and provide the requisite confidence-building measures .
This is a proposal the Greens have always put forward .
We also propose a discussion on disarmament , on the need for arms limitation , the need to establish a nuclear-free zone in the Mediterranean region .
We agree on the need to develop the MEDA programme in a positive way and to aim at debt cancellation , linked to compliance with the principles of the declaration , with a view to promoting sustainable development and to achieving that aim by means of renewable energy sources and energy savings .
So we hope the European Parliament will be adequately represented in Malta and that all the non-governmental organizations will be present at a civil forum financed by the European Union .
Mr President , the Barcelona Conference marked a major turning point in the creation of a Euro-Mediterranean pole .
That in no way reduces the necessity to conduct a regular review of progress in the working areas that have been opened up , to ensure that the spirit of Barcelona endures .
And , as Mr Sakellariou 's excellent report recommends , it is important that the European Union should move further down the road to Euro-Mediterranean co-operation .
As far as my group is concerned , it seems to us fundamental to strengthen trade relations while adopting the objective of reducing the trade balance deficit .
Furthermore , sustainable development of these regions presupposes sound management of resources , and especially of water .
Politically , we would like to see some relaxation of the common policies of conflict prevention , and greater attention paid to the subject of human rights .
Nevertheless , the spirit of Barcelona will only be fully realized if culture is given the importance that was attached to it at the time of the Conference , as a catalyst and as a means for bringing peoples closer together and combating intolerance and racism .
That is why my group will be supporting the amendments designed to strengthen cultural exchanges , the role of civilian society and the heritage conservation policies .
Mr President , the Sakellariou report has the merit of emphasizing the priority importance which we should now attach to establishing close co-operation with all the Mediterranean seaboard States .
For Europe , in the aftermath of the cold war , the Mediterranean horizon has become the horizon of security .
The two essential factors for that security , as inseparable as the two sides of a coin , are the economic development of the countries of the southern and eastern Mediterranean , and the control of migration flows .
This latter consideration is not only an essential precondition for the internal security of the European States but also the mainspring of our partners ' development .
They must be able to rely on motivated human resources , on a trained elite which has a greater , more public-spirited interest in the development of its own country than in the illusory attractions of an expatriate existence .
It should be a constant concern of our co-operation , and of its necessary renewal , to prevent encouraging this brain drain .
Mr Sakellariou proposes the creation of a co-prosperity zone in the Mediterranean .
That is indeed the path of genuine co-development which we should be taking , in order to ensure that the Mediterranean can one day become a zone of lasting stability .
For that purpose , we hold trump cards which others do not .
The long tradition of friendly and co-operative relations between some of our countries is a precious asset to the entire Union .
After the unfortunate failure of an initial ambitious attempt at a Euro-Arab dialogue , a new dynamic is seeking to become established on the basis of the Barcelona Declaration .
We must succeed this time , by asserting Europe 's Mediterranean priority clearly , resolutely , lastingly and realistically .
Mr President , the thousand Mediterraneans of Brodel , the old and new civilizations on the African and the European coast that have existed through the course of time , distrustful of one another and sometimes even inimical , have created the foundations for a common future through the Barcelona Conference .
It produced a final declaration , the fruit of that strange North-South summit that advocated global cooperation , to be implemented at three levels : a more intensive political dialogue , the development of economic cooperation , more attention to the social , cultural and human dimension .
Now , a few months later , we have to criticize the inadequacy of the European initiatives .
The time has come to translate into action the lofty intentions of the final Declaration of the Barcelona Conference .
In our view , the Council must convene regular follow-up conferences , in an attempt to identify the most appropriate measures to be taken , and must look into innovative formulas aimed primarily at debt cancellation , but also formulas for conversion , which does not mean cancellation but means converting reduced debts into expenditure devoted to development , to training programmes , to the requisite adjustment of the legal framework so as to make it into a comprehensive and consistent whole under the agreements .
A future Euro-Mediterranean stability pact could include , among others , a contractual commitment to acknowledge and respect the territorial integrity of all the Mediterranean partner states and a clause on establishing a nuclearfree zone throughout the Mediterranean basin .
Mr President , first of all I want to welcome our friends from the Euro-Mediterranean parliaments and say that this has been a great achievement . Commissioner Marín , you know how strongly Parliament advocated this policy .
It could be said in general that the Euro-Mediterranean policy has already produced a result because it has affirmed and legitimized the European Union 's political role in the Mediterranean and improved our relations with the countries on its shores .
Today we are here to celebrate this fact , regarding it as an acquis : now we have to see how we can move forward .
Of course , the practical implementation of this policy involves greater difficulties than its establishment .
We have been aware in recent times of the difficulties and delays : there were delays in the definition of the MEDA regulation ; we still need to define the charter of what is known as the stability pact which we hope will come into being in Malta , in response to a proposal - and this is important - from the ARE group ; we wanted to have the Commission 's indicative regional programme in April and , finally , we need to make every effort to incorporate finance , firms and trade associations in the Euro-Mediterranean policy .
We know there is an obstacle , namely the instability in the Middle East : but we have always emphasized the objective links that exist between establishing the Mediterranean policy and the peace process in the Middle East .
We must speed up the establishment of relations between the civil societies . We can establish relations between institutions up to a certain point , but then we need relations between socieities .
They need to establish closer contacts among themselves ; we have to find ways of achieving this , including new ways , we have to invent them . Of course this will be difficult , but we must do so because this will lead to more rapid and more frequent direct relations .
If we are to involve the societies in this process it is important that we look into means of setting up a permanent , although not cumbersome inter-parliamentary structure .
We need enormous progress in decentralized cooperation , which will encourage relations between areas and regions and activate the wealth of our cultures , our people , whose operational , entrepreneurial capacity will be enhanced by direct contact .
What we must do now is to encourage this direct contact : any instrument , any ideas on this will be welcome and you , Commissioner Marín , will always have our support along this road .
Mr President , first of all I too would like to congratulate Mr Sakellariou on the excellent report he has presented .
Euro-Mediterranean partnership is based mainly on three fundamental pillars : the political and security pillar , the economic and financial one and the social , cultural and human one .
At present the state of the art of these three pillars is generally speaking satisfactory , nevertheless in each of the three cases , problems are apparent which , if not resolved , could jeopardize everything .
As regards the first , political and security pillar , we cannot deny that between the Barcelona Conference and now there have been more military encounters between member countries of the partnership and that their attempts to successfully conclude their respective peace processes have stalled .
Although there is no provision for any link between the peace process and partnership , these problems could end up weakening it .
The European Union must therefore have greater influence in the Mediterranean region and assume a political role which , considering the importance of its financial role , should be a wide-ranging one .
On the second , economic and financial pillar , the progress made is increasingly evident .
However , we have to note with disappointment the difficulties encountered in the administration of the MEDA programmes , which have forced the Commission to freeze them temporarily following the weighty report by the Court of Auditors .
Turning finally to the third , social , cultural and human pillar , it has to be said that this has been subject to considerable delays , both because of the difficulties with the MEDA programme and because of our Parliament 's delays , since it has not yet created the forum which should become the ideal meeting place for EuroMediterranean civil society .
In the time between the Malta Conference and Barcelona III , the European Parliament must therefore seek to institutionalize a permanent dialogue between the various civil societies in order to avoid the risk of constructing a Euro-Mediterranean edifice without foundations , without the fundamental and reciprocal awareness and confidence that is needed between two societies that are still suspicious of each other and different .
I am therefore happy to welcome the colleagues from Mediterranean third countries who have come here and the proposal to set up a first meeting between the members of our and their parliaments .
I also urge you strongly to ensure that this does not remain an isolated event but is the forerunner of an institutionalized and regular dialogue .
Mr President , I too extend a warm welcome to our colleagues from the Mediterranean region .
What we have to do now is take the Barcelona initiative forward in practice and Mr Sakellariou 's report provides a particularly good starting point .
Since the beginning of this stability policy I have had one complaint .
Only the countries of the south are making any effort here , and happily Mr Spencer has the same impression , so things will have to change .
Perhaps under the Dutch presidency there will be a change of emphasis at the followup conference in Malta .
In any case I hope that considerable attention will be given to asylum , migration , drug trafficking and organized crime .
But , Mr President , Mr Titley put it best of all .
There will only be stability and security in this region if human rights are respected .
I am glad that all members of the Foreign Affairs Committee are prepared to consider my proposal that we should adopt the OSCE 's model for monitoring human rights in the region .
That would , one hopes , take us some way forward .
Because unless there is a move towards democracy and above all reciprocal integration on the part of these countries , well , there will be no stability in that region without progress in that area .
Regarding reciprocal co-operation , Mr President , I regret that one of our newest partners under the interim agreement , the Palestinian authority , has , at least if the media reports are true , just issued an invitation to the United States , the European Union and the Arab countries to attend talks in Gaza which exclude their Israeli peace partner .
If that is true it is not consistent with the spirit of the Barcelona Treaty , but I hope these reports are not true .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with the fundamental points of Mr Sakellariou 's report and my group 's support of it , expressed by Mr Bertens , and also with the very positive evaluation of Vice-President Marín 's work and results .
I agree on the significance of the establishment of a European Union Mediterranean policy in Barcelona in November 1995 , under the Spanish Presidency .
But on the other hand I have rather more reservations about certain economic aspects .
Mr Bertens spoke more about political aspects and I want to refer more to economic aspects , given that , for one thing , the delay in approving and subsequently implementing the MEDA regulation has slowed down other projects and dampened the expectations established at Barcelona .
Secondly , I must stress the need to develop projects which really contribute to economic development and meet expectations - above all economic expectations - in the area and which , as has already been said here , are encountering some reticence as regards finance .
That reticence must be overcome at the London meeting - an important meeting , to my mind , although I do not think it has been mentioned so far - and finally , as Mr Sakellariou said , much easier access to such projects must be extended to small and medium sized companies .
Mr President , I want to congratulate Mr Sakellariou because in his report he deals coherently with the three basic pillars of the Barcelona statement and also proposes alternatives to solve the problems which may be generated by political cooperation , cooperation in security , economics and finance , and cultural , social and human cooperation .
However , Mr President , since we are totally at one with the soul and spirit of the Barcelona Conference and perhaps to add another angle to this debate , I want to draw attention here to the great sacrifice and far from beneficial consequences that blindly strengthening Euro-Mediterranean cooperation involves for the industrial sectors of objective 1 regions .
The majority of these regions are in the Mediterranean basin and have industries similar to those of the third countries .
I particularly want to highlight the damage that strengthening free trade under Euro-Mediterranean cooperation will cause to the Union 's agriculture and textile industry if we fail to recognize that the least favoured regions in the Union itself will be seriously prejudiced and face more difficulties than they already do in achieving the desired level of development .
There is also the added risk that the security and stability of existing agreements with third countries in the Mediterranean basin will be seriously prejudiced .
Mr President , as the Barcelona Conference confirmed , Europe is part of the Mediterranean Basin and the Mediterranean Sea is , for all the countries surrounding it , an inland sea - a sea that belongs to us all .
So we need to learn to work together , all of us who have lived together .
We must therefore have joint projects in economic development , research , energy programmes and environmental protection .
Together , we must guarantee our common security , fight for peace and equip ourselves with specific means for doing so , as the Sakellariou report proposes , through a charter .
Together , we must defend human rights and combat racism , intolerance and all forms of fundamentalism .
We also need - jointly , again - to further the advance of democracy where it is insufficiently established and defend it where it exists , with all due respect for our differences , naturally .
Finally , Europe has a duty to reduce the debt of its Mediterranean partners .
That will be a strong , specific signal which they are all expecting from us .
In conclusion , as chairman of the Europe-Israel delegation , I offer my warm congratulations to Mr Sakellariou for the quality of his work and the excellence of his report .
I also call upon the whole European Parliament and European Union to understand that our future , in every area , will depend on our dealings with the southern countries in general , and the Mediterranean seaboard States in particular .
We have done some good work so far , but we must bear in mind that there is a great deal still to be done .
Mr President , I think that for the first time following the Barcelona Conference it has become possible to establish an authentic policy for the Mediterranean in global and organic terms .
However , there are several essential conditions for achieving this objective .
The first is to accompany the partnership with genuine technical support measures in order to attain the objectives that have been set .
It is extremely important not to seek to impose a policy from above but to reach appropriate agreements with the individual countries on establishing the specific policies of the three pillar defined in Barcelona .
I cannot go into all the aspects in the time available and will confine myself to one observation . I have in my hands the calendar of events produced by the Commission .
There are undoubtedly deadlines in regard to matters of major importance , but which mainly concern questions of security ; that is correct since the objective of peace and stability is an important one . The economic aspect is also extremely important .
But there are still very serious weaknesses as regards the entire question of cultural activities , which is also an essential aspect if we want to resolve , not by imposing solutions but through genuine development , matters relating to the closer integration of the Mediterranean countries and if we want to create a stronger sense of identity among all the countries by means of cultural initiatives of which , however paradoxical , there are only two : the usual customary attention to the audiovisual media , given the importance of television , but also , which is perhaps very important , the awareness of the programmes to be transmitted given that this signifies genuine policy-making .
From this point of view , I too want to praise Mr Sakellariou 's report , without disregarding the important contribution made by Mr Dimitrakopoulos .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to begin by welcoming the delegation of representatives from the Mediterranean countries to the gallery and then turn briefly to the economic aspects of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
Following the individual meetings in Bologna , Naples , Brussels , Rome , Trieste and Marseilles , it became clear that there was a wide-ranging need for training , for technological transfer and partnership between undertakings with a view to Mediterranean cooperation .
Our experience with the MEDA projects has also taught that a genuine development programme depends on the involvement not only of the governments but also of civil society , of the production and service undertakings , the trade associations , the medical centres and the universities .
This approach needs major resources , which we fortunately now have under the MEDA programme .
It is urgently necessary for the Commission to define and organize the management of the programmes .
We know that many Mediterranean third countries are requesting aid in order to improve their infrastructure : water , energy , transport and telecommunications .
It is urgently necessary for the Commission to set up the Euro-Mediterranean water agency , for it to promote cooperation in energy in the framework of the Energy Charter and for the network of the Innovation Relay Centre which is being extended to the central and eastern European countries through the Fellow members Innovation Relay Centers also to cover the countries on the other shore of the Mediterranean .
Let me also ask the Commission to carry forward the initiative for a satellite link-up of multimedia communications , integrating Mediterranean services and applications and building bridges across the Mediterranean in , for instance , the area of transport safety , territorial and environmental surveillance , tele-medicine and distance learning .
I hope that the workshop on the spatial applications of the Euro-Mediterranean region to be held in Cairo on 26-27 May will help to emphasize the importance and usefulness of these technologies and lead to practical initiatives .

Mr President , I want to begin my speech by congratulating Mr Sakellariou on encapsulating Euro-Mediterranean policy in a report which I regard as most opportune , taking stock of our efforts so far and establishing lines of action .
I also want to record that when we speak of Euro-Mediterranean policy we need to be able to face up to our responsibilities ; the work we lost for budgetary reasons last year could have converted our commitments into reality .
That must be taken into account , if we want to preach by example .
As regards lines of action , I think the stress laid on shaping the Mediterranean as a multilateral area is very important . We are not just planning the establishment of a free trade area , but also the construction of an area of peace and prosperity fundamentally founded on experience based on common values and on upholding democracy and respect for human rights , within a structure on the lines with the former Helsinki Conference , later the OSCE , leading to stability in and participation by all the countries in the area .
On the economic side - although I have to be brief - I do believe it is important to stress not only participation by the public - provided for , at the time , in the MEDA Regulation - but especially the effort to provide backbone and organization which has to be made in the majority of the Mediterranean countries so as to be able to consolidate their own structures as societies .
Finally , Mr President , I think that the great objective of our Euro-Mediterranean policy must be to replace fear , mistrust and conflict with a policy which really makes the Mediterranean Mare Nostrum .
Mr President , I too would like to welcome our Mediterranean friends and colleagues , and also sincerely to congratulate Yannis Sakellariou on his work .
The Barcelona Conference confirmed the European Union 's interest in the Mediterranean and the great importance of that area for the whole of Europe and its development .
Europe has understood that peaceful coexistence in the area cannot exist unless the great problems faced by non-Community countries in the Mediterranean Basin are addressed , problems which essentially amount to democracy and development .
It is therefore in the European Union 's interest , and at the same time its obligation , to help those countries on the basis of an equal relationship , and with respect for their cultural characteristics .
We must not forget that the Mediterranean is an area in which different cultures and different religions meet .
We consider it to be a very positive fact that great emphasis is placed on respect for human rights and the protection of minorities , because those are among the basic problems of those countries .
The issue of peaceful co-existence in the area relies on respect for territorial integrity and on the inviolability of frontiers , and is an essential prerequisite for partnership relations to develop between the European Union and the countries of the South .
For this , we consider it essential to create a mechanism to guarantee compliance with those principles , because , unfortunately , there are countries that took part in the Barcelona Conference but which are failing to comply with what was agreed , and so continually creating tensions and persisting , in contravention of all international law and order , with the occupation of a large section of an independent state .
I think it is very important to pay particular attention to the subject of migration .
Most of the immigrants are in the Community and come from Mediterranean countries .
Besides the necessity to find solutions which will address that issue , we must also understand that the problem cannot be solved in the host countries , but in the countries of origin .
It is for that reason that the European Union must help the development of those countries , so that the flow of migration can be stemmed .
Mr President , first I want to congratulate Mr Sakellariou and everyone here .
Secondly - and I believe it is just to do so - I want to congratulate the European Commission on its achievements this year and particularly the Euro-Mediterranean policy .
Mr Spencer spoke in this Chamber of the need for all the countries of the Union to feel that Euro-Mediterranean policy belongs to them .
I am optimistic about that .
The involvement of the British Government at the London Conference is an example .
But I think we must also try to make progress , looking to the future , in the sense that all the other policies of the European Union should also incorporate the spirit of the Euro-Mediterranean Conference .
I do not need to go to the Commission , I do not need to speak about European policies in support of this , I only need to stay in this House and see the papers we produce .
We will not be able to maintain credibility much longer if , alongside reports like Mr Sakellariou 's - reports which use terms like partnership or cooperation - we will find words like ' danger ' in speaking of questions relating to agriculture , security or frontiers .
The immigration issue and Member States ' policy on it is particularly flagrant , compared with what we say in the section on cooperation in the social , cultural and human areas of the Euro-Mediterranean agreement .
I also want to say that the ECU 64 , 000 million earned by exports in 1995 , producing a positive balance of ECU 18 , 000 million , speaks for itself in answer to some of the questions raised in this House on the problems Euro-Mediterranean policy may cause to certain European regions .
I think we ought to avoid that kind of comment as much as possible , and make clear what is really happening .
I want to end by referring to a subject I am already weary of - the Islamic danger .
I just want to mention one specific case : a Pakistani woman has taken her father to court because he would not let her marry the man she loved .
Conflicts like that have often arisen in the European Union , but I do not know of anyone going to court to resolve them .
Mr President , looking at the Sakellariou report and its well-intentioned proposals from a northern or north-eastern perspective , I feel that there are some very interesting dissimilarities between our case , the Baltic Sea region , and the Mediterranean .
One of them - and that is my concern here - is that too many Mediterranean countries have a long way to go before the body politic is free from the influence of religion or , as I would personally put it , religious superstition .
The Protestant tradition in the north makes separation of religion and political power easy .
We note the conflict between some government circles in Turkey and the army , the latter representing Atatürk 's idea of a lay society .
We should also note that even among countries living in some sort of fragile peace there is no widespread acceptance of peace and what it means .
Here the question of the media comes in .
The little I have seen of the media coverage in the non-EU countries along the Mediterranean showing events in other countries along the same shores is often distorted and one-sided and does not contribute to an understanding of the cultural and political diversity of the area .
I see a possibility for the EU to exercise moral power and pressure on the countries in question , which is probably the intent behind many of the good proposals in the report by Mr Sakellariou .
At best , the EU 's financial contribution is small if you , for instance , compare it with US payments to some countries , especially Israel and Egypt .
Sometimes power comes with money , but not always .
The report supports an enhanced EU presence in the area .
The intentions are good .
Nowhere is there mention of the fact that US involvement has been crucial and will be crucial in the foreseeable future .
I hope that this will change .
It also depends on the will of the people along the Mediterranean .
How is this will expressed in a dictatorship ?
Mr President , I too believe that Mr Sakellariou 's report is important because it allows our Parliament to review the need for major advances in the Euro-Mediterranean partnership policy decided in Barcelona .
It is true that some important progress has already been made , but it will be vital in Malta to move ahead with the charter for peace , stability and the full implementation of the cooperation provided for in the MEDA and the EIB regulations .
This is a fundamental strategy for the European Union and must be regarded as such so that attention can be directed towards the south , beginning with the near south , and the processes of peace , stability and mutual understanding can be strengthened .
That is why I say that it is vital to set up a parliamentary forum , an institutional meeting place between the European Parliament and the parliamentary assemblies of the Mediterranean third countries .
We must admit that there are delays , but we will rapidly assume our responsibilities ; this is our duty and we must do it as soon as possible .
Lastly , let me draw attention to a few points .
It is true that we must create the conditions for more balanced trade between the European Union and Mediterranean third countries and promote the growth of intra-regional trade between the third countries in the Mediterranean basin ; but as Mr Bianco said , we must also emphasize the importance of cultural dialogue , of cultural awareness , of the common features of the Mediterranean basin and of the differences , with a view to mutual respect and recognition , which is the basis of understanding and tolerance .
The value of such a dialogue was emphasized during an important meeting in Italy between writers and intellectuals from the Mediterranean EU countries .
I believe that culture and politics do not come second but in a sense come first and create the right conditions for development , for Euro-partnership , for economic partnership .
We must never forget that !
Thank you , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
Let me first of all congratulate Mr Sakellariou , not only on the quality of the report we are discussing today , but also on his firm and unswerving support of the Mediterranean policy since its beginnings .
I would also like to thank him for his kind words , but he will forgive me for not being equal to his command of languages - I cannot do so in German , but I do thank him very sincerely .

I am grateful for the comments made by both Mr Spencer and Mr Titley to the effect that European Union Mediterranean policy cannot and should not be a matter or concern or interest only to the Member States in the south of Europe .
As you know , the Commission has always insisted that Mediterranean policy is a European policy of interest to every Member State and just as it seems to me absurd that Mediterranean policy should be an issue only for Portugal , Spain , Italy , Greece and France , I also think it is wrong to regard the policy on the countries of central or eastern Europe as of interest only to the Benelux countries or the Germans .
And in fact , the major review we are carrying out presupposes continuous and increasing consolidation of the idea that Mediterranean policy really is a policy for everyone and must be understood as such by all the Member States .
It is very interesting to have this report , Mr Sakellariou , on the eve of the second Euro-Mediterranean Conference which will take place in La Valetta in April .
Much remains to be done .
And the Commission endorses its content and the contributions made by the various groups in large part .
But I want to highlight one thing : it is hard to grasp the distance we have covered - and this is the main thing I want to say - since the Barcelona Conference was held in November 1995 .
Our sights are now set on the Malta Conference , when the Commission proposes to ratify the principles established in Barcelona and deepen them , rather than inaugurate new paths of cooperation .
Because our main objective is the definitive consolidation of the Barcelona process .
I think patience and a sense of history are needed .
Barcelona is only a baby .
Barcelona is one and a half years old .
The problems of the Mediterranean are enormous and some of them are serious and intense .
So this policy must of necessity be a long term policy and like all long term policies it must gather momentum , taking increasingly firm steps .
Consequently , the Commission 's fundamental strategy for the Malta meeting will be to consolidate what we are doing year by year , so that this long term policy goes on producing results .
Peace , stability , shared prosperity , and establishing a dialogue between cultures and civilizations , continue to be interdependent elements and they can only progress , as all of you have pointed out - and I am delighted at the consensus - to the extent that the three Barcelona objectives go hand in hand .
I will try to explain the current position very briefly : in the first pillar , we have an option - Mr Sakellariou mentions this in his report - to take action which makes it possible to recreate a certain common view of security problems in the Mediterranean .
The charter is a part of the future because a set of objectives is finally being established .
That is already a step forward .
In La Valetta we will certainly be discussing whether the aim is modest or ambitious .
I think it is a sufficient because a year and a half ago it was unthinkable - given the events that have occurred , for example , in the peace negotiations in the Middle East - that it would be possible at least to draw up a EuroMediterranean charter on peace , stability and security .
We have a basis , ideas which you have introduced in the political and security areas , for working on much more substantial issues , with the aim of establishing a kind of Mediterranean OSCE or security plan .
I think these are ideas worth considering but of course they need to be deepened and include a specific timetable .
On the political and security side , the Commission endorses your report .
We have been able to introduce a certain degree of new dynamism and a number of points suggest that we are at least on the right road : the list of measures with guarantees that have already been approved , the communications network between the 27 countries , the Institute of Foreign Policy network , the draft mechanism for prevention of natural disasters , and the action plan for political and security dialogue which is already being debated .
So at least the foundations of dialogue are being laid pretty solidly .
The second pillar , or the second part of Barcelona , consists of economic policy and the association agreements .
Perhaps that is the most brilliant part - I do not say that for my benefit , but for the benefit of my Directorate General - because in a year and a half we have already succeeded in negotiating and signing four association agreements : with Morocco , Tunisia , Israel and , recently , the Palestine National Authority , and we can certainly conclude the agreements with Egypt , Libya , Jordan and the Lebanon before La Valetta .
In just a year and a half we will have succeeded in concluding seven free trade association agreements , a rate of progress of two association agreements per quarter and you know how difficult it is to reach final decisions in our Council of Ministers , so that is a result which should fill us with satisfaction .
Earlier Mr Gasòliba mentioned a series of elements which need to be deepened .
But from Barcelona to La Valetta , our work has been fundamentally geared to consolidating the network of association agreements , because this is the platform , the legal , economic and financial basis , viewed from the free trade perspective , which will allow us to continue consolidating the various aspects of cooperation .
I repeat , this is a long term process .
We cannot expect the classic problems in the Mediterranean to disappear as if by magic between Barcelona and La Valetta , in barely a year and a half .
But there is already a significant network of agreements which will allow us to continue our work .
I shall end , Mr President , because time is running out .
But I promise to send you the text of my speech so that you can read what I was going to say on the third pillar of the Barcelona Agreement , covering the cultural , regional and social aspects , negative interdependency , drugs , terrorism , fundamentalism and uncontrolled immigration .
Much remains to be done .
The European Parliament has extended an invitation to the representatives of the associated Mediterranean countries and it is my intention that the foreign ministers should definitely confirm the creation of the European Parliamentary Forum in La Valetta .
I believe that forum will be created after you have held that meeting here is Strasbourg .
And I want to conclude by telling you once again that there is no budgetary problem . We have a budget for the forum .
So I want to ask you and those who have been invited to join the Commission in convincing all the foreign ministers , all 27 , that this forum must be consolidated .
And if that comes into being it will be another step towards establishing a political debate between parliamentary representatives of both sides in the longer term , and I believe that continues to be very necessary .
Thank you , I have gone on too long , but on the plus side I think I have at least given you a broad outline the results this Euro-Mediterranean policy is producing .
Thank you , Mr Marín .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Progress of the Intergovernmental Conference
The next item is the oral question ( B4-0018 / 97 / rev. O-0030 / 97 / rev. ) by Mr De Giovanni , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , to the Commission , on the progress of the Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , Parliament is expressing serious concern about the progress of the negotiations at the Intergovernmental Conference .
We have the impression there is an impasse and a rather serious situation .
We also know that we have reached a very delicate point in the history of European integration , on the 40th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome which was celebrated this morning , and that we have been faced , especially since 1989 , with problems on an entirely new scale .
We have reached a kind of moment of truth : we are either on the eve of substantial progress or on the eve of possible regression .
We need only think of two fundamental issues , such as enlargement and monetary union .
What will happen in relation to these two major questions if we do not transform the institutions ?
So the Intergovernmental Conference has a historic responsibility ; but the impression we get is that the negotiations have not yet produced any outcome , three months before they finally come to an end .
Is that true ?
I am asking the Commission .
How does the Commission intend to put pressure on the governments ?
These are specific questions which we are putting to the European Commission today .
The European Parliament is trying to do its part and to lay emphasis on certain problems .
In its resolution it highlights three essential questions .
It states emphatically that the prerogatives of Parliament are the real cornerstone of the democratic legitimacy of the Union . Parliament is concerned about this .
I have the impression that this process could come to a halt , could indeed backtrack , because there does not seem to be any real balance between closer integration , the development of the Union 's policies and competences and Parliament 's own power of legislation and control .
Increasingly large grey areas are appearing within which committees carry out tasks that could also tend in a negative direction .
So we call resolutely for co-decision to be extended to the entire legislative area , for the European Parliament to have control functions , for widening and extending qualified majority voting , for transparent legislation .
The second question is the creation of an area of freedom , justice and security , i.e. , the establishment of European citizenship and the extension of non-discrimination , that is to say the construction of a genuine European civil society .
But is this possible without any real integration of the important areas of home affairs and justice ?
Parliament believes it is not , otherwise everything will remain subject to government negotiation .
But can we have a thousand Schengens ?
Obviously not !
So here we call for the involvement of the Community institutions , a specific role for the European Parliament , a specific role for the Court of Justice .
Lastly , the Pandora 's Box of closer cooperation , which is becoming the real issue at the Intergovernmental Conference .
How so ?
We have the impression that this cooperation is becoming a pretext for an Intergovernmental Conference that is not able to resolve the major issues before it .
We need only remember that if the majority question were resolved , it would scarcely be necessary any more to call for closer cooperation .
Parliament can see the risks inherent in this prospect : the possible destruction of the balance between states , of cohesion , the possible seeds of fragmentation of the Union , of the very fabric of Europe .
That is why Parliament is sounding the alarm and sending a vital political message to the states , to the governments , to the Commission : where closer cooperation is necessary it must occur within the Treaty and not outside the Treaty , with the guarantees of the Community institutions and procedures .
And it may become possible under the Treaty , but on specific conditions , some of which we cite in the resolution : unified institutional systems , the maintenance and development of the acquis communautaire , respect for the principle of the equality of all states and citizens , respect for the principle of solidarity and cohesion .
Lastly , what does unified systems mean ?
As my final point let me take the indivisibility of the European Parliament and its powers .
We must point out - as I pointed out to those governments that referred to the possible division of Parliament - that the European Parliament is a parliament of the people and not of the states and must therefore remain indivisible .
As such it will be the guarantee that even if situations arise that are temporarily different , this will not affect the unity of the European project .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , forty years of the European Community represent both a historic success and a present obligation for us .
European integration is built on continuity and change .
If the Intergovernmental Conference is to achieve satisfactory results , the European Parliament , in accordance with the Dublin Document , must now formulate its position on controversial issues during the current negotiations and before the treaty is drafted in May .
Firstly , the European Union needs majority voting in the Council and , of course , parliamentary codecision for the whole range of ordinary legislation .
That is the key issue of the reforms , because the effectiveness of the Union depends on it .
Secondly , the EU also needs certain exceptions from the precept of concerted action , but only as a last resort , as a means of avoiding sustained obstruction .
This is also - regrettably , I might add - an unavoidable condition of our capacity for enlargement .
Thirdly , the EU needs team spirit , cooperation and movement - not flexibility ; although that enigmatic term sounds good , it means nothing and leaves unbounded scope for interpretation .
That dilutes the acquis communautaire and leads to a Europe à la carte .
We must consider critically , and in some respects anxiously , the current state of negotiations at the Intergovernmental Conference , precisely because we want to make the Amsterdam summit a success .
We need that success , because 40 years of a European Community based on supranationality and solidarity could not , for example , prevent the Renault affair .
We all had to experience the brutality with which economic power was unleashed here against people 's jobs and against the European welfare state .
We cannot continue to run along behind the decisions of multinational companies and suchlike ; we have to pursue better policies , active policies .
That is exactly what the citizens of this Union expect of us .
It is also the very basis of democracy in Europe in the 21st century .
Mr President , this is a crucial time , as the Commissioner has said .
In a few months ' time this Intergovernmental Conference will reach a conclusion and the Dutch Presidency is committed to presenting its draft at the beginning of May , just a month and a half away .
That is why , Mr President , we in the Committee on Institutional Affairs thought it was the right time to consider the issues on the conference table through the questions put to the Commission by the chairman , Mr De Giovanni .
And I want to add that , in the draft resolution we passed in the Committee on Institutional Affairs by a large majority and which the House will vote on tomorrow , we sought to uphold two things : continuity and consistency with previous resolutions of the European Parliament .
Continuity , because the European Parliament has expressed its position on all the questions of this Intergovernmental Conference in the Bourlanges-Martin and Dury-Maij-Weggen reports and in the Dublin Resolution , which analysed the Irish Presidency 's document .
Our intention was to concentrate on various major issues which have arisen as the debates in the Intergovernmental Conference have progressed .
One of the issues on the table at the moment is the third pillar .
I think citizens in all our countries feel security is threatened , and - I think this is enormously positive - they feel that Europe should also take responsibility for this area which so closely affects their lives .
I also want to say , Mr President , that expectations about ' communitarization ' of the various sectors of the third pillar have currently dimmed a little .
I think the resolution Parliament is going to approve leaves matters very much in line with previous resolutions . It fully clarifies where Parliament stands on the areas to be ' communitarized ' , first of all , and secondly , where there is enhanced cooperation , what conditions must be assembled to bring matters to a conclusion .
We are going to include terrorism as an objective for ' communitarization ' in an amendment my group has presented , Mr President .
Enhanced cooperation is the second main section dealt with in that resolution .
Before getting into the detail , we are going to defend the philosophy of this Parliament , which is the extension of qualified majority in the Council and co-decision in Parliament .
I am sorry the Council is not here , but I would like someone to tell me why this Parliament has only been granted co-decision in certain sectors .
What is the conceptual , philosophical , and political reason why Parliament does not have co-decision in all sectors ?
I do not think there is one , Mr President , and we will therefore continue to reiterate our demands .
In the second place , enhanced cooperation should not be the ' gadget ' of this conference .
Enhanced cooperation does not solve the problems .
Enhanced cooperation - let it be clearly stated - is just a necessary instrument to avoid progress being blocked by a Member State which is causing deadlock .
If that did not happen there would be no need for enhanced cooperation .
And I shall end , Mr President , by saying briefly that our resolution establishes the conditions under which enhanced cooperation will be possible .
I am sure subsequent speakers will address other aspects of this resolution , which I hope will be approved tomorrow by a large majority .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when the Intergovernmental Conference on the revision of the Treaty began in Turin on 29 March last year , the participants assigned it three tasks : to equip the Union with efficient institutions with a view to enlargement , to provide Europe with a genuine ambition in the fields of diplomacy and defence , and to improve the organization of the third pillar - justice and internal affairs .
The intention was that all this work would take us into the Europe of the 21st century , a closer-knit , more democratic , more mutually supportive Europe .
Without prejudging the results , a year after the IGC began , recent events have shown on more than one occasion the limitations of the Union 's present architecture with , for example , the failure of the Commission in the BSE tragedy and the inability of the Union to respond to the sufferings of the Renault workforce at Vilvoorde .
It is on this last point , like Mr Schäfer , that I would like to alert the Commission and the Council .
Over and above these three challenges which the IGC is to meet , is it not time to construct a social Europe , time to discuss calmly the tragedies brought about by unemployment , and , better still , time to try to prevent them or mitigate them ?
Are we going to wait until our 18 million fellow citizens who are out of work are called upon to come and demonstrate their discontent in this House to force us to vote under pressure ?
Confronted with the globalization of trade and the technology explosion , are we simply going to offer the men and women who make up our Union 's population this desperate choice between insecurity and unemployment ?
The Eurobarometer poll of February 1997 showed that the fight against unemployment was regarded as a priority by all our fellow citizens , and should be the main objective of the IGC .
Ladies and gentlemen , are we finally going to give Europe the means to follow a third road - the road of employment and social justice ?
Yes , the time has come to define a genuine European social model , as President Chirac said at the opening of the IGC .
Finally , harsh and even painful though it may be , the present situation does give us an opportunity to realign the IGC , with a view to constructing a Union that works for mankind , and avoiding the temptation simply to clean up our institutions , necessary though that may be .
Mr President , Commissioner , as you were saying a moment ago the Intergovernmental Conference has embarked on its final phase .
I have the impression that , even more than at the start of the Conference , public opinion has been traumatized by human tragedies such as the closure of the Renault works at Vilvoorde , and that it will not tolerate timid advances that have no positive effect on the functioning of the institutions - that fail in other words to provide the necessary solutions to meet the anxieties and allay the scepticism of Europe 's citizens .
As things stand today , there is no doubt that it is within the third pillar that the most significant advances seem to be occurring .
It is true that there are public expectations regarding security , the fight against drugs and against organized crime .
Our motion emphasizes the requirements in this area .
But the Council would be wrong to think that that would be enough .
Inadequate advances in the areas of the first and second pillars will set the seal on the failure of the conference , and the European Parliament will have the duty of relaying that disappointment .
As Mr De Giovanni has recalled , Parliament has indeed consistently shown and demonstrated in all its resolutions the concept it had of the development of the institutions , now , and especially , in the context of enlargement .
In the first pillar , we have called for qualified majority voting to be made general in the Council for all legislative acts , together with the extension of the co-decision procedure and the lowering of the majority threshold .
Where has the Intergovernmental Conference got to with the second pillar , Commissioner ?
We should be glad to know about that .
Enhanced co-operation can only be a last resort solution , in the event of a deadlock , a possibility which must be considered .
Our resolution clearly shows that .
This morning we commemorated the fortieth anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome .
Those who were involved in that historic moment for our ancient continent had ambitious aims and , above all , the political will to achieve them .
Despite the difficulties , they held to their course and they did so in a spirit of solidarity .
Ambition and political courage - that is what I wish for today 's participants .
Mr President , the solution recommended by Mr De Giovanni is designed to strengthen the unity of the institutions and to democratize them .
He is quite right , and I approve .
However , one major problem has not been dealt with .
In the absence of any common social and economic policy , economic and monetary union will not work .
The mad cow crisis has shown the need for a common public health policy ; the Vilvoorde case has shown the need for a common industrial policy ; the transit problem has shown the need for a common fiscal policy .
Tomorrow , we shall need a common banking policy , etc .
But the present institutions of monetary union will not allow these policies to be evolved , and the Intergovernmental Conference has excluded them from its agenda .
In conclusion , I see two alternatives . Either we succeed in developing , beginning during this present Conference and continuing afterwards , a genuine common institutional framework for economic and monetary union and the first pillar , with the capability to move forward together ; or we will have to make up our minds to advance , with deep regret , by the path of intergovernmental co-operation , reinforced in the first pillar .
That is what I have emphasized in an amendment which I commend to the House .
Mr President , by means of the amendments proposed to the part-session , the members of the Green Party would like to reinforce the text of the resolution in areas which we believe are fundamental and which also ought to be fundamental to the IGC , i.e. democracy , openness , freedom and human rights and mobility for the people .
For us , democracy is to respect each other and each others ' differences .
We must lead the way for the new Member States to be respected and not impose religious or cultural restrictions but be open and democratic .
We strongly oppose the proposal from the Dutch presidency to alter the anti-discrimination clause and to remove matters concerning sexual preference , age and disability .
In order to guarantee a democratic foundation for membership of the Union , we believe there must be a withdrawal clause .
Such a clause should give information on how one withdraws from the Union and how much it would cost .
Furthermore , it is also necessary to change Clause 23 to specify that a civil foreign policy within the framework of an pan-European security system is needed and that all decisions should be unanimous .
Unfortunately , I have to exceed my time by saying that I am dissatisfied with how this resolution has been dealt with by the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
The matter has been dealt with far too quickly .
We have been given proposed amendments , texts and oral amendments sitting down .
We have simply not had a chance to look at these proposals properly .
I would therefore like to caution against the incredible speed with which decisions are made in the European Union .
How can citizens participate in the discussions and understand all the new terms being used ?
Please take note of my warning and do not do what the Committee on Institutional Affairs did a while ago !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I must join in the protests of Mr Méndez de Vigo at the absence of the Council which , although not officially obliged to be present , knows , through its officials , that the policies and decisions of this Parliament are determined in this Chamber and that therefore if it is interested in hearing them , it should do so here .
In regard to the resolution as a whole on which our group will be voting - hoping it will obtain the consensus desired by so many other colleagues - I want to concentrate on the question of closer cooperation and address an appeal and an invitation to Commissioner Oreja to examine the content of the resolution that is before us for our approval tomorrow and the content of what has emerged from the activities of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , and not only in relation to the indivisibility of Parliament ; that is a question raised by the Dutch presidency with solutions that are pretty fanciful and which I hope will soon be reviewed as regards the Commission 's role .
I know that the Commission per se would be inclined to give up its role of guardian , of pillar of defence of the structure of the Treaties , of the Union and of what the Treaty requires of it . But we regard closer cooperation as an internal instrument of the Treaty system and therefore the moment one or other country blocks a process of integration , the Commission , as guardian of the Treaties , has to put forward an initiative , since we cannot leave this task solely to the Member States .
That is why I am glad Parliament is moving in this direction and I hope this will assist the Commission in its deliberations .
Mr President , the forty years that have passed since the Treaty of Rome was signed can be divided into two periods in terms of the evolution of public opinion .
Until the early 1980s , the communities were becoming established and the institutions were finding a degree of balance , with the Luxembourg compromise and the creation of the European Council .
During that period , Europe was working to achieve recognition , and it gradually came to be regarded in a favourable light by its citizens .
But , since the mid-1980s , it would seem that the trend has been reversed : the institutions have lost their equilibrium , the democratic deficit has been increasing and , above all , confidence has been eroded .
Many of us have seen it in our own countries , and it is certainly true in France : if there is public controversy today on unemployment , immigration , insecurity or free trade , the European Union is instantly perceived as a source of threat , not of hope .
This astounding reversal of opinion needs to be studied seriously ; its causes must be analysed if we hope to get back on course .
For my group , the essential cause is the way Europe adopts objectives which are very far removed from what the public expects .
And this gap itself arises from a lack of national control over the European institutions , a lack which is far from accidental but is an integral part of a system which has specifically adopted the objective of bypassing national sovereignty and is now , as it were , being hoist with its own petard .
On this fortieth anniversary of the Treaty of Rome , the Intergovernmental Conference must see it as its task to re-establish the conditions that will enable the Union to regain the confidence of its citizens .
That is why my group is not associating itself with the motion for a resolution on behalf of the Institutional Affairs Committee which is being put to the vote , because it is too supportive of the fad for communitization at all costs and majority voting which , in the past , has helped to strengthen the European authorities while weakening the nation States .
That is also , Mr President , why my group has tabled a counter-motion based on the principle of strengthening national control over the European Union and developing the flexibility needed to adapt the Union better to the needs of its citizens .
I have received two motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr De Giovanni 's excellent resolution gives me an opportunity to introduce an important point into this debate , relating to something which could seriously jeopardize European development .
As a consequence of the pressure to achieve rapid economic integration , the development of this Union necessarily implies security cooperation and the need for closer cooperation in the domain of internal security .
The freedom of movement we all desire for Union citizens as well as third-country nationals in the European Community is discussed in depth in the context of Community law but also as an area of intergovernmental cooperation , for freedom of movement goes hand in hand with certain aspects of internal security .
These aspects of internal security , reflected in Europol , in the European information system , in the convention on the crossing of external frontiers and in the Schengen information system we discussed yesterday , all entail close cooperation among Member States in areas in which the Community , though operating on an intergovernmental basis , still encroaches very systematically on civil liberties .
I need scarcely mention here that I personally , along with many of my fellow Members , would prefer this to happen within the framework of Community law and under the control and legislative jurisdiction of the European Parliament .
Be that as it may , the fact that this is not the case , while at the same time responsibility for these processes is increasingly being removed from the national Parliaments too , carries the implicit danger that a democratic deficit will emerge in the realm of the third pillar and will be accurately identified as such by the EU public , thereby further eroding confidence in the democratic legitimacy of European action .
That is why it is extremely pertinent that the resolution contains a reference to the particular need for action in the domain of the third pillar and the implementation of Article 7a of the Treaty on European Union .
Mr President , forty years after the Treaty of Rome was signed , we are now debating its third review in an atmosphere which is , unfortunately , melancholic .
In principle , the European Union 's general report should fill us with satisfaction and optimism . But the impasses ahead of us in the negotiations justify pessimism and concern .
President De Giovanni gave a good account of the more general reasons for our concerns .
I fully agree with them , and without circumlocution I should add that I fear the crisis ahead of us .
The most probable result of Amsterdam or Luxembourg is still at this time , in my view , a minor embellishment of the Treaties and not any decisive progress .
To these general concerns , I should add the more particular ones felt by the representatives of the smaller countries .
It is not enough to reiterate the principles that have held sway during these 40 years and have brought us so many successes : unity of our institutional system , preservation of the Community 's achievements , the principle of equality , the principle of social cohesion , and the maintenance of balance .
We must also respect and reinforce those principles , and never depart or turn aside from them , as the Commission itself did recently , with its proposals concerning its own composition .
I say to Mr Marcellino Oreja that one cannot have equality between Commissioners of first and second rank in the name of a supposedly more effective Commission .
Such a structure is not more democratic .
That is not how to maintain balance and we cannot accept it , nor of course propose it to the parliaments and citizens of our countries .
Mr President , I believe that Europe can only get ahead by demonstrating consistency with the principles sometimes threatened by the interests of certain major players .
We will continue to fight for that .
We want it , but at this time I do not know how much we can hope for it .
Mr President , we are today celebrating the 40th anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome .
Addressing this hemicycle , I have in mind the idea that in forty years it should have been possible to do more for European construction and do it better .
This is my maiden speech and I felt that I should be ill at ease with the meaning behind that thought .
I should like you to know that I , too , am concerned with the effectiveness of the European Union .
But should we sacrifice peace , security , freedom , democracy and solidarity to efficiency ?
Should we sacrifice , for the sake of urgency , the most noble objectives which have led us from the signing of the Treaty of Rome to this point ?
The old adage ' More haste , less speed ' still holds .
I think that one of the reasons for Europe 's success comes from the solidity with which it has been built , on a great deal of work , tough negotiations and genuine consensuses , in other words it has been achieved because people have taken things slowly , and there was no attempt to impose anything , there was always a concern to convince states voluntarily to adhere to ideals .
When we pass votes so that in the year 2057 our descendants can commemorate the 100th anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome , I too would like to go along with that vote .
But I would like to honour those who before us thought of Europe , who acted in order to transform it and who entrusted us with the task of continuing it , and this means fair recognition of the fact that taking things slowly has always been the reason for its success .
Therefore today we must make sure that we can explain what we want , where we are coming from and where we are going as well as how to do it .
Citizens of the Member States of the European Union have that right : and we who legitimately represent them here must carry out our duty .
Madam President , allow me to explain briefly what disturbs me about this debate .
Many Members are behaving as if we were awaiting a latter-day Pentecostal miracle in Amsterdam , whereas it is perfectly plain that this Intergovernmental Conference is unlikely to reach agreement on any major political issues , neither on fundamental rights nor on the composition of the Commission nor on flexibility nor on new provisions for majority voting .
Everywhere there are conflicts and total disunity .
Yet at the same time everyone describes unity as the prerequisite for our launching the enlargement negotiations .
It is therefore very important that the European Parliament should not become bogged down in details but should address the main issues in its resolutions .
That is one point .
The second is this : I expect the Commission to adopt a more positive approach .
What we have heard the Commissioner saying today is not enough , namely that he expects a conclusion in Amsterdam but does not know how it will materialize .
How can things go on like this ?
The third is that it is vital for us to ensure and insist that our national Parliaments exert pressure on their governments .
That is absolutely critical , because it will be too late otherwise , and we shall be jeopardizing not only the existing Union but also enlargement and the European project in its entirety .
There is no more time to lose !
Mr President , it strikes me when reading the proposed resolution that I live in two different realities : a political reality in Sweden and on the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
At home , I have never met a voter who for example demands a uniform voting system .
I have also never met anyone requiring Union citizenship or a statutory majority in matters concerning criminal law .
I do on the other hand encounter constant criticism about the lack of true democracy in the European Union .
The greatest problem of the European Union is not the Third Pillar or flexibility but the lack of a democratic legitimacy .
This is why it is so serious that the Intergovernmental Conference does not appear to be doing enough in this area .
There do not seem to be any public meetings in the Council of Ministers which otherwise is a matter of course in a democracy or of transparency in the legislative assembly .
The wording about the principle of public access to official records looks to be very feeble .
The authority of the Commission which is subject to very weak parliamentary democratic control seems to be very much on the increase .
This is a step towards a diminished level of authority for democratic national parliaments and towards stronger supranationality .
We are heading towards a ' new Maastricht ' and a new confrontation .
Finally , I would like to say that I share my colleague Mrs Schörling 's criticism of the way this resolution has been dealt with .
An obvious example is that we do not even have access to the proposed amendments when discussing the matter .
This is one thing we ought to be thinking of when requesting more authority , i.e. to find a working method that really functions democratically in Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , rarely in the history of the EU has the gulf between the dream and reality been so painfully obvious as it is today .
With the celebratory speeches for the fortieth anniversary of the Treaty of Rome still ringing in our ears , all we have to study are the confidential proposals of the Irish Presidency .
I wonder whether the Europe of freedom , justice and peace has anything at all to do with the Europe that is being envisaged and worked for at the Intergovernmental Conference .
The truth is that the European Parliament is discussing its n th resolution , and I fear that the Intergovernmental Conference will consider this n th resolution to be just as irrelevant as all the others or at best an inconvenience .
Perhaps there is food for thought in the fact that the presidency of the Council has not even found it worth the effort to attend a debate of such central importance in this Parliament today .
It is not a matter of turning the prayer wheel over and over again ; what we must do is to reflect on the political instruments with which , in the final weeks and months before the crucial meetings of the Intergovernmental Conference , this Parliament can actually step up its pressure on the Conference to a far higher level .
By instruments of pressure I mean drastic measures , ranging from a vote of censure on the Commission for not heeding the voice of Parliament on this matter to blocking the budget for a European Union that we cannot regard as the Europe we owe to our people .
Mr President , in my brief speech I would like to draw the attention of the Commissioner , Marcelino Oreja , as a doctor of law , a professor of international law , a diplomat , a former minister of foreign affairs , a former Secretary General of the Council of Europe and today a highly effective commissioner , to an issue he is well aware of .
This morning we celebrated the 40th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome .
As many previous speakers have said , and as the Commissioner knows , the Treaty of Rome - and the Treaties of the Communities , born of the Treaties of Paris and Rome - are distinguished for establishing an innovation in international law : the creation of supranational communities , in which relations between the States are not governed by traditional international law .
At this moment , I fear that the Council of Ministers is on the point of making a great discovery - we would describe it in Spain as ' belated discovery of the Mediterranean ' .
There are people who suddenly discover things which have been there all the time .
Well , the Council is on the point of discovering international law .
In other words , a Community based on Community law is about to be transformed into a Community under international law , like the United Nations Organization .
Not to speak for too long , and as the Commissioner will be present at the Council negotiations , I would like to give him a little advice . He should remind the Council how this Parliament operates .
Because I was quite struck by the Council 's proposal that only Members of Parliament from the countries involved in flexibility should participate .
That means if Mr Haarder , for example , is in the Chair and an issue comes up where neither England nor Finland nor Greece are part of a flexibility arrangement , Mr Haarder , who is now chairing the sitting , will have to identify each Member one by one , call the ushers and expel those Members from the Chamber one by one so that the procedure can go forward .
But another flexibility arrangement comes up next , which includes England , Sweden and Finland , but not Portugal , Spain and Germany , so again the President will have to call on each of those Members to leave and recall the others .
That will be highly entertaining and we will have great fun with it , but as I said before , I am afraid the rediscovery of international law by the Council will kill off this Community we founded 40 years ago .
Mr President , the Dutch presidency has removed age , handicap and sexual orientation from the anti-discrimination article .
That is a disgrace .
The presidency is suggesting that the existing provisions are enough for measures against discrimination and that is a load of hogwash .
The Commission has , after all , been complaining for a long time about the lack of a legal basis so I should like to know what Mr Oreja thinks about that .
It seems as if the presidency is really afraid that an article with no direct effect but requiring unanimity may be too expensive and here it is not money but rather decency which is important .
Equal rights for the elderly , the handicapped , gays and lesbians is an elementary cultural norm which should find a place in our new Treaty .
Article 119 on equal treatment for men and women , the Irish formula , equal pay for work of an equal value is , as we know , to be scrapped .
Does that cost too much as well ?
There is not a single parliament anywhere which knows what to do about this proposed article .
It shows that Europe seems increasingly set to become a cosy ministerial talk-shop .
Where is the Dutch commitment to greater democracy ?
I feel desperately let down .
Mr President , it is not surprising the Council is afraid to show its face considering the proposals it has made , because the Dutch Presidency has achieved something quite difficult : it has made things worse and shown us that things always can get worse .
The proposals it has presented are a definite step backwards .
Perhaps it is a tactic and the intention is to make us happy to go back to the bad position we were in before , because the situation now is worse .
We are definitely worse off today than we were yesterday and we are going to be even worse off tomorrow , on both institutional matters and political and social matters .
Besides , the most serious backsliding is precisely in the two areas of most concern to the citizens of Europe : women 's rights and the democratic deficit .
There is a fear of consolidating , or giving powers to , the most responsible , most democratic , most representative institution in Europe , which is the European Parliament , but there is no fear of empowering the officials and bureaucrats who are populating the Europe of today , a Europe which is pure democratic deficit .
Democratic control is the question in Europe today , and the question tomorrow will be what control there is over the European Central Bank and its vast accumulation of power .
Mr President of the Council , Mr Commissioner , Mr President of the European Parliament , we are going to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome just by saying ' more democracy for Europe ' .
Mr President , today should really be a day of great celebration , because the Rome Treaties produced many good things .
We should be grateful to the founding fathers of Europe , men like Schuman , De Gasperi and Adenauer , for having shown timely statesmanship , vision and courage .
A vision of how , after two world wars , Europe could move forward in peace and prosperity .
And the courage to take the necessary steps to that end .
Mr President , it is not a day for celebration .
Many present-day heads of government , and the Dutch presidency too , do not have the courage or vision needed to achieve the necessary break-throughs at the IGC .
I can name three respects in which things are not going too well .
There is the issue of equal treatment , the issue of flexibility and the third pillar .
Starting with equal treatment , which Mrs van Dijk already mentioned .
We expressly asked for a broad article on equal treatment and anti-discrimination to be included in the Treaty .
It now appears that on a number of counts the elderly , the handicapped , sexual orientation , the presidency is backing off .
We find that unacceptable and I can assure you that Parliament and our Group will shortly be testing the Treaty on this point .
The second point is flexibility .
We are increasingly worried about this .
We are forced to conclude that flexibility is increasingly being used as an excuse for the failure of solutions in other areas .
Not only foreign policy , but internal security and environment policy as well .
And when that happens , flexibility will not be a positive alternative , but an excuse and a weakness which will destroy the Union .
The resolution now before us thus imposes a number of tough conditions on this flexibility , the most important of which is the need to exercise democratic scrutiny .
And the fact that the Dutch presidency does not see fit to subject the farm budget to democratic scrutiny is doubtless an ominous sign .
Flexibility without such democratic accountability is unacceptable to us too .
And then there is the fight against international crime .
If this area is not included under the first pillar , and so far we have seen no official documents suggesting that it is to be , and if decisions are not taken by qualified majority , then we shall not solve this problem in Europe .
It means quite simply that we shall not be able to control drug trafficking , trafficking in human beings and the arms trade , and that Europol will remain weak and toothless .
The Dutch presidency is failing to give a lead here because it wants to keep drugs out of the third pillar or out of the first chapter of the Treaty .
But this shows us really that thanks to coffee-shop opinion in the Netherlands the internal pillar is being held hostage to international crime .
Mr President , the lights for the IGC are not at green .
They are not even at orange .
They are red .
And red is the colour of shame .
The shame of a Council which cannot do what was done in the fifties , namely show courage and vision .
Things are looking bad for the IGC .
We shall wait and see , but I hope things improve , otherwise we shall have some fierce criticisms to make afterwards .
Mr President , when in 1986 the Single Act was concluded , Altiero Spinelli stated in this chamber , with his great political and moral authority , that the mountain had given birth to a mouse .
What would he say today if he had to make a statement about the Intergovernmental Conference ?
The obvious political inability to tackle the problems linked to enlargement and the lack of definition as to progress towards the single currency , through an effective deepening of political and social integration in Europe , has led the governments to turn into decisive subjects internal security and strengthen co-operation .
It is without doubt that the increase in crime and popular insecurity linked to the unification of the European area calls for an ability to make joint responses which are also efficient , whose lack at the moment is a serious factor in the lack of prestige and the rejection of the European Union itself .
The Intergovernmental Conference has to respond to this in democratic terms .
Strengthened co-operation is being presented as a means of making progress towards European construction by overcoming the resistance of certain countries .
But how can we understand strengthened co-operation without first of all having guarantees in the Treaty of extending qualified majority voting , specifically to prevent blockages which stem from the right to veto ?
In the face of known proposals , it only makes sense to demand that we enshrine strengthened co-operation so that it cannot lead to an à la carte Europe and so that it guarantees institutional political unity , equality between the Member States and economic and social cohesion .
At the moment there are no guarantees of this , however .
On the contrary , we must beware of the possibility of this being enshrined into a genuine system of ' directoires ' , which we should only reject and fight .
The worrying tendency of the proposals coming out of the IGC to regress to methods of intergovernmental decision with reductions in the European Parliament 's own powers , would only worsen the democratic deficit and the deficit of citizenship which exist at the moment in Europe .
Mr President , in backing this motion for a resolution we wish , above all , to oppose , for the sake of democracy and solidarity in the European Union , the plans for breaking up the Union by these most unwise proposals .
Mr President , when we commemorate a truly historic event like the signing of the Treaty of Rome , I do not believe we should concentrate entirely on reliving a past act , however honourable it might be .
I believe , Mr President , we should draw out the essence , the principles and the values of a fundamental act which changed the face of our continent , interpreting them and examining them as the key to the future , particularly in terms of stimulus for the years ahead .
I think the lesson to be drawn from this commemoration is as clear as day .
I think a view of Europe firmly based on the tangible , the material , is a legitimate view of the project .
But against this balance sheet view , this view based on the notion of net contributor or net beneficiary , I believe the time has come to revisit the values which inspired the founding fathers of Europe , ideas of peace , concord , understanding and solidarity .
And they must all be understood a little in the light of circumstances and our own time , because the European Union of today was once a common market .
That position has been superseded , Mr President , and we have moved on from the concept of consumer to the concept of citizen , and from the concept of Common Market to the concept of Parliament , alongside the Commission , giving decisive impetus to the project of integrating Europe , which is now at a key point in its timetable .
Europe must be roused from its lethargy and move in the right direction , and that can only be done by combining pragmatism with a vision of the future .
I think that is the message that needs to be sent to the Intergovernmental Conference : put figures at the service of ideals , stop concentrating shortsightedly on the coming elections rather than on the coming generations and let everyone seek their own best interests in the common interest .
Mr President , I am grateful to Commissioner Oreja for being with us , because we have to ask the Commission a question in order to give our opinion to the Council , which is not represented here .
What can we say to the Council except that it is guilty of hypocrisy , that the problem today is to secure the advance of democracy , and that the objective of the national governments is , as it were , to force the Intergovernmental Conference to withdraw .
Basically , if they could abolish the European Parliament they would be more than happy .
Not only that , but they would not have to contribute a token presence once a month .
Let me give three examples .
First , during the previous part-session , we adopted a resolution on human rights and the Debré law .
President Chirac took umbrage and , as a consequence , the French Government has been wondering in the National Assembly how it can muzzle the European Parliament and prevent it from delivering any future opinions on human rights and the third pillar .
Secondly , we have for several months been refusing to approve the agreement with Turkey because of the human rights situation there .
The Council has become annoyed at this attitude , so that the conclusions of Dublin propose that Parliament 's right of assent should be limited to the association and enlargement agreements , depriving us of any power over agreements which have budgetary implications , and impairing the right of co-decision .
Why ?
Because we are a nuisance .
Thirdly , we are told that progress is being made in the area of the third pillar .
Well and good , but in practice the European Parliament is being sidelined in favour of the national parliaments .
Well , national parliaments have a much more partial view of affairs .
Not only that , they can be manipulated , because they depend on government majority systems .
And why is the European Parliament not to be allowed a say ?
Because it is a nuisance !
In these circumstances , my questions will be addressed not to the Commission , since we are in agreement , but to the Council .
I shall ask the Council : what are you really defending in the interests of advancing democracy ?
Tell us frankly what your intentions are with regard to the European Parliament .
Yes , we are a nuisance , and no we are not a conservative parliament . But that is the price of democracy .
Thank you , Mr President . The technical quality of the European anthem this morning was appalling .
We must ensure that the European project does not suffer the same fate as our anthem .
We need to enliven our act .
Although we have good reason today to celebrate forty years of the Treaty of Rome , which have brought peace and at least relative prosperity to a large part of Europe and to the people there , we also have reason to worry about the future of Europe .
The main subjects on which we consider the state of negotiations at the Intergovernmental Conference to be absolutely unsatisfactory have been referred to on several occasions today .
Without genuine institutional reform we shall be placing the European project in jeopardy .
Majority voting must become the norm , and in future there must be no more European legislation without the exercise of full codecision rights by the European Parliament .
If no breakthrough is achieved on either of these two questions during the remaining three months , the Intergovernmental Conference will not have been a success .
This in turn will put the start of accession talks with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe at risk .
As an Austrian , I firmly believe that there is a place in this united Europe for our Eastern neighbours too .
But to that end we must create a Union that is able and willing to accommodate these new member countries .
We must not jeopardize the work of the past forty years .
In the remaining months we really must do all that is humanly possible to work out sound and sustainable solutions , especially to the major institutional problems , which the Council has so far been desperately anxious to avoid .
On a point of order , Mr President , before Mr Oreja answers : numerous colleagues have commented on the fact that the Council is not present here .
To my mind the fact that we are embarking here on a debate formally entitled & # x02BC ; Questions to the Commission ' should never be a reason for the Council to think that it need not attend .
That really reflects a failure to understand Parliament 's procedures .
The Dutch presidency should appreciate that .
As I understand it , there is to be an oral amendment to the resolution tomorrow .
I think it would be a good idea for us to establish that the Dutch presidency and other presidencies too should attend all the important debates in this Parliament .
I wanted to say that before Mr Oreja begins his reply .
Mr President , I want to thank all those who have spoken here today .
Their words are of immense importance to me in the work I have to do on behalf of the Commission at the Intergovernmental Conference .
There is something I want to tell you because I have noticed a mood of pessimism in many of the speeches we have heard here .
I want to say that the Conference has not yet entered the final stage , which is the negotiation stage , and you know from experience what the previous conferences were like .
You remember the 1985 Conference and the 1991 Conference so you are perfectly aware that we did not really get into the negotiating stage until the final straight .
There has been no real negotiating so far . We only began to approach negotiation a few weeks ago .
Up to now there have been monologues , hardly even dialogues and , of course , what there has not been is real negotiation .
Negotiation is starting now because now we have documents for discussion .
Consequently what I do want to tell you is that the role of Parliament is very important at a time like this .
I think you can have a decisive impact if you do everything possible to set out your positions clearly and as you know , the great majority of them are shared by the Commission .
For example I do not remember a single discrepancy between us in the speeches of your representatives at the Intergovernmental Conference .
And after those speeches I have always made clear the degree of consensus that exists .
So I do think this is the really decisive moment .
We are on the eve of 25 March , but we are also on the eve , in practice , of the Amsterdam European Council .
This is a decisive moment and we will see what happens .
I really have nothing to reply to because there have not been any questions to the Commission as such , and that is evidence of the great consensus between us .
Some issues have been raised , for instance Mr Dell 'Alba 's point , also made by Professor Medina - professor and master , I am delighted to acknowledge that here - about the European Parliament 's participation in enhanced cooperation .
You know the Commission 's position .
It is the same as Parliament 's .
We do not believe the unity of Parliament can be broken . That would not make sense and that is the position we have expressed , both in our report and , very particularly , in the speeches I have made in the Intergovernmental Conference .
I also want to say a word on Mr Anastassopoulos ' reference to the role of the Commission .
' Know thyself ' is probably the most difficult precept .
But in the end , only the Commission has said what it thinks of itself , after expressing its view on the other institutions .
I want to comment on Mr Anastassopoulos ' remark about first and second class commissioners in the Commission .
I do not entirely agree .
There are no first and second class commissioners , there are commissioners who have an assigned portfolio and there may be commissioners who do not have an assigned portfolio , which does not mean that their remit is less important .
Forgive me if I share a personal confidence : I remember that when I started the negotiations for Spain 's membership of the European Communities , a central role in that College of Commissioners was played by Commissioner Natali , who was responsible for all enlargement issues , but he did not have a portfolio .
So what I regard as important is having a good balance . Now , as long as there is a proper allocation of responsibilities to those commissioners who have been assigned a portfolio , I do not think holding or not holding a portfolio necessarily implies first or second class commissioners .
I think we have tried to strengthen something we consider essential : the legitimacy of the Commission .
And in this connection , we have made clear the European Parliament 's role in the election of the President and in the recognition or investiture of the College of Commissioners .
I think that is essential .
And I can tell you that personally , as a member of the previous College of Commissioners , I now feel that I have greater legitimacy , not least because of the hearings that were held here with the various members of the Commission prior to the final investiture .
That all strengthens legitimacy and I think that is very positive .
And finally , I also want to reply to Mr Frischenschlager 's point about there being no agreement in the conference and that it was not enough for the Commission to say we were hopeful without saying how agreement would be reached .
I venture to say that there may not be agreement on the Commission 's issues but first , the Commission has a report covering its views on every issue , and second , we are continuously making our views known and I have made it clear exactly what our thinking is as regards common foreign and security policy , and what we think about the role of Parliament and the role of the Commission in the third pillar . We are making these points daily and I frequently do so in the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
But in any case , I want to tell you that I have been greatly enriched by this meeting , by being here and receiving encouragement from Parliament , and by the essential feeling that Parliament is the cornerstone at this time because it represents the people .
So I want to appeal to Parliament at this critical and significant time , on the eve of 25 March , and above all on the eve of the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference , to keep us continuously in touch with Parliament 's thinking so that we can move forward in the right direction .
Mr President , I am sorry to prolong matters , but I put a very specific question to the Commissioner .
I have not had an answer to it and I would like one .
I asked him what the Commission thinks about the Council 's position that anti-discrimination safeguards for the elderly , the handicapped and gays must be covered in the current package of social measures , when I thought the Commission had always said that there was not as yet any legal basis for that .
So I should like to hear from the Commission whether it thinks that this position of the Dutch presidency is indeed correct or whether it cannot do anything about it .
I had in fact made a note of that but I overlooked it amongst all these papers .
This is an open question .
The principle of non-discrimination has been accepted in relation to this matter and should appear in the treaty , which represents a step forward because , for me - and this is the position of the Commission - a central idea is that everything affecting citizenship - and citizenship is human rights - must be governed by non-discrimination .
Two criteria have been applied to the list of what we understand as non-discrimination . One generates a long list of what non-discrimination covers , and the other gives a generic description .
As regards actual description , one of the questions which some members of the Intergovernmental Conference have raised is whether or not this means - specifically in relation to people with disabilities - recognition of a legal basis and , as a presumption of that , whether there would be common policies .
That is not the intention of other members of the conference .
So it is an open question , and the issue will be looked at again in April . At the moment we can make no progress , specifically because the Dutch Presidency has not taken a final view on the matter .
Mrs van Dijk can be sure that I will take careful note of what she wants - I think I feel very close to the positions she herself maintains - and I hope I will be able to give her an answer here , in this House , or in the Committee on Institutional Affairs , when this matter is back on the agenda of the Intergovernmental Conference in April .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.55 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Budget guidelines for 1998
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0080 / 97 by Mr Tillich , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on budget guidelines for 1998 - Section III ; -A4-0079 / 97 by Mr Tomlinson , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on budget guidelines for 1998 - Other sections .
Mr President , I should like to begin by sincerely thanking the relevant committees of the House for their cooperation in producing the guidelines , and I am also grateful to the Commission , which is represented here today , and indeed to the Dutch presidency , for the climate of openness in which the negotiations on the guidelines have so far been conducted .
I believe that these will form a sound basis for proceeding with the discussions on the 1998 budget .
The budget of the European Union for 1998 - just like the 1997 budget - has to be efficient and transparent , but it must also be focused exclusively on programmes and projects which represent added value at European level .
The aim must be to contribute to job creation and social and economic development in the Union , and at the same time to support the Member States in their efforts to meet the convergence criteria for economic and monetary union .
Most importantly , the Commission should improve its forecasting of agricultural expenditure - subject to monitoring by Parliament - and the Commission 's preliminary draft budget should already reflect the impact of agricultural prices .
In my view , the call from some Member States for zero growth is unrealistic .
The European Parliament will approve a moderate increase , but only if the outstanding problems - the creation of a reserve under the agriculture guideline , the absence of legal bases , the question of second and third pillar expenditure and Parliament 's right to be consulted , and the classification of expenditure - can be resolved in a way that is acceptable to the House .
Parliament is also calling on the Intergovernmental Conference not to alter the budgetary rules of the Union in any way that would tend to restrict the budgetary powers of the House .
As general rapporteur , I am proposing the following priorities for 1998 : combating unemployment by focusing European resources on investment and job creation ; using innovative credit arrangements to support small and medium-sized enterprises which are creating viable jobs for the future ; beginning the process of preparing applicant countries for accession to the European Union ; developing a suitable instrument to facilitate the inclusion of these countries in all the policies of the Union , while at the same time initiating a process of adjustment to EU policies to take account of the specific problems which enlargement poses for the Member States ; supporting existing youth and education programmes which have a clear multiplier effect ; and getting the cultural programmes moving once again .
I have some further observations on the individual categories .
Category 1 holds the key to achieving the success that the Council is seeking with the 1998 budget .
The Commission and the Council must appreciate that with an overall budget increase of 3 % - leaving the Structural Funds untouched , in line with the decisions taken in Edinburgh - and zero growth in the other categories , they will still have to find ECU 2.3 billion from agricultural spending if they wish to move towards zero growth .
Fair enough : we await their proposals .
As regards the greening of agricultural policy , I would point out that this simply means incorporating the protection of the environment into all areas of Union policy , as proposed by the House and implemented by the Commission .
I would therefore suggest that the two committees concerned - the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee on the Environment - should reach agreement over the coming months on how this is to be achieved .
Turning to category 4 , the priority which I am proposing in my capacity as general rapporteur is as follows : the most important element will be the creation of a pre-accession instrument that will provide for structural changes in the Commission 's services in 1998 and a programme for the pre-accession phase , as well as the requirements which will then emerge .
We expect the Commission to bring forward appropriate proposals to this effect in time for the first reading .
As regards the poor utilization rates of the PHARE , TACIS and MEDA programmes , we are talking here about EU taxpayers ' money .
If no takers can be found in the recipient countries for what is on offer , there are reasons for that situation .
With regard to category 5 , we need better administrative management .
The cumbersome Eurocracy must become an efficient authority at the service of European citizens and businesses .
I would ask you to support the guidelines when we vote tomorrow .
Mr President , the guidelines motion for the 1998 budgetary procedure for the other institutions is very clear .
In the general framework that is set out in paragraphs 1-44 it makes it quite clear that the circumstances that we are facing are not austerity , but they are not encouraging of anything approaching profligacy .
They are adequate without encouraging any degree of excess .
We talk very clearly there about the need to honour our interinstitutional agreements to keep below the ceilings of the financial perspective and we point out that the suggested 3 % increase in appropriations should not constitute a target to be reached , but a guideline not to be exceeded .
There is very clear reference in the report to human resources which , without going through it all , points out that there has , in fact , been a 23 % increase in staff appropriations over the last 10 years .
Some of that has been related to posts linked to enlargement , but the most important paragraph is paragraph 10 , which points out quite clearly that the Committee on Budgets commends to this House the view that as in 1997 , no new posts should be created in 1998 for the other institutions overall .
It does , however , point out the special circumstances that confront the Court of Auditors .
The Court of Auditors has had the responsibility laid on it by the Maastricht Treaty to produce the statement of assurance .
In order to get the necessary staff working on that , the normal , value-formoney audit work has suffered and that needs to be taken into account by this part of the budget authority .
Under human resources it specifically underlines the need for each appointing authority to justify each proposed upgrading of post so that we do not just get global proposals , but a justification relating to them .
Paragraph 12 refers to the minimum recourse to external consultants .
I should make one point quite clearly to the House : this does not say do not use them , but only use them where their expertise is specifically necessary to complement the work of Parliament .
I turn to the part of the report that deals with appropriations for property and supplies .
I particularly draw the House 's attention to paragraph 15 in which we reaffirm the European Parliament 's policy of property acquisitions in as short a time as possible , consistent with other budgetary demands .
This really is intended to be an endorsement of the existing position of Parliament 's Bureau 's where they are talking about purchase over a period of 10 years .
It goes on to recommend this as an appropriate policy for other institutions and urges interinstitutional cooperation to this end to be accelerated .
I now turn to the part of the report dealing with information technology and information policy .
Of course this is a report that covers all institutions , but as we are mainly parliamentarians here , I take a parliamentary example .
Information technology produces good , bad and indifferent .
I visited today Parliament 's web-site .
On the positive side I discovered , for example , that the report of the Committee of Inquiry on transit fraud that was presented this morning is already available on the Internet in five languages : English , Dutch , Swedish , French and German - very positive .
On the negative side , while still visiting the parliamentary web-site , I went to look at work in progress in parliamentary committees and I came up with the remarkable fact that no documents were found .
It shows that our information policy is a somewhat mixed bag .
There are very clear recommendations about the need to get consistent standards in our information policy , in our information technology policy , and not only in relation to them , but in relation to those imaginative projects which are so imaginative that not all Members of the House fully understand them , such as the Epicentre .
So there are very clear guidelines there .
I commend the report to the House .
It was overwhelmingly supported in committee and forms the basis of aspirations to deal with the other institutions ' budgets in a single reading .
The only thing that might possibly stand in the way of that is property policy .
The key to the solution is in the hands of our absent friends , our friends from the Council who have chosen not to be with us here this evening .
Mr President , Parliament 's Agriculture Committee expects to co-operate well with the Committee on budgets .
We think that both parties gain from good co-operation and we have every confidence that Mr Tillich will ensure that it really is good this year .
Looking more closely at the farm proposals we see that agriculture has been experiencing zero growth for many years now .
There is perhaps an explanation for this : the agriculture guideline is not in itself a reason to spend money , it represents a ceiling , unlike the structural funds which do specify how much has to be spent each year .
I think it is hard to explain to the man in the street and above all the man in the street in Europe that spending on the structural funds has to rise this year by 8 % , when there is still a whole pile of about 30 billion which has not been spent .
What is the logic of that ? Even if it was agreed in Edinburgh in 1992 ?
To me one of the most difficult features of the farm budget is that the income supplements per hectare are not being maintained .
If more income support is really to replace price support as the future policy of the Union , that policy must be credible , and it will not be if we move the goalposts half way through .
So I think , and the resolution says this , that we need to have a thorough discussion in the budgetary authority concerning category B1 .
What exactly is compulsory expenditure and what is non-compulsory expenditure ?
Compulsory expenditure is that used to support prices and incomes and non-compulsory expenditure is used for other things , ideally covered by category B2 , for example , which as I said just now is already overfunded .
We are keen to have this debate , Mr President .
Mr President , the fishing industry , as you know , is one of strategic importance for the seaboard regions of the entire European Union , where it represents an often irreplaceable source of jobs and economic development in these particularly sensitive zones .
Even though the Common Fisheries Policy does too often adopt an approach which is more remedial than positive , it nevertheless plays a not insignificant role in these sensitive regions , to the benefit of fishing communities .
This Common Fisheries Policy can be broken down into a number of aspects which are closely connected to each other although they appear on different budget lines .
That is why , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , I hope the rapporteur will be able to preserve the overall cohesion of our budget , which represents an indissoluble whole .
How can the technical resources of the CFP be deployed if the financial resources are lacking for the control system ?
How is a reasonable orientation plan to be implemented if the Structural Funds are not preserved ?
That was the argument with which I approached the chairman of the Committee on Budgets and yourself , and I thank you for having already taken into account , even if only partially , the requests I made .
Finally , regarding the fisheries agreements , I would remind you that , during the May part-session , we were asked to vote upon the Crampton report on the development of international fisheries agreements .
Those agreements are a source of employment for a very large number of structurally sensitive maritime regions .
I would also remind you that these fisheries agreements assist the development and stability of a number of less favoured States where fisheries can represent an important resource , and that those States include a number of our ACP partners .
I would therefore ask the rapporteur to retain intact the line of credits corresponding to these important agreements .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy I wish to make two points - one on research and one on energy .
As far as research and development is concerned , there is a consensus amongst both the scientific and the industrial communities that research funded by the EU has a real multiplier effect , that it adds value .
It is therefore all the more disappointing that the Council of Ministers is being so unambitious in its proposed funding for research .
As you are well aware , we were expecting to have the fourth framework programme enhanced by a sum of about ECU 700m .
Indeed this was exactly the sort of sum that was needed in order to enhance the research of the EU .
Instead of that the Council comes up with a miserly suggestion of ECU 100m , ECU 35m of which they propose to spend on a new crisis need : that of BSE .
It seems to us that ECU 100m is totally inadequate for increasing the competitiveness of the industries in the European Union and hence employment .
The United States and Japan indeed spend far more than the European Union on research .
My second point is on energy .
The European Union entered into obligations both at Rio and in Berlin to contribute to combating climate change through measures such as energy efficiency and renewable energy .
The problem here is the long-standing and widespread problem of a lack of legal base .
The Commission is doing its best , I know , to adopt a framework wherein these programmes can be included .
I hope that this will be done in time for adequate funding to be made available in the 1998 budget .
Mr President , as the previous speaker has done , I should like to congratulate both our rapporteurs here this evening .
My comments will focus principally on Mr Tillich 's report and the Commission report on the Commission budget for 1998 .
However , I would like to say that Mr Tomlinson has done an excellent job in his report .
We all know that he is a forward-looking man , rather like Batman visiting his website , and we like to know that he is well ahead of us in these information technologies and making sure that Parliament will be well provided .
Turning to Mr Tillich 's report , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur .
It provides succinct guidelines so we are giving a clear message to the Commission and the Council this evening .
It is a pity that the Council is not here .
It does not augur well for the rest of our dialogue .
We understand that the presidency does not take quite so much interest in such a day-to-day process as the annual budget procedure is now becoming .
On behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , I should like to clarify our position as a group .
In the 1997 budget we focused on maintaining our commitments under the inter-institutional agreement , which we did not wish to see disappear then , nor do we wish to see it disappear during this budget procedure .
Our second plank was to go for zero , or almost zero , growth in the 1997 budget , as the European Union is preparing for the single currency .
The position this year will be somewhat altered in so far as the way the Council is prepared to enter into dialogue with the Parliament as part of the budgetary authority is concerned .
That leads me to make three specific points regarding the preparations for the 1998 budget .
Firstly , we want to see outstanding items resolved and we encourage the Commission and the Dutch presidency to focus on the item of the legal basis in particular .
This has been trailing for some time and we think it should now be fully resolved before the first reading of the 1998 budget .
Equally , we wish to make sure that the demands of Parliament vis-à-vis the Intergovernmental Conference , in particular the example of obligatory and non-obligatory expenditure , are taken up within the Intergovernmental Conference and that we reach a satisfactory solution on it .
Secondly , when it comes to specific priorities , the guidelines are extremely clear .
They give four priority areas .
The Group of the European People 's Party would like to make sure that those projects which have a multiplier effect , giving real value for EU money , are not dismissed simply because the Commission or the Council in its input into the guidelines would like to see certain projects which are dear to Parliament dismissed .
We want to make sure that we get value for money and we will insist that there is clarity in the way in which the analysis is done on the particular lines .
We will examine the Commission 's report on that .
Finally , the most important part of this budget - and I think my group will share this view - is the pre-accession strategy .
Terry Wynn has rightly drawn attention to that in paragraphs 27 and 28 .
At the dawn of new challenges for the European Union , we know there will be reports coming from the Commission later this year on what kind of strategy we should be following for enlargement of the European Union over the next decade .
It is surely in the 1998 budget that we need to take account of that as a first step .
Mr President , as you see , you have eventually given me the floor spontaneously , and , personally , I welcome that .
The subject is an important one .
As too often happens , it is not one to arouse the enthusiasm of the multitude , because all we see here are the same faces as usual : the members of the Committee on Budgets , Commissioner Liikanen and the administrators of the Committee on Budgets .
But , as all these people have eventually come to know me quite well , I feel sure that none of them will demand my exclusion , and that I shall be able to express my group 's opinion , seriously and calmly , on the budgetary guidelines and on the reports by Mr Tillich and Mr Tomlinson , whom I congratulate on their efforts .

These budgetary guidelines have to be seen in the new economic context : a context where the markets are taking account of the forthcoming introduction of the single currency .
In particular , I have no doubt that the pressures on Europe 's currencies , which have enriched speculators in recent years , were largely related to the uncertainty felt by the market about the coming of the single currency .
The lowering of interest rates , the return of savers to Europe 's stock exchanges , the collapse of the relationship of the monetary investment companies with variable capital and the recovery of the dollar are all signs that economic activity in Europe is returning to normal and favourable omens for a recovery of growth - the one essential condition for new job creation .
That is why our group supports paragraph 1 of the section entitled ' General comments ' in Mr Tillich 's report , and I myself attach particular importance to the following phrase of that paragraph : ' to support the Member States in their efforts to meet the convergence criteria ' .
I think something needs to be added to that , to set in motion the ideas put forward just now by Mr Wynn when he said that we want the best budget achievable : the best budget achievable is not the biggest budget achievable but the budget in which best use is made of the appropriations .
And I believe the problem of increasing the volume of the budget for 1998 is not the crucial problem - the crucial problem is knowing when we shall finally see implementation rates that are maximum implementation rates .
This is why we naturally support the four priorities defined by the Committee on Budgets , because one of those four priorities seems to me to be of the utmost importance .
I refer to the exploitation of the job creation potential of the SMEs , because the hope of a recovery of growth is the one essential condition for new job creation .
On agriculture , our group is still firmly committed to the principle of compulsory expenditure , and I say yet again : the agricultural budget is not a budget , it is an instrument of market regulation which should be thought about in economic terms and not in budgetary terms .

That , by the way , is one of the reasons why I find myself so frequently disagreeing with Mr Brinkhorst , though that didn 't stop me supporting , at the meeting of the Committee on Budgets , his amendment which is now the subject of paragraph 4 of the Tillich report , because I believe that the opening of a genuine dialogue with the Council will be one of the essential conditions for the success of our budget .
I take this opportunity to say that , once again , I am shocked that the Council is not represented at this debate .
Regarding the utilization of the appropriations , it is clear that the considerable shortfall in take-up of the PHARE and TACIS appropriations should make us seriously consider redeploying those appropriations which are not used .
I think it is unacceptable to find ourselves with ECU three billion that have not been used and are going to be returned to the exchequers of the Member States at a time when we are facing desperate situations in other sectors .
I do of course support the stepping-up of efforts and the additional financing for mine clearance in the former Yugoslavia , because I believe that the only way to induce refugees to return to the former Yugoslavia is to rebuild , and that it is impossible to rebuild any housing until the mines have been cleared .
I shall be much briefer about Mr Tomlinson 's report , confining myself to a very short comment on the appropriations for property and supplies .
Our situation with regard to property is an unnatural one .
The rental system for a Parliament which , at least in the minds of its founders , is intended to last forever should not lead to the enrichment of the property promoters who carry out the transactions .
Especially as regards the incredible affair of the basement floors of the ' Caprice des dieux ' , I trust we shall reach a satisfactory solution before the end of the year .
We shall also be asking tomorrow for a separate vote on the end of paragraph 16 of Mr Tomlinson 's report .
Our group cannot accept a secret accord between the President of the European Parliament and the Luxembourg Government .

Mr President , as rapporteur for last year 's budget I would like , first of all , to wish my successor , Mr Tillich , every success and my old friend , Mr Tomlinson because 1998 is again a crucial year , perhaps not so much in financial terms but for what this budget contributes to progress on the institutional dialogue .
As a European and a Dutchman I am sad to see that the Council presidency is again absent as it was during the BSE debate .
I would like to ask Mr Liikanen what he expects of the dialogue .
The 1998 budget is only going to be a success if outstanding questions not resolved in the 1997 budget are resolved .
These points have been made by others .
I would simply like to strengthen this point by saying that if we cannot resolve them , clearly we are going to enter into a confrontational phase .
Secondly , 1998 is very important because it will show whether or not budgetary powers which actually exist will be taken away .
Again this depends on the absent presidency .
Pillar II and pillar III will become very important in the future not so much in monetary terms , but in terms of accountability and democratic control .
Priorities have been established and I am very happy that we have fewer priorities this year than we had in the first instance last year .
I am happy that all colleagues participated in this point .
I would also like to stress the aspect of the pre-accession .
We are living in a phase where very soon Europe will be much more than the 15 countries that we have now .
Therefore it is necessary to redevelop instruments not only for the new countries joining , but for existing countries .
My group will plead for something like PIMs for countries which , at the present time in the European Union , need to reorient themselves because they will be under special pressure .
It cannot be an excuse to delay the adhesion of new countries but it will very much facilitate what at the present time cannot yet be done .
Finally , agriculture remains important .
The ad hoc procedure last year was a failure because of interinstitutional issues - I hope we can resolve this - and also because of extra-institutional issues .
Again I would like to ask the Commission what it expects the absent Council to do on this point ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur , Mr Tillich , is steering the House in the right general direction with the priorities he has identified .
In practice , however , one has to ask exactly how unemployment is to be tackled and preparations made for enlargement to the east , and how these things will be costed .
To my mind , this also begs the question of how these two priorities relate to one another . I believe that they are very closely related , because the Europe that we live in is already an entity , even if the rate of progress towards accession varies in the ten countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
We have a part to play in shaping the process of structural change which is taking place throughout Eastern Europe - a process intensified and accelerated by the prospect of accession to the EU - just as we are involved in the structural change that our Member States must undergo in dealing with an industrial policy which has to some extent run its course .
Surely it follows , therefore , that we should take a joint approach to the challenges which are involved in this process of structural change in Eastern and Western Europe , and learn from one another ?
The lessons of our current structural policy could usefully be applied in Eastern Europe , and vice versa .
That is why , as well as the pre-accession instrument which the rapporteur has provided for in category 4 , I am proposing a specific structural instrument in a new , additional category 2a .
This would also serve to emphasize the gradual budgetary transition from external to internal policy as regards the applicant countries .
At the same time , by creating a negative reserve , we would produce a technically neat solution which does not affect the present obligations to the Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first let me encourage the President in relation to the surmenage we have imposed on him today ; Mr President , you have my full solidarity !
I also welcome the Secretary-General who is in the gallery for the first time , I believe , at this night sitting on two reports .
Of course I must also praise the two rapporteurs .
However , I must express some concern about the Tillich report , and in part also about the Tomlinson report .
In relation to the Tillich report , improved by the amendments , I have one major anxiety which I want to share with you in my brief speaking time .
I think it is inconceivable for Parliament to tackle the budgetary procedure in a rigorous manner and in the context of a zero-growth budget without regard for the outcome of the Amsterdam Conference and what might happen if , please God , the European Union finds means of responding concretely to the challenges which we have discussed so often and so seriously : unemployment , etc .
This timid approach to things , saying that as from March we do not intend to increase the Community budget by a penny , do not intend to increase the staffing by a single post , while the other institutions are to acquire more powers by virtue of the Amsterdam Conference - the Commission could have more powers , the Union as such could acquire responsibility for new policies - this timidity which forces us to calculate , as though this were our priority , the number of annual leave cases where the place of origin is outside the European Union - I certainly do not regard this as an encouraging start .
In particular , Mr President , I am referring to a question that was central to our discussions during the last term and to which Parliament devoted much energy , to the point of nearly deciding on a motion of censure on President Santer and the entire Commission . Not a word is said in the report about the priority we attached to this question and which the Commission is prepared to support at our incentive , namely the need to carry out more rigorous controls on the quality of human food to ensure that we have a health and food policy that is concrete and controlled by the Commission .
Not a word on all that , Mr Tillich !
I have here some amendments which I hope you will examine with attention .
We had a joint amendment which was inexplicably rejected .
I really hope Parliament restores it so as to introduce a minimum of logic into the subject of our debate .
As for food aid and humanitarian aid to third countries , we have discussed the extent to which the lines would be taken up and utilized ; we have already pointed to the cases where cuts need to be made .
They are budget lines - B7-210 , B7-212 , B7-217 , B7-219 - which have utilization rates of 180 , 160 , 152 % ; well , what are we saying to this ?
' Estime important d 'évaluer l 'efficacité de la politique de l 'aide humanitaire . '
Qu 'est-ce qu 'on doit évaluer ?
In fact we must encourage this policy and make it work .
I have tabled an amendment on that too , which I hope will be adopted .
Thank you , Mr Dell 'Alba .
Thank you both for your intervention and for your words of encouragement , but please rest assured that this Presidency has great staying power .
If you wish to test it out , you may do so on Friday morning , when I shall still be in the chair .
However , I should say that , generally speaking , when honourable members comply with the Rules of Procedure - as they usually do - presiding over a sitting is not a chore , but a pleasure .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Tillich , having acquainted myself with Mr Tillich 's report I took the liberty of comparing his proposal with that put forward by the Commission regarding the 1997-98 farm product ' price ' package .
The sum was easily done : a 3 % increase in the general budget , a 0.5 % increase in the agricultural budget , an 8 % increase in the Structural Funds .
In a word , a cut in the agricultural budget relative to the guideline , on the pretext of non-utilization of the sums appropriated to the EAGGF for several years , and an increase for the Structural Funds even though it is common knowledge that we do not use 70 % of the sums appropriated .
A case of double standards that requires an explanation .
Your proposal for agriculture , coupled with the Commission 's , puts us - and will put us - in serious difficulties before the 1999 international negotiations .
If these proposals are accepted as they stand , Europe will be committing a serious strategic error by reducing these payments for the major crops .
Allow me to remind you that , even as we debate the matter , the exact opposite is happening in the United States .
Their new legislation provides cereal growers , until the year 2000 , with a level of subsidies at least equivalent to what it was previously .
So our competitors are going to step up their farming activities and gain market shares .
We , as usual , are going to do the opposite and we - or rather you - are going to bear the responsibility .
In the light of this situation , our group proposes two simple amendments whose common objective is to safeguard the future of our agriculture .
First , the European Union must keep its promises to our farmers , and secondly the Maastricht convergence criteria must not be used as an alibi .
Considering the weakness of the Commission 's proposals , it is therefore necessary to retain the principle of compulsory expenditure for all the agricultural lines .
I cannot believe , Mr Tillich , that on this fortieth anniversary of the Treaty of Rome you failed to take account of the great success of this Common Agricultural Policy by condemning it .
Mr President , although I am opposed to the Government of my country , I find the position of the Council of Ministers more logical than those of the Commission and this Parliament .
The proposed 3 % increase in expenditure seems to me excessive .
In every European country the equivalent expenditure - in other words the investment or intervention expenditure - is not increasing .
It is stable or even declining .
Consequently , genuine austerity would not be to increase expenditure by 3 % but , at the very least , to leave it unchanged .
The only acceptable rate of growth for European taxation and European public spending is zero .
That would be a strong signal to the tax-paying citizen .
A brief digression : in the southern French towns where the electorate has voted for mayors belonging to my political party , the National Front , local taxation will fall in 1997 .
That is something that is extremely well received by public opinion and by the taxpayers .
It is an extremely strong signal .
Parliament would do well to follow that example , the more so since the increases proposed to us are essentially being justified by the 8 % increase in the Structural Funds .
That increase is unrealistic .
It is unrealistic because everyone knows , and indeed everyone is saying , that there is a wide gap between the appropriations committed and the appropriations taken up .
Providing for excessive expenditure , over and above what can possibly be used , is quite obviously a source of waste .
Everywhere where appropriations are too high - which is the case with the Structural Funds - there is the danger of waste , the danger of clientage .
The justification offered for this expenditure on the Structural Funds , and on other lines , especially social policy , is the justification of employment - the struggle against unemployment .
Unfortunately , the Structural Funds do not create jobs .
They move jobs . They put jobs on wheels , trundling them around Europe from one place to another but without ever creating new ones .
What could create jobs in Europe is different trade policy , different relations with the rest of the world , but not the Structural Funds .
Incidentally , we had an example this morning - I am sorry to go back to this - the Renault business .
What happened ?
The European Union allocated a number of Structural Fund appropriations to the States of southern Europe , specifically Portugal and Spain .
It was obvious for Renault to build factories there , factories which produced cars more cheaply than other factories further north .
The Structural Funds contributed to this job creation in southern Europe .
And yet , in this case too , what we have is not expansion but regression : the trade-off is the closure of the Vilvoorde factory , which will probably persuade Europe , through the Structural Funds , to make appropriations in order to compensate for the job losses .
In a word , the Structural Funds do not create jobs - at the most , they move them .
The social policies for combating unemployment are ineffective , or at best they try to make unemployment more bearable .
That is no way to improve the situation in Europe .
Mr President , firstly I would like to congratulate the two rapporteurs who are in the chamber on their reports , but I will concentrate on Mr Tillich 's report and , owing to the lack of time available , will deal with only a small number of aspects .
We refer to this report as ' Guidelines ' , i.e. its aim is to guide the Council , to provide a course to be followed , to inform the Council that these are Parliament 's priorities .
The Council would be wise to bear this in mind for its first reading .
The first piece of advice for the Council is that there are still a number of disputes outstanding which are of great significance for Parliament .
We would like to resolve these matters once and for all , together , and they include the matter of the legal basis for many budget lines , particularly those lines about which European citizens are extremely sensitive .
Mention should also be made of the problem of classifying expenditure . This is an important topic given that the European Parliament is one of the branches of the budget authority .
The next piece of advice from the European Parliament to the Council is that this House is very clear about where its policy priorities lie , about where emphasis should be placed , and the most important matter is the fight against unemployment .
No one should be in any doubt that unemployment is a real domestic tragedy for whomever is affected by it .
I would like to end by expressing a wish - please would the Council read the verbatim proceedings of this debate , so that it knows what has been going on , since it has not deemed it necessary to attend .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Tillich on his excellent report and also because , in this exercise , he has continued to make use of the formula of cooperation between the various parliamentary committees , inaugurated in the budget for 1997 , which is proof of the openness and cooperative mood of the Committee on Budgets .
A result of this openness has been that no fewer than eleven parliamentary committees other than the Committee on Budgets have formulated amendments to these budget guidelines : 39 of the 134 amendments tabled come from these committees , despite this not having been an easy task .
The translation of the report was available on 25 February and the period available for submitting amendments ended on 4 March - there was barely time to react , especially since the ordinary parliamentary committees do not receive the privileged treatment in terms of time periods , translation , availability of rooms and permission for meetings which the Committee on Budgets has .
I would like to concentrate on the amendments tabled by the Committee on Regional Policy - although not all were accepted in their entirety , many were incorporated into Mr Tillich 's report , either directly or via compromise amendments .
Others no longer needed immediate approval in the light of the report 's final text .
The original wording of paragraph three of the report caused the Committee on Regional Policy much concern , since it accepted from the commencement of the budget procedure not only an average increase below the ceiling fixed in the financial perspectives but also wanted to apply that reduction equally to all expenditure categories , which meant that not only would expenditure within Category 2 be cut back but , also , in this exercise , the reduction would impinge on commitment appropriations . This signifies ignorance of the fact that the amount allotted to the Structural Funds , referred to in the financial perspectives , not only constitutes a simple authorization but also an expenditure target , as derives from Article 12 , paragraph two , of the Framework Regulations of the Structural Funds .

We are therefore grateful that the Committee on Budgets has amended that paragraph three in the terms given in the compromise amendment tabled by Mr Tillich , including within the demands presented to the Council respect for the compromises established in the Framework Regulations of the Structural Funds .
It is our belief that the budget authority must not compromise either growth or employment .

For the same reasons , our committee was concerned by the original wording of paragraph 12 of the report and we believe that Mr Christodoulou 's amendment 72 , which amended the said paragraph , is more appropriate , since it firstly points to the need to continue the structural policy , in accordance with the Edinburgh agreements , and also expresses its concern about the percentage of payments made , asking the Commission to issue a detailed report and submit proposals aimed at rationalizing and improving the effectiveness of these policies .
Overall , we think this is a reasonable report and I would like to conclude by congratulating Mr Tillich once again on his having written a report which makes the requirements of budgetary austerity imposed by Economic and Monetary Union compatible with continuity of economic and social cohesion .
( FI ) Mr President , the reports under discussion create a good basis for the preparation of next year 's budget , and I should like to congratulate Mr Tillich and Mr Tomlinson on their reports .
The primary objective of next year 's budget has been defined as the prevention of unemployment .
It occupies both the first and second places on the list of priorities .
Unemployment is a terrible scourge in Europe .
There are already nearly 20 million unemployed and unfortunately no end to the growth in unemployment is in sight .
Neither is it possible to talk of European cohesion if our citizens consider that the European Union is not capable of reducing unemployment .
Still less can we speak of cohesion when there is a lurking suspicion that the European Union 's policy itself increases unemployment .
Thus the fight against unemployment must be seen to be a particularly central task for the EU as a whole .
In the creation of new jobs , small and medium-sized enterprises occupy a key position .
It is therefore right and proper that the budget 's second priority area is improving the operating conditions for small and medium-sized enterprises .
The structural funds have a key role to play in strengthening business activity .
The concern expressed in the report about the large discrepancy between commitments and payments in the structural funds is partly justified .
There is no point in committing funds if they are not used .
Over the last five years almost 20 % remained unused .
Mr President , subject to these comments I still have great hopes of next year 's draft budget .
Mr President , my group cannot settle for the report before us as adopted by the Committee on Budgets .
I particularly regret the fact that the necessary rigour that this 1998 budget should show has virtually disappeared in the report .
At a time when the Member States are being asked to make substantial efforts to reduce their budget deficits , to reduce their public spending , and in some cases to increase taxation too , it is wrong to have this kind of increase in expenditure in the European Community 's budget , following the increases contained in the 1996 and 1997 budgets .
The Commission must be told that we want to subject ourselves to the same climate of austerity as is being imposed on all the Member States , and that climate must prevail in every sector of Community spending .
I also regret the fact that the principle of subsidiarity , which had rightly been invoked by the rapporteur , has disappeared at the budget review stage .
I do of course support the comments made by my colleagues Mr des Places and Mr Souchet regarding support for farmers ' incomes .
I should like to add two further points that explain my group 's hostility to the report .
The first relates to information policy .
The report says in its opening paragraphs that the necessary effort must be made on behalf of information policy .
Here again , in an austerity context it would be appropriate not to spend too much on selling the citizens of the various countries of Europe what is going to look increasingly like pure propaganda .
Finally , Mr President , we are also unable to support paragraph 37 , which refers to the establishment of a genuine European Foreign Service .
Mr President , this morning when we celebrated the 40th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome President Santer said that an economic Europe calls for a social Europe .
In the Tillich report , the European Parliament emphasizes the importance of employment , regarding it as the absolute priority , the importance of the social dimension of the European Union and the major contribution that Community funding makes to achieving social objectives .
So I consider it essential for adequate funds to continue to be earmarked for the various social policy activities financed by the Union .
I too am very displeased at the absence of the Council , with whom we want to reach agreement on the legal bases .
Frankly , I consider this attitude incomprehensible and also as unnecessarily inflexible vis à vis Parliament in particular .
I also believe it is fundamental not only to sustain our training policy but also to include in the financing of this chapter the objectives listed in the White Paper on education and training .
Today Parliament voted on a report that specifically evaluated the White Paper .
I would ask the Commission to continue with the work it began in 1996 on monitoring the utilization of the European Social Fund and establishing more systematic relations with the Member States in this area .
This work showed that there was an improvement in the rates of utilization and demonstrated that the criticisms - like those voiced here tonight - about the under-utilization of the Structural Funds and the Social Fund are in fact unjust : we must examine and check where the problems are and tackle them , to ensure that the available resources are used in full and in the best possible way .
Mr President , at this stage it is most important that we should have a clear view with regard to the agriculture budget of what the contribution of the European Parliament must be to this important section of the budget .
I think we realize already that the farm budget is now debated far more intensively than in previous years .
Above all in the Committee on Agriculture .
Only very close co-operation between the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee on Budgets can ensure that we play our proper part as Parliament and improve the quality of the budget as a whole .
The need here is for greater transparency , more realistic spending estimates and consequently the best possible use of the funds which are available for non-farm budget items .
This first report of Mr Tillich 's inspires confidence .
I hope he will demonstrate the requisite inventiveness and flexibility so that the committees concerned can agree a common view and enable the European Parliament to do likewise .
Moving on to the substance .
For the first time we have proposals , prompted by the agriculture budget , to change the income supplements in order to meet the spending criteria .
But those criteria have first been looked at unilaterally by the Council .
The agriculture guideline appears not to have played any part at all here .
More strangely still , the proposed reductions in income supplements are to be permanent , whilst the reason for them is somewhat exceptional in nature , namely the BSE crisis .
I think that this way of operating farm policy is not conducive to creating confidence amongst the producers concerned .
They are entitled to serious and in-depth consideration of the system on which they depend for their livelihood and control of which has passed almost totally to the European institutions .
Mr President , firstly allow me to thank the rapporteur , Mr Tillich , for his flexibility when discussing his document in committee , a place where there are not only contrasting ideological and regional views but also the contrasting views of the Council and of the Commission .
It is therefore obvious that it will be difficult for the House to exert an influence if the rapporteur 's principal concern is not to achieve broad consensus on the document in question .
For the sake of such consensus I think it right that the idea of the budget having to draw inspiration from subsidiarity should have been discarded , when it is precisely the budget which is the instrument implementing Community policies , not the instrument determining subsidiarity .
I am in total agreement with the priorities the rapporteur sets out in point five of his report , provided we do not forget the amounts set in Turin .
Referring to point 2 , therefore , however logical it may appear that the level of commitment appropriations should be established as a function of actual forecasts , I believe there will be less conflict if we keep to the Edinburgh agreements .
It would be something else again for us to conclude that the Financial Regulations have to be revised again in order automatically to render the commitments not used by the beneficiaries null and void .
Mr Tillich , it is difficult for us , via an annual budget , to attempt to condition programmes which have already been approved - utilizing EAGGF expenditure is not the best way to influence the environment .
Perhaps the big question mark which remains regarding this budget relates to PHARE , TACIS and MEDA .
How can we be more realistic - which is what we want to be - without breaking with the amounts agreed at the Cannes European Council ?
Mr President , I want to thank Mr Tillich for his report and congratulate him on trying so hard to represent almost everybody 's point of view .
In his general remarks he makes the point about helping the national governments to achieve the Maastricht criteria .
I have to say that this is unrealistic .
We spend 1.22 % of the GDP of the Community .
National governments spend 46 % .
Whether we go up or down a percentage point or two will not in any perceptible way affect the ability of any national government to achieve the Maastricht standards .
Yet in spite of the smallness of the budget that we spend there are , generally , quite a number of voices talking about reducing spending .
I think this is unrealistic .
Mr Tillich makes the point about his four priorities , which Mr Fabra Vallés referred to and supported .
I support too small- and medium-sized industries , unemployment , youth and culture .
These are important .
But we have already committed 80 % of the budget in agriculture and structural funds .
If we are to make any meaningful contribution to the policies proposed as priorities then we have to have at least some expansion in the amount of resources available to us .
In the area of agriculture Mr Tillich does not say much .
But he does imply that by changing the regulations we can save money .
This certainly would be bad faith and bad politics because the reform of the common agricultural policy in 1992 was intended to take us up to the next round of GATT agreements .
We should look forward to the day when we will be able to increase productivity and improve farm incomes to reduce agricultural spending .
I sincerely hope we will .
Nevertheless , for the moment it must remain .
We worry too much .
It was a six-year programme .
It is more important that it be well spent than that it be all spent .
Mr President , the European Parliament has tonight debated its priorities for the 1998 general budget .
The role of the Commission at this stage is to listen .
The institutions will have a first discussion of their positions in the trialogue on budget priorities on 9 April this year .
The Commission adopted its budget orientations for 1998 at the end of January .
It is the second time that the Commission has done so .
This procedure is one of the first innovations to strengthen financial management in the Commission and it has fulfilled the expectations .
On substance the Commission decided to continue to pursue the approach of budgetary rigour which it started with the 1997 budget and which was subsequently strengthened further by the budget authority .
The first reason to maintain a rigorous orientation is the same as last year .
The Member States are continuing their often painful efforts to get their public finances in order in the run-up to economic and monetary union .
Of course the Community budget is not big but it must , within its limits , encourage and facilitate these efforts .
There is also a second reason which is gradually becoming more important .
As the next round of enlargement approaches , the Community 's finances have to be prepared .
This has implications both for the level of spending and for the Community structural programmes .
These questions will be discussed in more detail after the Intergovernmental Conference but a smooth transition to an enlarged Community will only be possible if the remaining time is used for the required adjustments .
In its budgetary orientation debate the Commission also decided on a new method to re-establish budgetary rigour .
In fact , the traditional approach of following the financial perspectives with some small margins would not be appropriate for 1998 .
It would in fact lead to growth rates of 10 % or even more for the Community budget .
Compare this to an expected growth of less than 3 % in the Member States .
It would be simply impossible to explain such budgetary generosity at Community level to the citizens and taxpayers of Europe .
The Commission has therefore adopted a new approach to reflect on a justifiable overall growth rate first and then to discuss the priorities within such a framework .
For 1998 it has decided to aim at limiting an increase to as close as possible to 3 % .
I noticed from Mr Tillich 's draft report that the Commission and Parliament agree on the need to support the Member States in their efforts to meet the convergence criteria .
The discussions on the appropriate growth for the 1998 budget should not be overshadowed by preconditions which are , or could be , beyond reach .
Mr Brinkhorst asked me a question about the willingness of the Dutch presidency to contribute to a mutual understanding of these issues .
I cannot comment on the results but I have to say that the Dutch presidency has shown a lot of interest in the budgetary issues .
The best sign of that is that the budgetary issues will be discussed at two Ecofin Councils even though the presidency is not here at present .
( Interjection from Mr Tomlinson ) I must say to Mr Tomlinson that this morning there was another important report in this Parliament which was closely and intently followed by the presidency .
The Commission objective of 3 % is not only inspired by the expected developments in the Member States .
It also appears to be a reasonable compromise between the imperative of rigour and respect for the existing commitments of the Union .
At the level of the financial perspectives this concerns in particular the commitment appropriations for structural funds .
The decisions of Edinburgh imply a growth rate of some 8 % compared to 1997 .
That is quite high in the current circumstances .
However , unless there is an agreement in the Council and Parliament that the inter-institutional agreement should be modified - and I take it from the draft Tillich report that Parliament will not be party to such an agreement - the Commission will respect the spending objectives for commitment appropriations in Category 2 .
As far as payments are concerned , any over-budgeting must certainly be avoided .
While it is difficult to meet an overall target of 3 % , if 8 % growth is accepted for one-third of the budget , it is not impossible .
But it requires a very small growth of expenditure in the other categories .
Of course this does not exclude the reinforcement of a few particular priorities if other activities are reduced or some phased out .
The Commission has not taken a position on the balance between the categories but it is obvious that a rigorous outcome can only be acceptable if all the institutions live up to their responsibilities for different parts of the budget .
Thus the Commission adopted a proposal last week for the agricultural price package for 1997 and 1998 which is compatible with its overall budgetary strategy if - and this is crucial - the Commission proposals concerning adjustments in the cereal sector or equivalent savings are adopted .
With regard to Category 4 , the Commission is working on a review of PHARE in the direction envisaged by the rapporteur and this issue was also raised by Mr Wynn and Mr Elles .
I hope the Commission will be able to discuss the matter next week or in two weeks at the latest .
As far as its own House is concerned , the Commission has decided to propose another year of zero growth for its staff , except for enlargement and it has agreed on new quantified initiatives to redeploy its human resources to priority activities .


In closing I would like to express my best wishes to the rapporteurs , Mr Tillich and Mr Tomlinson , as well as the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Samland , for a successful budgetary procedure for 1998 .
Thank you , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
North / South cooperation to combat drugs
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0059 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Regulation on North / South cooperation in the campaign against drugs and drug addiction ( C4-0630 / 96-95 / 0167 ( SYN ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Liese ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , between 40 and 50 million people throughout the world are dependent on illegal drugs .
And that statistic conceals a host of grim individual stories .
There are many causes of drug dependency and drug dealing , and that is why an integrated approach is needed if we are to combat the problem .
One aspect which is frequently overlooked is the fact that development policy can also make a major contribution , and has to do so if the drugs problem is to be tackled successfully .
Poverty and underdevelopment are direct causes of illegal drug cultivation in the developing countries .
If no legal alternatives are available , it is easy for the mafia to step in .
Another problem that we often overlook is the fact that the drug trade and the large sums of money that it brings into a country lead to an artificial overvaluation of the currency .
This means that those who make their living from legal produce are doubly penalized , because their earning ability is reduced .
Once again , it does not pay to be honest .
In order to solve the drugs problem , therefore , some of the resources of development cooperation must also be brought into play .
The committee was unanimous in supporting this concept , and I should like to thank everyone who helped with the report .
In particular , I am grateful for the cooperation from the Commission , and for the efforts of my colleagues who collaborated on this report .
We managed not to complicate the issue of development policy with ideological arguments .
We did not engage in any debate on the principles involved in liberalizing drugs policy , because such a debate would have had little focus and would not really have solved any of the problems .
What , then , are the central concerns of the report and of the Committee on Development and Cooperation ?
We wish to see the expression of a political will to get to grips with drugs in those countries with which we cooperate : in particular , national legislation on money laundering must be put in place and suitably monitored .
We wish to see a high degree of respect for human rights , and a recognition of the key role that women play in the process of alternative development .
We also support the Commission 's initiative of cooperating with the United Nations in the fight against drugs .
As rapporteur , my main concern - shared by the committee - was to put the concept of alternative development at the top of the agenda .
Alternative development means giving people the chance to earn their living by cultivating legal produce , so that they no longer have to depend on illegal drug crops .
This may sound simple , but in practice it is very complicated .
The idea is not merely to replace coca or poppy fields with something else : we need an integrated concept .
Training must be available , marketing structures for other produce must exist , and there must be a means of transporting that produce .
Only when all this is in place will the concept of alternative development actually work .
Last year , I had the opportunity of seeing for myself a number of United Nations projects in Colombia which are also partly co-financed by the Community .
I was very impressed to see that it was possible to replace quite extensive acreages of illegal crops with legal ones and , in doing so , to offer people hope for the future .
But here too it is essential , first of all , that the rule of law should operate in the country at least to a minimum extent , and that those involved in the illegal drug trade should be penalized at some point .
The Council accepted a good deal of the report at first reading .
In particular , I think we should note that , after some initial problems , it stopped quibbling over the legal basis and recognized that Parliament had a right to be consulted .
Unfortunately , however , we did not reach agreement on every point , and that is why we are once again seeking clarification on the question of alternative development in particular .
Not only do we wish to see alternative development funded from this budget line ; we are also calling for a systematic examination of the Community 's other financial instruments and the European Development Fund to see if they can help to support the concept of alternative development .
The fact is that we must take a more committed approach in this area .
Of course , this also means that , far from cutting back on development aid , the fight against drugs is a further reason for increasing it .
If we fail to do so , the European Council statements on combating drugs will have little credibility .
Mr President , let me first compliment the rapporteur , Mr Liese , on the excellent work he has done over the past months and on succeeding , with the cooperation of all of us , in getting the Committee on Development and Cooperation to express a unanimous view for the second time running .
The development of cooperation in fighting drugs and drug addiction is an objective that Parliament set itself a long time ago and does indeed represent the search for an intelligent response to a problem that affects the life of millions of people in the world , in both northern and southern societies , which pollutes political , social and economic relations at international level and which is today the main source and principal means of support of the most profitable forms of international crime .
In the field of combating drugs and the spread of drugs , development cooperation also acts as an important example of international solidarity and cooperation with third countries and is an intelligent , preventive and more effective method of confronting and resolving problems that directly affect our societies .
There are three fundamental objectives which the Community institutions have set themselves with this proposed regulation : firstly , to reduce the impact of drugs production as a factor of stimulating demand for the consumption of these drugs ; secondly , to reduce the power of the mafia and the cartels , by cutting the ground from under their feet and reducing their sources of supply ; thirdly , to reduce the central economic position of drug production in large areas of the developing countries .
We must seek an intelligent solution because we have to form an alliance with the people of the south for whom the production and trade in drugs is often the only or main means of subsistence .
From that point of view , reference has rightly been made to the central role played by education to increase the awareness of the populations concerned , but even more important is to associate development and anti-poverty policies in the efforts to combat the production of drugs .
It was rightly pointed out that it is not enough simply to tackle the direct problem of replacement crops : action is needed within the organization of society in order to combat the power of the mafia , by strengthening the role of women and formulating alternative development projects based on the economic recovery of productive systems and , more generally , on social improvements .
After Parliament 's first reading , the Council accepted some of the approved amendments .
However , we note that some questions have remained on the sidelines , in particular the key role of women , the social and environmental implications of the activities relating to human rights , and sound management .
That is why our group will vote for the 23 amendments approved by the Committee on Development .
Mr President , I read this Council of the European Union common position through with great interest .
I see there an extremely impressive range of activities which are planned .
We are actually going to try and help the developing countries !
This is very laudable because , after all , we are exporting synthetic drugs to these countries , and for once we are not blaming them for exporting to us .
But then I know , because I have had something to do with drugs , and I have recently been talking to Mr Gelbard , a Secretary in the State Department in the United States , they have spent US $ 1 , 000m on crop eradication in Bolivia .
They have not yet touched Peru because they have not had much cooperation .
And then I see that all this great work which is to take place from 1998 to the year 2000 is going to cost ECU 30m .
I just ask you to compare the US $ 1 , 000m which has been spent by the United States on crop eradication in one country , with the ECU 30m which is going to be spent over the period 1998 to 2000 under all these plans which are so well drawn up , so carefully thought through .
What are we doing ?
Are we serious ?
I cannot believe we are serious if we are spending that sort of money .
I have no more to say .
Mr President , in congratulating Mr Liese on the quality of his report I would like to concentrate on the three amendments which I , once again , put forward with his support .
First , Amendment No 3 : the need to avoid contradictions between the EU policy to combat the drugs trade and those of the World Bank and the other financial institutions .
Alternative development opportunities for producers of drug-linked crops in developing countries are too often jeopardized by unfavourable macro-economic policies imposed directly or indirectly on those countries .
Peasant farmers find it increasingly difficult to produce other crops competitively for export under prevailing conditions of structural adjustment .
Our regulation should make reference to this and require the Commission to work with the Member States , within the international institutions , to reduce these .
Second , Amendment No 4 , which seeks to ensure that criteria for deciding a country 's eligibility for EU support and for evaluation of the projects will be defined in dialogue between the Community and partner governments or organizations .
It is extremely important that the EU does not follow the example of the United States which , in some countries , has unilaterally made drug control assistance conditional on the attainment of crop eradication targets .
Not only is the long-term value of forceable eradication questionable , but eradication driven by conditionality is provoking serious social instability in countries such as Bolivia and Colombia .
Third , Amendment No 5 , which seeks to give priority to enabling small peasant producers to take advantage of EU trade preferences .
It is the small-scale rural sector , including those cultivating drug-linked crops , that should be the object of our development assistance in this field , and hence should be the object of the regulation .
All of us in this Parliament are united in our determination to combat the drugs trade .
But this regulation should recognize the practical measures which are required if the EU 's policy of joint responsibility for the drugs problem is to be realized : respect for genuine cultural differences , an anti-poverty focus and a framework of fair trade can succeed where repressive measures have failed .
In our regulation let us commit ourselves to these objectives .
, Vice-President of the Commission .
( ES ) Thank you Mr President , and good evening to everyone sharing this solitude .
Many thanks , Mr Liese , for your report - you may rest assured that the Commission has made the campaign against drugs one of its priorities .
The use , production and illegal trafficking of drugs are , together with money laundering , problems which a large number of countries in Latin America , Africa , the Middle East and Asia have to deal with .
The illegal production of drugs is tending to become internationalized - this is no secret , and you state this in your report - and it is no longer just a few developing countries which are cultivating and converting coca crops , opium poppies or cannabis in Latin America , Africa , the Middle East or Asia .
Industrialized countries and other developing countries have , unfortunately , also begun to produce so-called designer drugs , or synthetic drugs .
In addition , illegal drugs use has now become a public-health problem for a growing number of developing countries , not just for rich nations .
This globalization is very closely linked to the profits which can be derived from drug-related activities . It is well known that such profits are huge .
However , money laundering is not the privilege of the industrialized countries with advanced banking systems , but goes on everywhere to a certain extent , from East to West and from North to South .
The European Union , as you will know - to reply to one of Mr Howitt 's concerns - has distanced itself from certification policies as practised by the United States and we have incorporated the principle of shared responsibility , both in our policy position in Vienna and in the future position to be adopted by the European Union at the forthcoming General Assembly of the United Nations on the subject of drugs .
Shared responsibility in the sense that although a great deal of the responsibility lies with the producer countries - that fact cannot be denied - there is also a great deal of responsibility on the part of the consumer countries , and it is our belief that only by assuming the principle of shared responsibility - co-responsibility - will it be possible to set up the bases for an international dialogue which will enable us to eradicate this plague .
We do not believe - you are quite right - that unilateral certification measures will achieve positive objectives in the campaign to combat drugs .
There is one absolutely elementary question , mentioned by Sir Jack Stewart-Clark , who is well versed in drugrelated problems since he has in the past prepared several reports for this House .
This budget line is really very modest as a specific line intended to combat the drug problem .
However , we should not forget that , principally in the Mediterranean - specifically in the case of Morocco - or in Latin America - Bolivia and Peru - a considerable part of the cooperation programmes currently being implemented is essentially aimed at promoting alternative crops .
Allow me to pass on some information about Bolivia : alternative crops in the Chaparé region in Bolivia are being financed by the European Union .
The United States has made no contribution whatsoever .
A degree of care should be taken when presenting such impressive figures in the campaign against drug trafficking , since a distinction must be made between development cooperation funded by military sources and development cooperation funded by the forces of law and order .
To be sure , if , in its report , the European Commission were to include all the national budgets of the 15 Member States - all the expenditure for Scotland Yard , the French Gendarmerie , the German police , the Spanish Guardia Civil and Italian customs officers - the amount spent by the European Union to combat the drugs problem would also be an impressive figure .
However , this matter has to be viewed from different standpoints .
It will not come as news to anyone that this specific budget line could hardly be more modest .
Yet , let me give you all a warning : the European Parliament , namely you yourselves , in the 1996 financial perspectives decided to reduce the already modest sum of ECU 11 million by one million .
As a consequence , it is difficult to ask the Commission for an explanation of why you decided to further reduce the already modestly funded budget line .
However , I say again , a large part of development cooperation programmes targets such problems .
Naturally , there are problems such as the safeguarding of human rights and global poverty-alleviation policy - in this respect we can accept the European Parliament 's recommendation - and I am pleased , Mr Liese , that you are pleased with the Commission at least this evening - you cannot imagine how happy we at the Commission are that this House is pleased with us , because it has not happened very often - and I am also pleased that we are in a position to accept virtually 90 % of your amendments , although a few do cause us some problems .

Some of these are basic matters , such as Amendment 4 ; another would be Amendment 21 , particularly given internal Commission organization .
We always prefer logically to present budget-line implementation at the end of the year and not in the first 6 months , because , generally speaking , the Commission identifies projects in January , February and March , and approves them in April , May and June , for implementation from October , November and December onwards .
As a consequence , from our viewpoint , working at the end of the year corresponds to the logic of internal work organization .
As for Amendment 3 , you will be aware that the Commission is not , as such , an integral part of international institutions .
This role falls to the European Union which is generally represented by our honourable Council of Ministers .
Anyway , thank you .
This report is valuable and offers guidance , but I still have misgivings about its lack of a global character , particularly in budgetary terms , as such a character would lend credibility to this interesting drugs-related policy .
Thank you , Mr Commissioner .
Do allow me to congratulate you on your excellent pronunciation of Catalan and also for having pointed to what you referred to as , if I have understood correctly , ' shared solitude ' . However , since we are discussing such an important subject this evening we will have to trust that a careful reading of the Verbatim report of proceedings will make up for non-attendance .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
Population policies in developing countries
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0057 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Regulation on aid for population policies and programmes in the developing countries ( C4-0631 / 96-95 / 0166 ( SYN ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Nordmann ) .
, rapporteur . ( FR ) Mr President , I hope that population matters will produce the same positive feelings in Parliament and the Commission as everything that has been said on drugs .
In the hope of creating those feelings , I shall not go back to basics because Parliament has already declared on several occasions that it favours support for population policies in the developing countries - support provided by the Union which respects the humanistic values of individual freedom of choice while at the same time serving as a vector for the better development of health services .
This is the philosophy Parliament has tried to institute , and it is the same philosophy that underlies the proposal for a regulation under consideration .
At second reading , we might share the sense of satisfaction Mr Liese referred to earlier at what we might call a statistical level , because I believe that 26 of the 40 amendments tabled at first reading were retained in the common position .
It should also be noted that those amendments which were not retained relate primarily to the formulation or relative flexibility of the action framework and that the Committee on Development did not see fit to assert a kind of proprietorial vanity regarding some of them .
The first of the amendments on which we should like to insist concerns a reminder of certain financial commitments entered into on behalf of the Union , especially at the Cairo conference in 1994 .
The Union had announced its intention , between now and the year 2000 , of increasing its financial aid to population policies in the developing countries to ECU 300 million .
Although the Commission did not submit any financial memoranda at first reading , the sums set down by the Council fall terribly far short of what had been announced , hence one of our amendments recalling that commitment .
That being so , not everything has been said , and not everything will be said at voting time , and of course we will have to have a budgetary strategy for monitoring this matter .
The second amendment , which is something of a formality , relates to the problems of commitology .
The Council having declared itself in favour of a regulatory committee , our own committee , conventionally , asks that responsibility for verification and monitoring of the policy be entrusted to an advisory committee .
There remain a number of amendments which were tabled by Mr Liese , rightly I believe , in so far as they reintroduce points adopted at first reading .
They also reintroduce provisions which were not retained by the Committee on Development .
That is why , irrespective of the validity of Mr Liese 's position and the respect one may feel for it , I , in my capacity as rapporteur , shall have to vote against these amendments .
Once again , they relate to very slight differences of standpoint , with the exception perhaps of Amendment No 8 , the adoption of which , as such , would be likely to raise practical problems of implementation in certain difficult or urgent cases .
However , setting aside the debate which this amendment might cause , I think I can conclude by saying , Mr President , that we should close this procedure with the same sense of satisfaction as in the previous debate .
Mr President , population growth is a problem for the development of many countries .
However , it is by no means the only cause of poverty , and my group is convinced that it is not the main cause of poverty in the developing countries .
Population growth should not , therefore , be used as an excuse for refusing essential aid and trade preferences .
Nonetheless , the fact remains that population growth must be vigorously tackled .
Solutions must be found which take account of the people concerned .
Personal experience has convinced me that it is not the case that families , and particularly women , are happy with large numbers of children .
It is the women who are seeking information about birth control , and they are also seeking practical help .
I think it is right that the European Union should offer that information and practical help .
Of course , we all realize that this means more than just distributing condoms .
An integrated approach is needed , and education - particularly for women - is also a key to tackling population problems effectively .
Our group has a special concern which has already emerged in the debate : we are particularly anxious that unwanted pregnancies should be avoided .
On the other hand , because we are dealing here with a budget line for population policies and demography , we also wish to see the decision of the Cairo Conference being implemented .
In other words , abortion should not be a means of birth control .
If we are talking here about demography , as opposed to general humanitarian aid , then this is not the place for argument about abortion under medically unsatisfactory conditions , because we are dealing here simply with population policy .
The fact is that we cannot agree on the question of abortion , nor are we going to reach agreement , whether in Parliament or in the European Union .
And our amendments are not designed to produce a European Union view on abortion .
Of course we must take the Cairo Conference seriously , in so far as what we are dealing with here is population policy .
I should therefore be grateful if the other groups could signal their willingness to accept Amendments Nos 3 , 4 and 5 in particular .
These amendments were tabled by other groups at first reading : Amendment No 5 , in particular , came from the Socialist Group .
The point here is that no support should be given to countries or organizations that use compulsory abortion and infanticide as means of controlling the population .
In my view , there can be no serious argument against such an amendment .
Therefore , I would ask once again for your support on this point .
Mr President , in tackling this problem I should also like to say that the demographic problem , although it is not the single cause of the problems of developing countries , is nonetheless a problem which cannot be overlooked .
Consequently it seems to me that the conclusions of the Cairo Conference are perfectly appropriate conclusions and they should be defended by all of us , including the final consequences , namely concerning abortion , which at the conference in Cairo undeniably was presented as a process which must not be looked upon as a form of contraception , deserves our support .
In any case , the demographic problem affecting developing countries is a problem which calls for a very serious effort in terms of training and prevention .
There is a set of policies which ought to be developed and , consequently , we must very seriously bank on public health policies and also the development at the appropriate level of policies on sex education , which are compatible with any positive approach to this problem .
In the perspective of the positions set out by Mr Nordmann , these seem to me to be extremely correct .
On the one hand , we must consider that the Union 's undertaking concerning the strengthening of aid to democratic programmes in developing countries up to 300 , 000 million escudos by the year 2000 is fundamental as a minimum contribution for developing these questions , and also the questions of comitology seemed to me to be extremely well dealt with by the rapporteur .
We must concentrate on committees such as the FED , MED and ELA , because it is by means of information , hearing and continuous consultation that this problem can be dealt with in a proper and positive way by the European Union and be developing countries themselves .
Mr President , we consider it extremely important that , as part of these measures , the European Union should fulfil the commitments it entered into at the Cairo conference on population and development , and do so on a scale that will effectively enable the provision of widespread access to family planning in the developing countries .
On that basis , my group will back the report which has been tabled , and we hope that it will be adopted in a form which does not entail a one-sided view of the world .
I cannot conceal the fact that we had a controversial vote in the Committee on Development on certain amendments which have now been tabled again in plenary .
We share the concern of the PPE Group that developing countries should be equally entitled to participate in tendering , and to that extent there is no disagreement here .
However , we wish to make it quite clear that our group is not prepared to support those amendments that seek to promote a very one-sided view of the world .
It remains to be seen how the House will vote .
I should like to return to the question of the UN conference in Cairo , since we believe that this conference represented a significant step forward in terms of opinion forming , and contributed to raising awareness and making people realize that we have to achieve slower population growth if we are to avoid the unfortunate situation that exists in many developing countries , where improved economic growth is outpaced and eaten up by population growth .
There is no disagreement on the fact that compulsory measures should have no part to play here , but on the other hand we believe that we should not lay down too many preconditions which involve interfering in the internal affairs of other countries .
Ultimately , what we are dealing with is an extremely wide range of attitudes among people of different cultures , and it is not for us to lay down more preconditions than are absolutely necessary .
One piece of progress in Cairo which , as a feminist politician , I should particularly like to mention was the agreement by the conference that women themselves can decide freely how many children they want , and when they want to have them .
This consideration also conditions our view of the report , and we should like to see it adopted in that spirit .
, Vice-President of the Commission .
( ES ) Thank you , Mr President .
Thank you very much , Mr Nordmann , for your report which sets this evening 's debate against an atmosphere of mutual understanding between the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament regarding a matter as important as demography , covering both population aspects as well as health and production worldwide .
In global terms , the Commission 's priority objectives which , I believe , are largely shared by the European Parliament and the Council , are three in number . Firstly , enabling women , men and adolescents to come to a decision freely and with full knowledge of the facts about the number of children they have and the timing of any births ; secondly , contributing to the creation of a socio-cultural , economic and educational environment which makes it possible to exercise this option fully , especially in the case of women and adolescents , through the condemnation and eradication of any form of sexual violence , mutilation and abuse affecting their health and dignity .
As something of a response to Mr Liese 's concerns , the European Community particularly endorses the position on abortion , adopted at the Cairo Conference , condemning its use as a method of contraception .
Thirdly , we wish to make a contribution to developing or reforming health systems in order to increase access to them and the quality of reproductive-health care provided in the case of men and women , including adolescents of both sexes , thereby significantly reducing the level of risk to the health of women and children .
The Commission 's initial proposal has been altered considerably - Mr Nordmann is right - by the incorporation of many of the amendments proposed by this House on first reading .
I would therefore like to offer my thanks for your collaboration on this specific aspect .
I would like to make the following comments on the amendments endorsed by the Committee on Development and Cooperation : the Commission is in favour of Amendment 2 , which relates to the use of Committees ; as regards Amendment 1 , on increasing Community financial support for population policies and measures by ECU 300 million by 2000 , the Commission - I have to point this out to you - will not be in a position to introduce this possibility on purely technical grounds , since the Regulation - or the legal base of the Regulation we are discussing this evening - will enable a legal base to be attributed to a budget line , aimed at demographic matters , which also consists of a very modest sum : barely ECU 8 million , aimed at financing pilot projects .
Now I would like to comment further on the discussion I had with Sir Jack Stewart-Clark concerning the money spent on combating drugs .
Population policy does not come under solely that particular budget line , because if you take together all the policies we implement - Latin America , Africa , Mediterranean and Asia - and what is done under bilateral programmes with various States receiving our aid , the sum of ECU 300 million is exceeded with interest .
Yet again , as happens with the Community budget , we come up against the form that matters should take : if we were to look at population policy-related expenditure contained in the Lomé Convention , in Latin America , the Mediterranean and Asia , you may rest assured that ECU 300 million would be exceeded .
If an attempt were made to set up a budget line of over ECU 300 million applying only to population matters , we will have the same problem as we have with the ' drugs ' line .
A choice has to be made , and I believe that we are confronted more with a problem of presentation , of how the Community budget is spent , than with a dispute over figures with the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
Next , there is a series of amendments - numbers 3 and 4 - with which we have problems on a number of objective grounds .
Amendments 5 and 8 we regard as unnecessary because the criteria relating to these amendments are already sufficiently contained in the recitals of the common position .
However , I would like to give you an example of something that is being done in the population field , namely the three most recent decisions we have taken under the terms of a bilateral cooperation project , to demonstrate that we are well above ECU 300 million .
The first piece of evidence is this : the ECU 200 million subsidy for the family welfare programme in India , to support the implementation of a new series of policies to be centred on family planning and also on global harmonization of reproductive-health measures .
In India alone , in terms of family welfare , we are already spending ECU 200 million . The ' Asia ' initiative on reproductive health - ECU 25 million - which we recently signed with Dr Nafis Sadik from the United Nations Population Fund last month relates to an innovative programme for working essentially in Asia .
To finish , a further bilateral example : in the Philippines , there is an ECU 19 million mother-andchild programme which will help to reduce the risks facing pregnant women and women in labour or who have just given birth , thereby reducing maternal mortality rates .
I wanted to mention these examples - India , ECU 200 million ; United Nations family-planning programme in Asia , ECU 25 million ; and the most recent decision regarding the Philippines , ECU 19 million - to demonstrate that if we add together all we are doing on various bilateral cooperation programmes , the Committee on Development and Cooperation should have no trouble in confirming that , in this specific case , we are meeting its requirements - our presentation , however , is , of course , different .
Thank you , Mr Marín .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
Fourth framework programme in research , technological development and demonstration ( 1994-1998 )
The next item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0084 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Decision adapting for the second time Decision 1110 / 94 / EC on the European Community fourth framework programme of activities in the field of research , technological development and demonstration ( 1994-1998 ) ( C4-0041 / 97-96 / 0034 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Linkohr ) .
Mr President , on Monday the Committee on Research adopted my report by a substantial majority - two members abstained , while the others voted in favour .
Our message is relatively simple .
We take the view that the funding should be increased by ECU 200 million , as opposed to ECU 100 m ; that funding for all the programmes - with the exception of research into BSE , which has already been treated very generously - should be doubled ; and that an additional ECU 33 m should be provided for research into renewable energy sources and water .
As regards the amendments , all I have to say is that no amendments were received on Monday , but clearly a whole series of amendments has now been tabled .
Speaking as rapporteur , I have to recommend that we reject them , because while I have every sympathy with some of the amendments , I am representing the view of the committee .
Moreover , the substance of many of these amendments is already included or at least implicit in the report .
The conflict which lies ahead of us is not , however , about the amendments .
It is simply about money , and I would strongly urge the House that it should demonstrate the maximum degree of solidarity in adopting the report if we are to have a chance of success in the Conciliation Committee .
I am relatively confident because the Committee on Budgets is behind us , which means that we can expect some genuinely tough negotiation .
On the substance of the report , I find it somewhat disconcerting that the Council took so long to reach a decision in the first place , and that it could not then see its way to providing a further ECU 100 m .
I would remind you that the ECU 100 m in question is not an additional sum of taxpayers ' money : it is a sum which Parliament made available from savings in other areas , and we shall be able to save a further ECU 100 m in the new budget . In other words , the funds can be provided through reallocation .
So the money is there .
ECU 100 m is already in the reserve , in any case , although it can only be paid out when there is a legal basis for doing so .
I would remind you here of a point that has often been made , and is rightly referred to time and again by the Commission : Europe 's competitiveness is , unfortunately , declining rather than increasing .
This assessment is no less accurate for being constantly repeated .
Declining competitiveness is what lies behind the loss of a great many jobs in Europe .
Part of the reason why we spent so much time this morning discussing Renault 's problems and the related difficulties is the fact that Europe has given away its competitive edge - and done so knowingly .
Nonetheless , I hope that this debate and , in particular , our disagreement with the Council of Ministers will at least send out a small signal .
I know that ECU 100 m or ECU 200 m is only a fraction of Europe 's annual spending on research , but it could serve to point the way ahead .
Unfortunately , there is no lobby for research .
Researchers themselves are above taking to the streets , and they do not count , as far as the political parties are concerned , because there are not enough of them .
The researchers have to rely on Parliament , therefore , and I hope that we shall achieve a substantial majority on this issue .
If Parliament approves the report , as I hope it will , then I also hope that we shall move into the conciliation procedure as quickly as possible and waste no time in coming to a decision , so that notices can appear in the Official Journal .
The fact is that if the procedure is not concluded in time , even the best decisions will be useless because it will be too late to pay out the money .
I would therefore ask the many Members who are present here to give this report their backing .
Mr President , first I should like to congratulate Mr Linkohr , not least for his patience in this apparently never-ending saga of the refinancing of the fourth framework programme .
Speed is now essential .
Months are slipping past ; brain-power is being wasted .
So we hope this decision will be taken speedily and implemented .
I regret very much the apparent absence of the Council of Ministers , although I may be wrong , from this important debate .
The main priority of the European Union is jobs .
One way , though certainly not the only way , of creating jobs is to make ourselves more competitive through research and development .
We have problems in society which research and development will also help with .
And the European Union adds value .
This is the view of academics and industrialists .
There is a multiplier effect .
Therefore it is all the more bizarre that the Council of Ministers and the Member States that compose it wish to repatriate money where it does not have that added value .
We are disappointed at the cut from the expected ECU 700m , which of course led to the drawing up of proposals , down to a paltry ECU 100m , over one-third of which is to be spent on BSE .
We in the Committee on Energy , Research and Technology wish to express our very warm thanks to the Committee on Budgets for its support .
It is forward-looking .
It has made research and development one of its priorities and has found more money to be spent on research and development .
It is the committee that found it .
It expects some sort of recognition for its efforts from the Council and the Commission .

Turning briefly to the content of Mr Linkohr 's report and the way in which we expect that money to be spent - and remember this is co-decision - some of the European Parliament 's priorities are reflected in Mr Linkohr 's report : our wish for landmines to be investigated , for inter-modal transport , educational multimedia and , in particular , renewable energy - and I must make it clear that the Committee on Budgets made it a condition that a proportion of that extra money would be spent on renewable energy .
I am told by medical researchers that the amount to be spent on BSE is unrealistically high .
However , in the interests of the speedy adoption of this report , we will go along with this .
But , we do not propose to double that amount when we double from ECU 100m to ECU 200m .
This is a sensible report .
Let us all support it and get it through quickly .
Mr President , as a group we shall support this report , although we have certain qualms about doing so .
Incidentally , I should like to say that the rapporteur has my admiration for the work that he has done .
He has my admiration not least because he was involved in a conciliation procedure two years ago , the outcome of which was ECU 700 million in a reserve - in other words 5 % .
Without wishing to belittle Parliament 's powers of codecision - and nothing could be further from my aim - I have to say that this begs the question of whether the entire procedure is justified by such an outcome .
One thing really amazes me in all this .
We wish to invest in the future - today we had workers from Renault here , and we have problems with the miners in Germany - but what are we doing ?
In the very areas that have a bearing on the future - research , development and possibilities for industrial conversion - we are trying to save money !
I would not mind if the money saved at European level was in fact being spent effectively on research at national level .
But there , I have to say , I have my doubts !
In any event , I am convinced that for the future of our research policy , we must find a form of financing which does not entail debating budgetary changes in the middle of the framework programme .
I was involved in the process four years ago : it was not satisfactory then , and it is not satisfactory now .
Secondly , I have some reservations concerning the Commission 's role in all this , and I have already spoken about these .
Just how seriously are we to take proposals that begin by providing for task forces with ECU 700 m of funding - for which a great deal of pressure was exerted - if those proposals can subsequently be changed at the stroke of a pen ?
What happened to the package when it emerged that we were to receive not ECU 700 m , but only ECU 100 m ?
Looking now at the list and the allocation of resources , I honestly have to ask what difference two million here or there will make .
What has become of our package ?
Having a package also implies finding the courage to state what we do not want - and we did not manage to do that .
For myself and my group , all this is a learning process .
I am convinced that for the fifth framework programme , we need a different type of cooperation .
Perhaps we also need different structures , and in any event I shall do my best to ensure that we cooperate positively .
It is with some degree of resignation that I will now conclude and offer the rapporteur my full support .
However , this is not the way to prepare for the future .
Mr President , the common position presented to the Council is a step backwards compared with Parliament 's first reading .
At this historic moment , when the importance of research is increasing day by day , I believe it is wrong not to give more coherent funding to this programme , which would enable the European Union to improve and develop coordinated research , so that the Member States can act together in the common interest .
We note that the European Union is finding it increasingly necessary to compete with the United States and Japan and the emerging economies , where research funding is and always will be more consistent and more conspicuous .
The increase proposed by the Council gives more precedence to its own financial priorities without taking account of the proposals made by the European Parliament in the 1997 budgetary procedure , when it decided to set up an ECU 100m reserve for research .
That reserve would indeed make it possible to increase the framework programme funds by at least ECU 200m .
So the Council 's attitude has in fact made the efforts of Parliament futile .
With such financial premises I think it is worth noting , as Mr Linkohr has done , that the increase of ECU 200m would , among others , have made it possible to earmark some of the funds for renewable energy sources , which are also important for the Mediterranean area .
It is in this area that Mr Malerba and I tabled an amendment , underlining the importance of a new form of renewable and non-pollutant electrochemical energy , what are called combustion cells .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the common position 35 % of the ECU 100m are allocated to research on BSE , vaccines and viral diseases .
This is indeed extremely important to public health and the future of the European Union ; however , as other rapporteurs have pointed out , perhaps that 35 % is being allocated at the cost of other important areas .
Finally , I hope the Council will do the necessary to amend its own common position and that negotiations will begin as soon as possible to remedy this situation .
Mr President , my compliments to Mr Linkohr on the work he has done so far on the topping up of funds for the fourth framework programme .
Mr President , my Group is unhappy that the original increase of 700 million ECU for the fourth framework programme has been cut by the Council to just 100 million .
This is because the BSE affair has caused the Financial Perspective to be exceeded and because the Council refuses to modify the Financial Perspective .
But , Mr President , Parliament now finds itself lumbered with the problems which the Commission and Council themselves brought about by failing to react to the BSE crisis in time .
Thanks to Mrs Cresson 's proposal Parliament is also faced with a fait accompli since just 35 MECU of the Council 's paltry 100 MECU are being set aside .
Once again for BSE , rather than the 15 million ECU which Parliament had proposed .
My Group is not in agreement with that .
Only if the Council is willing to increase the budget to 200 million ECU will 35 million ECU for BSE be acceptable as a proportion .
If the Council will not do this my Group , using the criteria of the Committee on Budgets , will again seek to have 100 million ECU set aside for research prior to the 1998 budget .
The Council must understand once and for all that it is the European Parliament which has the last word on research spending under the budget procedure .
Mr President , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left supports the recommendation made by Mr Linkohr on supplementary financing for the fourth framework programme .

However , there are three points we would like to highlight : firstly the cut in the amount of financing , which is a retreat from the commitment the European Union must make to research into the development of a competitive society and the creation of jobs . This is a very serious matter .
Secondly , we are concerned at the surreptitious introduction of the concept of ' Task Forces ' as a vertical philosophy as opposed to the horizontal philosophy of successive framework programmes , and it introduces what I believe is a worrying new aspect into preparations for the fifth framework programme .
Thirdly , it makes reference to the need to embark upon research into the welfare of the elderly , a problem which will be of crucial importance to Europe 's population in the future , and we therefore recommend that the amount earmarked for research into BSE be reduced by a similar amount , as there is no justification for so much funding to be allocated to this area .
Mr President , a lack of curiosity is an indication that a person is growing old .
And a society which does not engage in organized research is on the way to decline .
But obviously , one also has to ask what people are curious about , and what is being researched . It requires no great leap of the imagination to envisage people who are curious about extremely destructive - even self-destructive - things , and unfortunately that is an analogy which applies to our European societies .
If we look at what the package actually contains , there is aeronautics , fingerprint technologies and industrial engineering with a view to economizing on water use : that accounts for ECU 60 million already , by my calculations .
BSE research as a whole accounts for ECU 34.5 m , and a closer look reveals that this is intended mainly for animal experiments which are expected to yield results in about ten years ' time .
That is not where the BSE problem lies : the problem is that we need to change our agricultural policy and stop feeding animals on animalbased meal .
Looking too at the research that is to be undertaken into information and communication technologies , one sometimes gains the impression that it is all about preparing for escape into virtual reality , as opposed to investigating the interface between social processes and technological change , and all the possible options and objectives which this entails .
In the programme as a whole , ECU 147 m is devoted to research on socio-economic issues , and this in a society which is undergoing radical social and environmental change .
Something is seriously amiss here .
Considering the problems that confront us , the priorities are wrong .
Mr Linkohr has made a few adjustments : in particular , the ECU 33 m for non-nuclear energy is clearly a positive change , but it is not enough to convince us of the value of the concept .
After all , this is a retreat from the position at first reading , and the situation that we are forever bemoaning - the fact that Europe has lost or deliberately given away its competitive edge - is actually connected with the need to develop a sense of curiosity about the social , technological and scientific problems that we face .
So far , that is not what we are talking about here .
We shall abstain .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I address you this evening on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , a task which is all the more pleasurable in that today , for once , we have heard nothing but good of that committee .
That was a point worth emphasizing , and it is a pity there are not more of us here to hear a tribute which was as unusual as it was well deserved .
As the rapporteur pointed out , and as other honourable Members have also pointed out , it was indeed the Committee on Budgets which , in the course of the 1997 budgetary procedure , managed to snatch the hundred million with which the Commission is making us a proposal today .
I should add that this business of the refinancing of the fourth framework programme combines a broken promise with a sorry display of weakness .
The broken promise was broken by the Council , because , in the course of the negotiations on the fourth framework programme which we conducted with Rolf Linkohr and a few other colleagues , the Council did indeed undertake to provide 700 million of refinancing .
And now it has not done so , pleading that ' Ecofin doesn 't want to revise the financial perspectives ' .
What a climb-down by this council of research ministers !
And what a display of weakness by the Commission which , having come up with an ambitious initial proposal - and all credit to you for it , Commissioner - based on 700 million suddenly caved in completely after what was said at the subsequent Ecofin Council in Florence : ' no 700 million , we 'll try to find you something ' .
In fact , the Commission didn 't find anything .
It was Parliament that found the 100 million , and will find another 100 million in the 1998 procedure .
That is why I call upon the Commission to support the proposals by Rolf Linkohr and the European Parliament .
Because we are going to have another 100 million in 1998 .
That makes 200 million .
So I call upon the Commission , here and now , to support Parliament .
Mr President , I commend the rapporteur for his report .
I congratulate him on raising the ante to ECU 200m and for pursuing his own aim on the subject of land mines .
This will make some of my constituents happy although they fear that most of it will go to consultants and there may not be so very much to show by way of practical results .
I have to note that the original figure of ECU 700m was cut back by the Council .
I am not surprised that they applied a tight rein to this figure because , it has to be said , the Commission and Parliament were not able to put forward a clear signal of a coherent set of priorities .
It seems to me that a fluctuating number of taskforces on a variety of topics rather smacked of people looking around for ways of spending money , instead of coming forward with a carefully reasoned programme of action to complement the fourth framework programme .
So I commend the rapporteur but I hope , as my colleague , Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl has said , that we can learn from this process when we address the fifth framework programme .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to thank the Members of the Committee on Research , and especially the rapporteur , Mr Linkohr , for all their work .
As he always does , Mr Linkohr has made a balanced and constructive reply to the Council 's common position .
That reply focuses on the essential thing : the total appropriation for the financial supplement and its allocation .
It is clear that this will raise problems for the Council , which had difficulty in reaching agreement on the content of the supplement .
As the rapporteur also points out in his explanatory statement , it took the Council over six months , after the European Parliament 's first reading , to achieve the necessary unanimity to adopt a common position .
That shows , once again , that although co-decision is useful because of the constructive exchanges to which it leads , the Council 's unanimity rule is at odds with the desire to make the Union 's research policy effective and able to react to events .
Solving this problem is not the least of the issues facing the Intergovernmental Conference .
After all , the debate on the supplement has gone on all too long .
The sums at issue are not such as to upset the balance of the budget .
Various projects are having to wait , projects whose importance is common knowledge such as TSE and educational multimedia .
In many respects , then , it seems important to me that we should send a positive political signal to the scientific and industrial world .
Despite these circumstances , there are prospects that Parliament and the Council will be able to resolve their differences .
All parties will have to contribute to that .
The Commission will be unsparing in its efforts to achieve an acceptable compromise .
And , indeed , the foundations for such a compromise are beginning to become apparent .
The Council has accepted research into the detection and destruction of antipersonnel mines as a priority subject .
It has thus adopted an essential amendment from the European Parliament 's first reading .
Mr Linkohr , for his part , does not dispute the importance of intensifying research into transmissible spongiform encephalopathy , or TSE .
This is an urgent measure , as Mr Medina Ortega 's report on behalf of the Committee of Inquiry emphasized .
It is encouraging that it has been supported by both Parliament and the Council , both in principle and as regards the total appropriations , based on the analysis submitted by the Commission in its action plan last November .
It is in the hope of encouraging a compromise between the European Parliament and the Council in the coming weeks that the Commission does not , at this stage , wish to endorse the amendments proposed by Mr Linkohr , although I do have a great deal of sympathy for their tenor .
In this context , incidentally , the Commission expects to allow , in its provisional draft budget for 1998 , a sufficient margin to enable the budgetary authority to go beyond the ECU 100 million already shown in the 1997 budget .
I should like to take this opportunity to thank the Committee on Budgets and Mr Desama for their invaluable assistance .
Finally , a word about the timetable .
The fourth framework programme , for which the financial supplement is intended , will finish next year .
The fifth framework programme is already in preparation , and the Commission expects to submit its formal proposal next month .
We therefore need to finalize the financial supplement quickly to make it operational and to prevent any interference with the discussion of the fifth framework programme .
The European Parliament 's speedy conclusion of its second reading has set a good example , and I thank Parliament for it .
Thank you , Mrs Cresson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
And now , Ladies and Gentlemen , I have some good news for you .
Today 's sitting is now at an end , so , with your permission , I would like to thank all our colleagues and you yourselves for what Mr Chichester has referred to as an even-tempered debate which has nonetheless been significant and which for me personally , I must confess , Ladies and Gentlemen , has been very encouraging .
Many thanks to you all , therefore , and good night .
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I refer to page 14 .
I was not the only Member to speak at that particular stage of the day , but I did put a very specific question .
I should like the reply to be equally specific .
I asked on what basis the people in the gallery had been given access to it .
Since then , like everyone else , I have seen television footage which enabled me to confirm that none of those concerned was carrying a visitor 's pass .
Am I going to get a reply ?
If so , when ?
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , I remember that , it happens that I was present , like most of us , when you made your request .
I cannot give you an answer at this time .
The meeting of the Conference of Presidents of the political groups is to take place this afternoon , and I will remind it of your request , so that you can be answered .
I will be very brief .
I am not here to talk about workers who have tried to defend their livelihoods .
I am here to address a question of someone who stole from the workers .
Yesterday I raised the question of Robert Maxwell 's infamous picture in the outside gallery .
I sought assurances at that time that the President and Quaestors would investigate the matter .
Can you advise this House why Robert Maxwell 's picture still remains outside this Chamber ?
A known crook still has his picture in the frame outside the Chamber !
Mr Falconer , the subject has already been drawn to the Quaestors ' attention so that they can take the necessary action .
Mr President , I have a request in connection with yesterday 's disturbance in the gallery .
I would ask you to have the film taken of the incident examined .
I have heard that the film shows two things : firstly , that a group of these people sang the ' Internationale ' with raised fists - I myself heard singing , but I could not tell exactly what was being sung ; and , secondly , that someone gave a speech to the camera calling for a different kind of Europe .
It should be checked whether this is true or not .
I hope that it is not true !
Mr von Habsburg , I confess that it surprises me to hear that you , with all your knowledge , have not heard of the Internationale !
But we all learn new things now and then .
Mr President , I would just like to support what Mr von Habsburg has said .
We raised a number of points with the President-in-Office yesterday to ask why , Rule 101 ( 3 ) having been broken , our guests in the tribune were not escorted out of the Chamber so that we could have continued the vote in peace .
I would request a reply .
When do you think that reply might be ?
Mrs McIntosh , your question will be answered after the meeting of the Conference of Presidents of the political groups this afternoon .
Thank you , Mr President .
Yesterday one of our colleagues was named and asked to leave the Chamber .
That action was not carried through .
Could the Bureau , which is meeting now and will meet later this week , please now give us the status of Parliament 's rules about colleagues being named and asked to leave the Chamber ?
If colleagues do not leave the Chamber , what status do the rules of this Parliament have any more ?
Mrs Crawley , I am quite sure that the Bureau , as well as the Conference of Presidents of the political groups , will this afternoon look into the situation that arose yesterday and we will see what conclusions they reach .
Yes , Mr President , but don 't worry , I shall be brief .
I would simply like to tell Mrs Crawley that the point she raises will be considered in conjunction with Mrs McIntosh 's point regarding the non-application of Rule 101 ( 3 ) , since the two points go together .
Also , I would like to inform the House of another point that has come to my notice .
Regarding the deplorable - worse than deplorable - events of yesterday , I have learned that one of the European Parliament 's buses , registered in Luxembourg , was chartered by a political group to fetch those who were in the gallery yesterday from Entzheim airport .
In view of this , I should like that information to be verified , and I should like to be informed who authorized the bus passengers to organize a demonstration inside this House .
Mr Pasty , there will be a meeting this afternoon and I think you will have the opportunity to put other questions as well .
My point is along the same lines as Mr Pasty 's .
In reply to Mrs Crawley , since the Minutes record that the President demanded that the gallery be cleared , I should also like to know why that instruction was not followed .
What should be done in such cases ?
Mr President , I think it is very important that we take the rules and procedures very seriously indeed and it is helpful when Members here who have information can clarify positions .
But is it really proper that this Assembly should be listening to concerns and seeking and getting information from people like Mr Pasty , who is a well-known cheat and double-voter in this plenary and is again wasting our time on matters of procedure ?
I would not like us to continue with remarks of that kind , and I ask you to refrain from making personal comments under any circumstances .
Mr President , the only way to sort out all these problems properly is to set up a committee of inquiry , because yesterday 's problem struck deeply at the dignity of Members of Parliament and it is a recurrent problem .
So I formally ask for a committee of inquiry to be opened to investigate exactly what has happened .
The Conference of Presidents of the political groups will be meeting this afternoon . I am quite sure the Bureau too will discuss these matters .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Agreements with Georgia , Armenia , Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan
The next item is the joint debate on four recommendations , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy :
by Mrs Hoff ( A4-0026 / 97 ) , on the proposal for a Council and Commission Decision on the conclusion of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and Georgia , of the other part ( COM ( 96 ) 135-5872 / 96 - C4-0320 / 96-96 / 0092 ( AVC ) ) , -by Mr La Malfa ( A4-0024 / 97 ) , on the proposal for a Council and Commission Decision on the conclusion of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Armenia , of the other part ( COM ( 96 ) 136-5871 / 96 - C4-0319 / 96-96 / 0093 ( AVC ) ) , -by Mr Lambrias ( A4-0025 / 97 ) , on the proposal for a Council and Commission Decision on the conclusion of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and Azerbaijan on the other part ( COM ( 96 ) 137-5870 / 96 - C4-0318 / 96-96 / 0094 ( AVC ) ) , -by Mrs Lalumière ( A4-0069 / 97 ) , on the proposal for a Council and Commission Decision on the conclusion of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and Kazakhstan on the other part ( 7804 / 95 - C4-0344 / 95 and C4-0360 / 95-94 / 0221 ( AVC ) ) , and on six reports on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations :
by Mr Kittelmann ( A4 / 0081 / 97 ) , on economic and commercial aspects of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Georgia , of the other part , -by Mr Kittelmann ( A4-0038 / 97 ) , on the proposal for a Council Decision on the Interim Agreement on trade and trade-related matters between the European Community , the European Coal and Steel Community and the European Atomic Energy Community , of the one part , and Georgia , of the other part ( COM ( 96 ) 322-8890 / 96 - C4-0566 / 96-96 / 0180 ( CNS ) ) , -by Mr Kittelmann ( A4-0031 / 97 ) , on economic and commercial aspects of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Armenia , of the other part , replacing the trade and cooperation agreement with the USSR , on which official contractual relations are currently based , -by Mr Kittelmann ( A4-0064 / 97 ) , on the proposal for a Council Decision on the conclusion by the European Community of the Interim Agreement on trade and trade-related measures between the European Community , the European Coal and Steel Community and the European Atomic Energy Community , of the one part , and the Republic of Armenia , of the other part ( COM ( 96 ) 321-8891 / 96 - C4-0686 / 96-96 / 0179 ( CNS ) ) , -by Mr Schwaiger ( A4-0082 / 97 ) , on economic and commercial aspects of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Azerbaijan , of the other part , and-by Mr Chesa ( A4-0099 / 94 ) , on the economic and trade aspects of the Partnership Agreement between the EU and Kazakhstan .
Mr President , the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Union and Georgia was signed on 22 April 1996 , in the presence of the President of Georgia , Mr Shevardnadze .
In the Union 's view , this partnership constitutes a long-term commitment - as it says in the agreement - to bring together the people of the European Union and Georgia in the course of the generation to come .
Naturally , this should also serve to integrate Georgia into the international economic and political system .
This agreement includes a section containing economic and commercial provisions , but also a very important political chapter .
The political section stresses that cooperation between the two partners is to be based on the recognition of common values .
It is therefore extremely important that respect for democracy and human rights has been laid down as a fundamental condition for cooperation between the two parties .
In the case of Georgia in particular , it should be acknowledged that since independence , and especially since the political unrest of 1993 , important advances have been made in the process of democratic reform .
In political terms , therefore , Georgia now enjoys civil peace .
The only black mark continues to be the lack of political solutions to the Abkhazia and South Ossetia crises , which would allow Georgia to regain its territorial integrity and to resolve the refugee problem .
The European Union and the OSCE must therefore redouble their efforts to bring about a peaceful settlement of these conflicts .
In economic terms , it should be pointed out that following the collapse of communism in the former Soviet Union , production in Georgia suffered serious setbacks .
Between 1991 and 1994 , its GDP fell to around a third of the 1991 level . During the same period , the country suffered inflation rates of up to 15 000 % per annum .
With the restoration of peace and the establishment of the democratic political system , however , the process of economic reform began to take hold .
Hence in 1996 , Georgia 's GDP grew by some 15 % , and inflation was kept down to around 25 % .
The new PCA will align Georgia 's economy more closely with that of the European Union , and this will be of tremendous importance to the country 's future development .
Naturally , it is to be expected that trade between the EU and Georgia will increase substantially as a result of this agreement , but the Union has also committed itself to making a financial and technical contribution to the process of economic reconstruction and reform , and to the pursuit of sustainable development in Georgia .
Over and above this , however , investment by European companies in Georgia will continue to increase .
Also , because of its geographical position , Georgia will be able to act as a bridgehead for trade between the European Union and the other Transcaucasian and Central Asian countries .
The consolidation of Georgia is therefore essential not only for its own benefit , but also in the regional context , where Georgia is an important stabilizing factor .
It should be noted that a number of projects for the construction or rehabilitation of oil pipelines , railways and other transport infrastructure have already been drawn up .
In this context too , the agreement is extremely important .
Given that the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement will strengthen Georgia both politically and economically and thereby consolidate its independence , I would recommend to Parliament , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , that it should give its assent to this agreement .
It can be sure that in doing so , it will add a new , long-term dimension to relations between the European Union and Georgia , a country which is rich in tradition .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Hoff has largely foreshadowed what I wish to say .
The Committee on External Economic Relations also recommends that Parliament should give its assent to the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement and the Interim Agreement with Georgia which are now before the House .
In discussing countries such as Georgia here - and in due course Armenia and Azerbaijan - we must all try to resist the temptation to treat these countries as a single problem .
Transcaucasia is a region , and we are of course dealing here with three independent , sovereign states which are extremely sensitive and which must be distinguished from each other in terms of their problems .
I say this because I frequently see people adopting a judgmental attitude in our parliamentary debates , offering unsolicited advice and suggestions which are not always helpful .
If we are to assess the situation in Georgia properly , we must bear in mind - as Mrs Hoff also said - that it is not always easy for the people of Georgia to comprehend the transition from a communist system to a democratic society , since the former Soviet Union provided Georgia with massive economic support because of its geographical position .
By comparison with other regions , the situation in Georgia was relatively good , so that the collapse of communism and the quest for new structures and the new democratic possibilities opened up by a market economy was accompanied by some particularly serious problems .
Of course , Georgia 's relationship with Russia is still an important factor , above all for psychological reasons .
Even today , the ' big brother ' of the past sometimes cannot resist meddling in areas that are none of its business .
If we wish to understand the situation in Georgia , we must also take account of the Abkhazian minority , which held an unduly prominent position in the 1970s , compared with the Georgian majority .
One of the areas in which the European Union is able to provide fundamental help is the development of democratic institutions throughout Georgia . And it is already doing so .
In the process , it must of course keep sight of the close link between cooperation and respect for human rights .
The work carried out by the UN , the OSCE and the European Union has already had a stabilizing effect and will contribute to the emergence of sound conditions in Georgia in the long term - sound conditions in the sense that the attitude of individual citizens to achievement and personal success will help to consolidate the country 's democratic structures .
We must always remind ourselves of the fact that providing these countries with effective economic aid is essential to make their democratic structures viable .
What we are now witnessing in Albania and elsewhere is the result of economic failure .
People and political parties that are still inexperienced in terms of democracy are dependent on economic success .
The importance of this Partnership and Cooperation Agreement and the Interim Agreement lies in the fact that we are helping Georgia in good time !
It is especially important for us to bear in mind that Georgia is currently making great efforts to obtain both financial and security-related support from Russia , France and Germany , as well as from the World Bank ; that a sound legal environment for the privatization of state-run undertakings has been created ; that the privatization of the agricultural sector is making rapid progress ; and that by the end of 1996 , some 90 % of the privatization of small businesses had been completed .
All this has meant that many of the problems in Georgia have been eased , and it is now up to us to give political support .
If we can do so , I am sure that our political will in respect of this country will bear fruit , because we need to help the people there to help themselves .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the transition from the communist political systems to democratic political institutions and market economies is presenting enormous and evident difficulties .
These difficulties have been significant in every country from the Soviet sphere .
Some of the central European countries - Poland , Hungary , the Czech and Slovak Republics , etc. which had a national political tradition and relatively developed market economies , in a sense , have nevertheless experienced great difficulties . But for them the process of liberation from the Soviet system has been a kind of return to the national identity .
This has not been the case for the countries which actually belonged to the Soviet Union , for example Transcaucasus , which we are discussing this morning .
Many of these countries have reached independence without having had a history as a nation , or a specific and recent history as a nation . Countries like Georgia and Armenia have a very ancient cultural tradition , but have not rediscovered their identity since 1989 .
We have to understand the enormous difficulties these countries face as they set about constructing a market economy and a state for the first time .
Mrs Hoff and Mr Kittelmann have mentioned , in connection with Georgia , that Europe has a strategic interest , both from the geo-political point of view and from the economic point of view , in stabilizing and assisting the development of those countries .
So it is right to sign cooperation and partnership agreements , and I refer here to the excellent report by Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse on all the countries in this area which provides our Parliament with a framework for their problems .
Of these three countries , Armenia perhaps has the greatest problems because of its lack of natural resources , unlike Azerbaijan which has oil resources , and because of its geographic location , locked in an enclave with no outlet to the sea . To make matters worse its relations with Turkey have been extremely difficult for centuries and were made more acute at the beginning of this century - as Members know , Turkey still blocks trade and relations with Armenia even today , and we hope this block will be lifted .
Armenia also has difficult relations with Azerbaijan , exacerbated by the longstanding dispute over Nagorno-Karabakh .
In this whole framework our cooperation agreement is very important . Armenia 's leaders are not the same as in Soviet days .
Of course there have been positive developments and there have been problems .
When Parliament monitored the 1995 elections , we observed certain violations , like the exclusion of one important party from the political battle . Unfortunately we were forced to recognize similar and possibly more serious problems in the 1996 presidential elections which were accompanied by numerous reservations from the observers and by numerous protests from the opposition forces .
However , it should be recorded that the situation has improved recently .
I hope Parliament will give its assent today to these important agreements which relate not only to economics , but above all to political dialogue through which Europe and Parliament can carefully monitor the development of political rights , civil rights , freedom of information , and so on , to establish an ongoing relationship which can promote the evolution of increasingly solid democratic institutions , increasingly rooted in the conscience of those countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I therefore hope our Parliament will give assent today to the cooperation and partnership agreement with the Republic of Armenia .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on External Economic Relations is also asking Parliament to give its assent to the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement and the Interim Agreement with Armenia .
In recent years , the political background to Armenia 's economic situation has unfortunately deteriorated badly .
The break-up of the Soviet Union , in which the Armenian economy held a privileged position - receiving a disproportionate amount of support in comparison with the other Soviet republics , for political and geographical reasons - and which provided Armenia with both its supplies of raw materials and its clientele , had a drastic impact .
The war with Azerbaijan and the resulting destruction led to shortages and extreme isolation .
Since the decision was taken to switch to a market economy and to introduce private enterprise , however , the situation of the Armenian people has steadily improved .
It is important to note that as a result of these combined factors - these upheavals - Armenian society is in a relatively unstable situation , in which the country 's democratic structures are still fragile and there are sometimes revolts against certain changes and innovations , with consequent mistrust on the part of potential investors .
Basically , we must remind ourselves that Armenia 's democratic structures are still developing , and that , partly because of the poor economic situation , it is hard for the democratic parties to formulate common goals - something we are able to do in our democracies as a result of tens or hundreds of years of practice .
We must be fair in our assessment of Armenia .
This country needs our help .
However , we also need to focus on Armenia 's particular situation .
Here too , excessive lecturing is unhelpful .
On the contrary , we must try to encourage Armenia 's development , showing tolerance and solidarity .
Obviously , the energy crisis has also contributed to Armenia 's extremely difficult economic situation .
The economic blockade and the existence of a decrepit and poorly motivated bureaucracy - the usual communist inefficiency of the past , one might say - are also seriously hampering development .
The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict is still on the agenda .
It has sapped Armenia 's strength and is still having a detrimental effect on the country 's development and political stability .
It is to be hoped that the current ceasefire will eventually lead to a settlement of the conflict , although this is not yet in sight . Of course , this is also causing serious problems for the country 's economic situation .
If the positive economic trend which is now emerging stays on course ; if the move towards democracy , which is becoming more stable , can continue ; if we can turn our promises of help into practical assistance ; if the international aid organizations can boost the increased self-confidence of this small country of Armenia through their presence on the ground ; if , in the course of dealing with the multitude of other problems which the European Union is required to solve , we can remember that this is a country which is particularly dependent on our help , then we shall make an important contribution .
We must fulfil our commitments and give our assent to the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , which has important financial implications for the Union , but which in terms of Armenia 's problems is no more than a drop in the ocean .
In conclusion , I would urge the House to make use of this Partnership and Cooperation Agreement to encourage the country 's political leadership and democratic forces not to abandon the path of democracy , despite the problems which are facing them .
That is the most important contribution that we can make to Armenia 's development .
Mr President , in recommending the expression of a favourable opinion on the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Azerbaijan , I hasten to make it clear that I far from agree with the principles of the policy of unhesitating self-interest usually known as ' Realpolitik ' .
On the contrary , I continue to believe that the pursuit even of manifest mutual economic interests should be discontinued when it disregards flagrantly inhuman situations and contributes to the perpetuation of illiberal regimes .
Azerbaijan certainly has many problems for a variety of reasons .
In no way can it be considered to respond to the standards of our own values and principles .
The open wound of Nagorny-Karabach in Azerbaijan , the situation of the refugees , and the economic situation in one of the potentially richer countries owing to its oil production , disappointed our ad hoc delegation when it went there and found that democratic processes in that country are quite deficient .
Yet , the Committee on Foreign Affairs supports the agreement on partnership relations , based on the reasonable hope that despite the continuing weaknesses , despite the unsolved problem of Nagorny-Karabach - though there is an international effort to solve it , the Minsk Group , even if no ultimate solution has yet been achieved - , and since , fortunately , Azerbaijan has ceased its policy of violent repression , we can make progress .
Our incentive is the conviction that even if Azerbaijan is in a more difficult situation than the other two Trans-Caucasian countries , Georgia and Armenia , we ourselves , as Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse very rightly said , ought to take an overall view of the problem and be consistent in the policy we ought to apply towards those three countries in a strategically and economically important area at the periphery of Europe .
That is exactly the aim of the agreement signed a year ago in Luxembourg , and it is high time to implement that agreement if we really aspire to many-sided improvements in Azerbaijan and cooperation between the three troubled Trans-Caucasian countries .
For that reason , the Committee on Foreign Affairs unanimously declares its favourable opinion to the Commission and the Council , and recommends the same to the Member States , because the Union 's Member States also have to ratify this agreement .
However , we remain and must remain constantly vigilant concerning developments in this strategically so interesting area of the Trans-Caucasus , until the gradual and progressive normalization of relations and until true democracy prevails in that country .
With this in mind , the Committee on Foreign Affairs expresses its favourable opinion .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Azerbaijan is a potentially wealthy country .
The oil reserves in the Caspian Sea are greater than those of Saudi Arabia , and the country 's industrial , agricultural and services sectors offer good opportunities for development .
However , the consequences of the war , the environmental damage caused by irresponsible oil extraction in the Soviet Union in past decades , and the unresolved problem of a million refugees from the war are all placing a heavy burden on Azerbaijan .
Azerbaijan is almost on the doorstep of the European Union 's proposed enlargement to the east , and in a few years ' time may well only be separated from the EU by the Black Sea and the Caucasus .
European investment is extremely welcome in Azerbaijan , and is particularly sought after by the oil industry , the transport sector and the burgeoning construction industry .
Azerbaijan is now increasingly taking steps to create a favourable environment for such investment .
A crucial precondition for overcoming the economic crisis , however , is the planning and extension of transport links via Georgia to the European Union , as well as infrastructure networks for oil and oil products .
All the options in this respect must be viewed in terms of their economic efficiency and environmental impact .
As we have already heard in some detail , the starting-point for the EU 's partnership and cooperation agreements with the three Transcaucasian republics - Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia - is the need for regional cooperation and development .
In short , their purpose is to frame a comprehensive regional approach which , from the European Union 's point of view , combines the economic and financial aspects , includes the substantial humanitarian aid that is being provided , and does not neglect the opportunities for political dialogue now available to us .
It is above all through increased cooperation between Azerbaijan and Georgia - and also Armenia , if it so wishes - that the vast oil resources of the Caspian Sea can be exploited for exporting to the European Union and the rest of the world , as well as for local processing .
Only then will the door to economic relations with Europe genuinely be open .
At the same time , however , regional economic cooperation can help to reduce the political tensions in the area .
It is therefore only by making efforts to link up with the trans-European networks and other transport , energy and communications infrastructure that cooperation with Europe can be made possible .
In political terms , the point is to help stabilize these three states , which are now of course , as former members of the Soviet Union , in the process of fundamentally reorganizing their societies , economies and political decision-making structures .
As a peaceful partner and working together with Russia and Turkey - not against them - the European Union can achieve something .
The Black Sea and the Bosporus are the main lines of communication here .
Europe is too far away to be able to play the leading political role in the region .
And , naturally , it has no wish to do so .
However , it is in great demand as an honest broker to bring about economic progress and peaceful cooperation .
With France now holding the presidency of the Minsk Group of the OSCE , Europe has an excellent opportunity to work towards the rapid establishment of peace between Armenia and Azerbaijan in and around Nagorno-Karabakh .
It is of paramount importance in this context to remove the legacy of the war .
The blockade on Armenia must be lifted - as has already been said - the occupying forces must be withdrawn , and the autonomy and right to selfdetermination of the majority population in the disputed enclave must be guaranteed .
The refugees must be enabled to return home or , if this is not possible , they must be settled in new areas .
New housing , jobs and social services for a total of 1.3 million people in Azerbaijan , Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh must be created .
In the process , the European Union must pay particular attention to the need to build homes for multi-ethnic families .
In the framework of the Fizuli pilot programme , the towns and villages around Fizuli , which have been completely destroyed , must be rebuilt with European Union aid , as a matter of priority .
A new infrastructure axis based on the extension of transport links and energy and communications networks must be developed .
The Union 's support should be earmarked in particular for the Traceca programme , which addresses all these needs together .
Mr President , the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy supports this agreement with Armenia for a number of reasons .
Firstly , Armenia is the country which has suffered most from the break-up of the Soviet Union .
Secondly , it has still not recovered from the great earthquake of 1988 . And , thirdly , it has suffered enormously from the prolonged conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh .
However , we fail to understand why the agreement makes no attempt to find a solution to the problem of the Medzamor nuclear power plant , which according to the US Department of Energy Intelligence is one of the most dangerous reactors in the world .
Everyone knows that .
The Commission itself says in the annex to the agreement that the EU cannot accept the decision to reopen this plant .
Nobody disputes the fact that Armenia has to obtain its power from somewhere .
We all know that . But the simple reason why there is currently no solution to this problem is that Armenia 's neighbours are systematically blocking its gas supply .
The Union must therefore take steps to ensure that Armenia 's gas supply is restored , but it cannot simply turn a blind eye , as it were , to the Medzamor nuclear plant being recommissioned .
That is unacceptable , since it is widely recognized that Medzamor represents a greater danger to us all than Chernobyl .
We have a twofold task , therefore : ensuring that Armenia 's gas supply is restored , and that Medzamor is shut down .
That is what our committee wishes to see .
Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , I deliberately allowed you to overrun your time quite considerably .
Of course , in this Chamber I have often maintained that a speaking time of one minute is not enough to allow a proper expression of views by any Member , and that is the only point on which I , personally , am prepared to deviate from the effort I otherwise make to stick strictly to the limits .
Mr President , I have provided the opinion for the Committee on Budgets on the agreement with Azerbaijan .
The subject of my opinion was the effects on the European budget of this agreement .
It appears , at first sight , that the effects would be fairly minimal .
These effects would come through loss of revenue , through the increased imports from that region or if they affected our food supplies through agricultural exports or the cost of export refunds .
While the Commission has not given us information related to the budgetary costs , it seems that these will be very small .
We have to consider that Azerbaijan has 7.5 million people .
Their economy had been deteriorating for four or five years up until last year , GDP was dropping by 15 % to 20 % annually and stands today at around $ 400-500 per capita .
Quite obviously a country in that economic situation is not going to be in a position to do very much trade .
Apparently more than half of their exports are to the former Soviet Union and Iran , and about 20 % imports and exports to the European Union .
Their total imports are about $ 1.5b and exports something less than that .
Obviously this country is in a very weak trading position and is going to have very little effect on the finances apart from the direct transfers provided for in the TACIS Programme , which is a different subject from the one that I am dealing with .
The Budget Committee very much welcomes this agreement and hopes that it will serve to improve the political and economic situation ; that it will develop to a point where it will contribute much to the economic and political welfare of Azerbaijan .
We also hope it will be fruitful from our point of view .
Exceptionally , I will also allow Mr Chesa to speak .
Today we began quite a bit earlier and I am afraid some Members were not aware of that .
However , I would ask the speakers at least not to be late , because I am not disposed to let them speak whenever they turn up in the House .
Mr President , we are concerned this morning with the fourth Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with the Transcaucasian States .
The nature of such agreements has undergone a radical change , since they are now concerned with partnership and co-operation rather than with mere trade relations .
The present partnership agreement with Kazakhstan , concluded for an initial period of ten years , provides for the institution of a political dialogue and cultural cooperation , together with important agreements relating to the economic and trade sectors .
With regard to trade , the parties mutually agree on most-favoured-nation treatment in all matters connected with customs duties , provisions relating to customs clearance , transit , warehouses and transhipment , and methods of payment and payment transfers .
The rules governing the sale , purchase , transport , distribution and use of goods on domestic markets naturally take account of the limits imposed by GATT to aid developing countries and the new situation as regards relations between the Kazakh Republic and neighbouring States .
With regard to economic co-operation , the agreement relates to the following sectors : economic and social development , human resources development , support for enterprises ( including privatization , investment and development of financial services ) , agriculture and food , energy and civil nuclear safety , transport , tourism , environmental protection and regional co-operation .
Thus , Kazakhstan and the European Union are undertaking to work closely together on the basis of common values , with the Union thus providing support for the independence , sovereignty and territorial integrity of these new independent States , with a view to helping safeguard peace and stability in Europe .
Mr President , before the Commissioner leaves , I should like to ask a question as Chairman of the European Parliament 's Delegation on relations with the three Caucasian Republics .
What the Commissioner told us is very significant and important , and we all agree with it .
My question is this : since that area is so important for the European Union , why is there a Commission delegation only in Georgia ?
Why is the European Union , in the form of official delegations , absent from Azerbaijan and Armenia , when countries such as my own , Greece , has embassies there ?
I listened to the question very carefully , and I can only say that I entirely agree with Mr Alavanos that the reasons preventing us from having representations in all the new independent republics of the former Soviet Union are entirely financial and logistical .
I am very pleased that we have been able to open a delegation in Tbilisi in Georgia , and we would like to do the same in other countries which we regard as important , as we have explained in talks with the Committee on Budgets .
There are currently no plans , I think , to expand the number of delegations .
I hope there will be further possibilities next year , but then there will also be competition from other former Soviet republics .
We already have an office in Alma-Ata in Kazakhstan , but not in Uzbekistan , for example , which has specifically asked to have one .
We are doing our best .
Mr President , I just have one question , because this is something that was decided on by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
Do you not think , Commissioner , that every penny we invest in the Medzamor nuclear power plant through the TACIS programme is a penny wasted , because it simply cannot be made safer ?
It was brought back into operation because Armenia 's gas supply was cut off by its neighbours .
Would it not be better for us to concentrate our efforts on ensuring that the country 's gas supply is restored ?
Then the Medzamor plant - which is situated in an earthquake zone , moreover - could be shut down again .
Would it not be better to devote our time and money to that , rather than to patching up something which cannot be patched up ?
Is there a timetable for the decommissioning of this nuclear plant , Commissioner ?
To start with the last question , according to the timetable which the Armenian Government is following , the plant is due to close in 2007 .
We think this is too late and have urged them to consider an earlier date , and my answer to Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz is that we must try everything we can .
If the plant cannot be closed as quickly as we would like , then we can always try to ensure further improvements in its nuclear safety .
But I know that the basic problem with this reactor is that it is situated in a fault area where earthquakes and the like can occur , and this is something which it is difficult for the TACIS programme to deal with .
So as I said , we shall do everything we can to limit the risk , including trying to bring the closure date forward and giving consideration to alternative energy programmes .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , speaking in my capacity as vice-chairman of the Transcaucasian delegation , I should like to offer my sincere thanks and congratulations to all the rapporteurs for their reports .
They further highlight the great importance of these PCAs for the efforts of the countries concerned to develop and consolidate their economies and new democratic structures .
However , in Transcaucasia as elsewhere , democracy must mean that everything possible is done to safeguard social peace .
This means that every citizen must have a roof over his head , enough to eat and a job .
Above all , he must be able to express his opinions freely .
And this leads me to the issue that I wish to draw to everyone 's attention once again today : respect for the right of freedom of expression and for human rights .
In Georgia , there is hardly any problem in this context .
It is indeed a pleasure to talk with our young colleagues in the Georgian Parliament about their work , about the situation in Georgia and our relations with each other .
We are all constantly amazed at the rapid progress Georgia has made in the development and consolidation of its democratic structures .
There are problems in other areas , though , and especially in the two other Transcaucasian states .
In Azerbaijan , although oil production is promising a rapid economic upturn , very few people are able to participate in democracy .
Clan thinking and the resultant clan rule are conditioning the development of both democracy and the economy .
The country is governed autocratically , and the government parties and President Aliyev not only determine the broad lines of policy in a dictatorial way , but also decide as they see fit on the scope which the already weak opposition parties have for taking action .
The European Parliament cannot simply leave the monitoring of respect for human rights to the Helsinki committees and Amnesty International .
Their work is invaluable , but we too have a responsibility in this context .
The Armenian Government is exploiting the conflict with Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh to justify the suppression of the opposition .
For this purpose , President Ter-Petrossian is invoking former Soviet laws under which he himself was imprisoned during the Gorbachev era .
Now he is using those same laws to ban a large number of opposition parties .
We are thus repeatedly seeing trials in Armenia which can be described without hesitation as political .
This also applies to some extent to the so-called ' Dro Trial ' , where a group was found guilty of committing acts of terrorism , and sentenced accordingly .
Quite wrongly , however , an attempt was previously made to link this group to our socialist sister party , Dashnaksutyun .
It was even claimed that the ' Dro Group ' had acted on the orders of Dashnaksutyun .
Thankfully , that accusation was rejected as false and unsustainable by Armenia 's Supreme Court , and Dashnaksutyun has now been fully rehabilitated .
However , I would question the degree of reinstatement of Dashnaksutyun and of the associations and organizations affiliated to it .
There is another trial , however , which has not yet been concluded , the so-called ' 31 Trial ' .
This involves 31 wellknown opposition politicians , all of whom took part in a large demonstration to protest against vote rigging in the presidential elections in Armenia in September last year .
Although the organizers of the demonstration have now been freed , thanks to international pressure , the trial against these 31 politicians is continuing .
According to reports by Amnesty International , they are still being held in prison under inhumane conditions .
Armenia 's political , economic and military dependence on Russia is also a cause for concern .
Russia supplies Armenia with many essential goods , and maintains army and air force bases in the country , including on the border with Turkey .
Of course , I sympathize with the fact that Armenia is doing everything it can to improve its economic situation .
It was not without reason that , in its resolution of 17 January 1997 , the European Parliament called on Turkey and Azerbaijan to relax their economic blockade on Armenia .
Nevertheless , I wish to stress once again that economic hardship cannot serve as a pretext for undemocratic behaviour .
In adopting the Carrère d 'Encausse report in January , we made our position on the Transcaucasian republics quite clear .
We wish the economic development of Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia to take place within the framework of a social market economy and with respect for the environment and human rights .
That is what I wished to emphasize again today .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after the break-up of the Soviet Union , the early years of the newly independent Transcaucasian republics were marked by wars , the persistence of the communist old guard and control by the Kremlin .
Only now are Georgia , Armenia and Azerbaijan gradually managing to find their feet economically and politically .
However , lasting development will only be possible when the ethnic conflicts that are essentially a legacy of the Soviet era are resolved .
At least there is no longer fighting between Armenia and Azerbaijan - the guns have fallen silent .
It is undoubtedly the case that Moscow originally stirred up this conflict so that it could appear later as a peacemaker and gain influence in the region .
The plan worked : today , Russia is again the leading power in Transcaucasia , Turkey has had to swiftly abandon its ambitions in the area , and Armenia is in any case more dependent on Russian support than its fellow Transcaucasian republics .
As we know , normal relations between Armenia and Turkey do not exist .
Turkey is supporting the linguistically and ethnically related Azeris in the war over Nagorno-Karabakh , and has closed its border crossings with Armenia .
And for the time being , they remain closed .
The conflict over this enclave is undoubtedly Armenia 's most serious domestic , international and financial problem .
In terms of regional politics , it is part of the international poker game for the oil resources in the Caspian Sea .
On the plus side , however , one should mention that Armenia has an ethnically very homogeneous population of 3.7 million inhabitants , who can work together to develop the country .
In any event , Armenia is more ethnically homogeneous than any of its neighbours in the region .
Although it is geographically part of the Near East , the people of Armenia - and of Georgia , incidentally - feel themselves to be European at heart .
The region 's religious connection with the East is also alien to the Armenians : Christianity is the dominant religion in the country , in the form of either the Armenian or the Orthodox Church .
Like Belarus , Armenia used to play a special , technically-oriented role in the former Soviet Union . This applies to the chemical and textile-processing industries in particular , and that is undoubtedly also a point which must be taken into account in our cooperation with this country .
The Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Armenia will serve to underpin the existing close cooperation with the European institutions .
One objective of the agreement is the progressive integration of Armenia into the open international system .
This applies to both the political and the economic sectors .
Through this agreement , the European Union will help Armenia to consolidate its sovereignty , thereby contributing to the stability of the region .
Mr President , I would like to say that the three Caucasian Republics are the gateway between Asia and Europe , where ancient civilizations come together . They are now the point of contact and the dividing line between Christianity and Islam .
They are countries with a burdensome past , which are undergoing intense regional conflicts .
From that standpoint , as all the speakers and Commissioner Van den Broek have rightly said , what they need is a steady , consistent and dynamic political approach on the part of the European Union .
Here , we must be careful , especially we in the European Parliament .
I would like to congratulate all the rapporteurs . However , we should take note that this multiplicity of reports , this competition between the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on External Economic Relations has resulted in the fact that Parliament itself is required to take a series of mutually contradictory decisions , with the result that our intervention and presence is not convincing , not consistent and steady , and that some of us here appear in the eyes of third parties to be friends of Azerbaijan and enemies of Armenia , some as friends of Russia and enemies of Georgia , and vice-versa .
That is a weakness which we are repeating today , and I think we ought to be very careful about it .
Along with the weakness I have mentioned , we should note the absence , for budgetary reasons , of European offices from that region , which has enormous potential but is also a simmering volcano .
In my opinion , it is wrong that all the multinational companies have offices in Azerbaijan , and countries that can do little , like Greece , have embassies in Azerbaijan and Armenia , while the European Union is absent when it wants to intervene in a meaningful way .
The Commissioner told us - and this is very important - that the European Union is the main provider of financial aid in that area .
I , however , cannot help thinking about Albania .
We must not forget that Albania was the country that received a great deal of finance , and look at its situation now .
Consequently , I think that besides financial aid there must be intervention on behalf of democracy and especially some intervention to solve the regional conflicts , particularly today when the Minsk initiative seems to have become dormant .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , you have primarily been talking in terms of the importance of the Transcaucasian region for Europe .
That precisely describes the character of the PCAs , which are theoretically based on partnership , but clearly tend to favour the Member States of the Union and their interests in the region .
Questions such as the progress of democratic development , the civil rights situation , the development of a free and democratic system of justice , the ability to cope with the flood of refugees in the region , and the war between Armenia and Azerbaijan are becoming increasingly incidental .
But an equal partnership means one in which the whole population is able to participate .
The European Union must above all contribute to the stability and development of the region , and not simply display its interest in exploiting the region 's oil reserves and establishing a secure corridor for the pipelines .
The region urgently needs peace , so that investment can take place and infrastructure can be built and interconnected .
This means firstly that the OSCE agreement must contribute to the reduction of the region 's military capacity , since only then will a comprehensive strategy bring results .
The PCAs will be an important building block in this process , as long as they are implemented in a balanced way , for mutual benefit and in real partnership , and are actually geared to the region 's needs .
The prospects for this are very varied .
In Georgia , we are seeing the first signs that the political situation is stabilizing .
The country 's second government is taking care not to reignite the conflicts in South Ossetia and Abkhazia , although there is still no institutional solution .
The situation between the warring parties of Armenia and Azerbaijan is quite different .
There is a front line in that conflict which crosses Azerbaijan .
It is heavily populated by troops on both sides , and a part of Azerbaijani territory is occupied by Armenian troops from Karabakh .
The border is the front line , not the internationally recognized frontier , and it would take a single spark to cause the fighting to flare up again .
The OSCE 's demand for the stepping-up of the process of achieving a peaceful settlement in accordance with its principles , including the key requirement of the creation of an autonomous region enjoying the maximum degree of self-government within Azerbaijan 's internationally recognized borders , was not accepted by Armenia .
However , the Irish presidency endorsed the OSCE 's statement and all its demands .
Since then , the sensitive talks on the status of Nagorno-Karabakh have ground to a halt .
This means that around a million refugees who have already been living in tents , mud huts and goods trucks for five years will have to continue to endure this situation indefinitely .
The UN 's demand for repatriation of all refugees is not feasible for the foreseeable future .
If Europe is assuming that safe third countries will be found for these refugees in the present situation , it is simply deluding itself .
The UNHCR has confirmed to me that neither the political nor the legal position is conducive to finding safe third countries , especially for Armenian and Azerbaijani refugees .
A peace agreement is a precondition for economic cooperation .
Otherwise , it is simply not on - or do we intend to invest in Nagorno-Karabakh through the Latschin corridor ?
In my view , therefore , we must link the ratification of the PCAs to the conclusion of a peace agreement . That must undoubtedly be a precondition , and only then will we be able to give our support to a coherent and responsible foreign policy action .
It is an illusion to believe that economic action is possible in the current situation !
Mr President , the partnership agreements we are studying this morning send a clear , consistent and positive political signal to the infant Caucasian republics .
They serve the security interests of the European Union States in both the short and the long term .
The Caucasus is not at the ends of the earth - it is on our doorsteps , and what happens there has a direct impact on our security .
That is why our group is glad to see that these agreements take due account of questions of environmental and nuclear safety and the efforts to combat organized crime and drugs trafficking .
In the longer term , our objective must be to help achieve lasting stabilization of the situation in that region .
We must not exaggerate the importance of these partnership agreements , but they can help to achieve this , first and foremost by endorsing the sovereignty and independence of each of these young republics which have just recovered those benefits after the collapse of the soviet system and are particularly attached to them .
While encouraging the difficult process of co-operation in the region , we must nevertheless respect the specific characteristics and identity of each State .
The differences are important : two of these States have a Christian tradition and a European culture ; some have got rid of their former communist masters while others have kept them on in re-incarnated forms , following elections that have sometimes been suspect .
Overall , though , the agreements can help to encourage the establishment of democratic practices and the development of the market economy in societies which are tackling the considerable problems of transition , as Hélène Carrère d 'Encausse recalled just now .
These countries justify the institution by us of certain forms of aid , provided , Mr President , that they are really effective and do not have the paradoxical purpose of compensating for the disastrous effects of blockade policies against some of these States pursued by some of our partners in the region .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate all the rapporteurs on their excellent reports , which cover interim agreements and partnership and cooperation agreements with the three Transcaucasian states of Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia and the Central Asian state of Kazakhstan .
This House has already adopted Mrs Carrère d 'Encausse 's report on Transcaucasia , which provided the background for the PCAs with three out of the four countries we are dealing with today .
I would like to thank her warmly for her earlier contribution on this subject .
We are dealing with two separate regions of the world in this debate - trans-Caucasia and Central Asia .
Both regions are very different , although they share certain characteristics : both formed part of the former Soviet Union and inherited a dislocated command economy and a political system subject to Moscow .
Kazakhstan , Azerbaijan and , to a lesser extent , Georgia and Armenia are heavily influenced by the presence of the Caspian Sea and , particularly , the exploitation and transportation of oil .
All four countries are seeking to assert their independence from Moscow while cooperating in varying degrees with the Commonwealth of Independent States .
To a certain extent the interim agreements and accompanying PCAs are intended to encourage the independence of these countries and assist with the transition to market economies and democratic development .
It is important for the EU to build up relations with such countries which lie in an important geopolitical region .
Kazakhstan lies between Russia and China and near to Iran and politically unstable Afghanistan .
Georgia , Armenia and Azerbaijan sit between the Caspian and Black Seas , with both Iran , Turkey and Russia as near neighbours .
The conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan over Nagorny Karabakh and the fighting over Abkhazia in Georgia make this a volatile region .
Economic and democratic development in three of the four countries has been weak .
As Mrs Hoff 's report shows , only Georgia , with former Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze at the helm , has managed to hold free and fair elections and resist a lurch to authoritarian methods .
We have seen rigged elections in Armenia and Azerbaijan , while in Kazakhstan President Nazarbayev has flouted the country 's constitution and cowed the opposition .
These countries need to improve their democratic and human rights record .
I agree with the points Mrs Lalumière has made on the current unsuitability of the nature of the partnership and cooperation agreements to be signed by these countries .
It is misleading to give the impression that the EU and the European Parliament endorse the level of democracy and human rights in Kazakhstan , Armenia and Azerbaijan .
So , in adopting all these reports , I hope the House will continue to monitor closely the situation in the countries concerned .
By developing closer relations with these four countries , the European Union must work to develop prosperity , peace and democracy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , now that the leaden casing of the USSR has melted away , we can make one observation and one request .
The observation is that in Transcaucasia , as in many other places , the problems with nationalities , borders , minorities and ethnic and religious differences that existed in the past have survived almost intact .
Sometimes their effect is supplemented by the legacy of fragmentation practised by the USSR , as in Nagorny Karabakh , for example .
The request is that we should approach this situation in a totally new spirit , aimed at finding lasting solutions .
That is the context of the joint agreement on Armenia which we are being asked to approve today .
To give that country the opportunity to strengthen its independence , to deepen its democracy , to open up more to international relations , to orient itself towards a market economy , to diversify its trade flows which are too exclusively geared to the former USSR , to achieve the lifting of the blockade and then develop a sound , trusting policy of regional cooperation with its neighbours - those are the objectives of this agreement , and I approve of them .
I hope that Europe will use its influence to ensure that these things do happen , and to ensure in particular that Armenia has the right of freedom of trade , one of the foundations of the rights of nations , which will enable it in particular to close down a dangerous nuclear power station and will also be an essential condition for lasting peace in that region .
Mr President , I have a series of two or three observations .
We are debating about three or four republics in the Trans-Caucasian area , about the same number or more in Central Asia , for all of which we have allowed a very brief joint debate .
My comment is that the debate is superficially organised , it assumes that we are dealing with soulless issues that can all be dealt with in the same way , whereas in fact these are countries , peoples with ancient and modern civilizations and cultural , religious , economic and social traditions .
They cannot all fit into a single mould and be dealt with in one debate .
This poor organisation of the debate encourages me to make a second comment .
Despite the good intentions of the rapporteurs , all the reports and recommendations we have heard have a common characteristic .
And what is that ?
They betray a patronage , a didactic spirit , and an attitude like a rich uncle who holds the purse strings and dictates what people are to do if they want to see any of it .
And I will go on to say that we have learnt nothing , at least from the example of Albania which is much smaller in size and in every other way , and where such machinations led to the present situation , which has literally exposed and ridiculed the entire policy of the Community and American influences in their treatment of these new republics , as you call them .
My third observation , Mr President , because I do not wish to be negative , is that we must be careful , we need a proper approach , and we must view those countries , those peoples on an equal basis . We must respect their dignity and history if we wish to establish relations of cooperation and productive agreements with them .
Otherwise , it will seem that beyond our own intentions or those of the rapporteurs , there is an underlying Community policy which aims to plunder those countries and establish neo-colonial commitments and relations . And the price for that will be paid both by those peoples and by the peoples of Europe .
Mr President , allow me to make a brief contribution in my capacity as president of the Delegation for Central Asia and Mongolia , to demonstrate our support for the cooperation agreement with Kazakhstan being discussed today .
It is our sincere belief that this agreement will assist this young republic in consolidating its new-found democracy , in developing its economy and in completing the process of transition to a market economy .
As has been stated , we are aware that Kazakhstan 's record regarding the protection of freedom , respect for human rights and consolidation of the democratic process is unsatisfactory , but it is also a fact that some positive progress has been made , allowing us to hope that that country has now started on its way down the right road , leading to implementation of the agreement .
To delay doing this might be counterproductive and may risk a return to the previous state of affairs .
This republic is of great value to the European Union in strategic terms and its stability is of utmost interest to the Community .
Do not forget that we are dealing with the world 's third-ranking nuclear power , a country which has significant mineral , energy and textile resources - including space installations - , one which is on the dividing line between Islam and Christianity and which is home to a significant Turkish-speaking minority , and also Russianspeaking and Polish-speaking minorities .
We are in fact dealing with an area which is not so very far away since , ultimately , Turkey and Eastern Europe are the closest and most natural routes towards the European Union .
To sum up , Mr President , the agreement creates optimum conditions for mutual development of economic and cultural relations .
The only matter outstanding is for us to cast our votes , so that Kazakhstan 's political situation can allow this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate on the PCAs with these four countries , on which we have to decide , is one of crucial importance .
That applies both economically and politically , because this will be an extremely important region in the future .
It contains major reserves of natural resources , especially oil , which are probably far greater than is currently estimated .
Someone gaining the friendship of this region will always be better off than someone losing it .
Secondly , of course , the question of Islam is a particular issue as regards two of these countries .
There are two Christian and two Islamic states in the region .
The two Islamic states are mainly inhabited by Turkish peoples who have close links with the Turks .
I therefore have to say quite clearly , once again , that our policy towards Turkey is breathtakingly short-sighted .
We need this country ; we need it vitally , because it represents the alternative to certain other powers in the region which are extremely dangerous .
The Turks are clearly well aware of this .
I have been to Turkey several times recently , and I know just how many people from these two Islamic states are currently living in that country , where they are receiving training .
I would almost go so far as to say that there are two countries which give us a good example of how to provide development aid : Turkey and China .
Turkey , because it delivers its development aid primarily to the people - in other words , it is finally restoring to the peoples of these countries the structures of which they were deprived during the period of Russian rule . And China , because it applies its development aid at grass roots level , especially in Africa , rather than promoting large-scale projects - like some other donor countries - which often do not have a particularly beneficial effect on the regions concerned .
We must therefore also think of these two states in political terms .
And we must cooperate with Turkey in this region , because that is in Europe 's long-term interest .
As far as the two Christian states - Georgia and Armenia - are concerned , I should firstly like to say that it is certainly right that we should develop relations with and assist Georgia , but this should not mean that we put our trust in Russia 's Gauleiter in Georgia , Mr Shevardnadze .
This man was once used to counter Georgia 's freely elected president , Mr Gamsakhurdia , who was subsequently murdered .
I do take some interest in Georgia , I belong to the bureau of the group for human rights in Georgia , and I can assure the House that some extremely serious human rights violations are being committed there .
That must be constantly emphasized .
We are somewhat naive about human rights questions .
We see violations in some places , but not others .
And we should definitely see them in Georgia .
With regard to Armenia , I know that many people criticize President Ter-Petrossian .
Nevertheless , we should not forget what he has done for Armenia , how he has built the country up .
It is therefore also important for us to maintain good relations with Armenia , and especially to use our influence finally to bring about a settlement between Armenia and Azerbaijan , which takes account of the legitimate rights of both states and makes it possible to ensure the restoration of order in a region where we have interests .
Mr President , thank you for giving me the floor .
I was not able earlier to give the opinion of the Committee on Budgets on the interim agreement between the European Union and Armenia .
I should like to do so now , after what Mr McCartin has said about the partnership agreement .
He was a member of the Committee on Budgets , which delivered a favourable opinion .
He was responsible for the comments that honourable Members have heard .
Of course , the Committee on Budgets has delivered a favourable opinion on the interim agreement .
It did so unanimously , in response to a proposal by myself .
It obtained the figures it wanted from the Commission , relative to what is mentioned in the written opinion .
Having regard to the fact that the general partnership agreement required Parliament 's assent , and the importance of the interim agreement , the Committee therefore welcomed the fact that the Council consulted Parliament .
I should add that I personally endorse the comments that have been made about the importance of Armenia to the European Union .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.36 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )

Mr President , I would just like to pass on my good wishes to the Bureau for the taking the enlightened decision to remove the photograph of Robert Maxwell from Parliament 's premises .
It is just a pity that it took them twenty-four hours to do so .
What a pity you had to qualify your praise .
Mr President , I should like to ask The British Conservatives , especially Mr Cassidy , during this voting time , to refrain from making obscene gestures to people in the public gallery .
I am sure Mr Cassidy will give that assurance .
Welcome
I should like to welcome here today a delegation from the Parliament of Lithuania , the Seimas , led by its chairman Mr Racas .
He is accompanied by the Lithuanian Deputy Foreign Minister , Mr Rinkunas .
The delegation is visiting Strasbourg to meet its counterparts in the European Parliament and has held meetings yesterday and today .
The association agreement which has been signed between the European Union and Lithuania and which will put Lithuania on an equal footing with the other associated states in its relations with the European Union is still awaiting the ratification of three of the Member States .
As the European Parliament called , through the Oostlander report , for a policy of equal treatment of all the associated states , we hope that the ratification process will be completed shortly so that an EU / Lithuanian Joint Parliamentary Committee can be established .
Chairman and colleagues , we welcome you to the Parliament .
( Applause )
Votes

Mr President , with reference to Amendment No 5 , I have heard that a number of groups have problems with this amendment because it contains the words ' countries or ' .
I would therefore propose an oral amendment deleting those words .
The amendment would then read : ' Organizations which approve of or encourage compulsory abortion or sterilization and infanticide as methods of controlling population growth shall be excluded from Community support ' . The words ' countries or ' would therefore be deleted .
Does anyone object to this oral amendment ?
Mr President , there are in fact countries which approve of and officially engage in these practices .
They should accordingly be referred to as countries .
Simply referring to organizations , on the pretext that we can make that include countries if necessary , is in my view unacceptable .
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Mr Falconer wants me to congratulate Mr Donnelly on the adoption of his report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since yesterday , we have had as our guests Members of Parliament from ten Mediterranean countries who have been meeting us for the first time in the context of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership and the Barcelona process .
In the course of our very interesting discussions , our colleagues put forward a number of constructive proposals , whose inclusion in my report would have added to and enhanced it .
I explained to them that our Rules of Procedure unfortunately did not permit the tabling of amendments at the last minute , but I wish to put on record that I share a number of their reservations concerning this report .
However , we shall now vote on the report .
Amendment No 6 :
Mr President , I have consulted my colleagues in the PPE Group , and they agree that this amendment could be misunderstood .
I would therefore propose a compromise oral amendment adding the following phrase to the end of recital A , which I shall read out in French :
' ... and recognizing the consistent follow-up by subsequent presidencies , starting with the Italian presidency ... ' .
That is all .
If the House agrees to this oral amendment being put to the vote , Amendment No 6 can be withdrawn .
( The amendment was withdrawn )
Amendment No 13 :
Mr President , I do not know why our colleagues in the Liberal Group have tabled this amendment .
It simply seeks to delete a phrase from this paragraph , the important phrase concerning the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in the Mediterranean region .
That could be done by means of a split vote .
Amendment No 11 :
Mr President , I would like to propose adding the word ' maintenance ' to the word ' restoration ' , and the word ' archaeological ' to the phrase ' promotion of artistic and historical monuments ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I would propose that the second paragraph of Amendment No 11 should incorporate the present text of the motion for a resolution , with five words being deleted .
You all have the text in front of you .
I shall read it out in the amended version in French :
' rejects any proposal to list in the Treaty a large number of conditions to be fulfilled before Article 7A , providing for free movement of persons , comes into force ; strongly criticizes the fact that this text does not provide a role for the European Parliament and the Court of Justice ' .
I understand that there will be a roll-call vote on Amendment No 11 .
That seems to me a very relevant consideration as to whether we should accept this oral amendment .
In principle I would be against ever accepting an oral amendment that then leads to a roll-call vote .
It seems to me that a roll-call vote engages the political responsibility of Members of this House in a way that is unusual and we should be given notice of that .
I might even argue that under Article 119 ( 1 ) a request for a roll-call vote only applies to the amendment as printed and put before us and cannot apply to an oral amendment .
Would the Liberal Group be prepared to withdraw its request for a roll-call vote ?
I would like to reply to Mr Schäfer .
I understand that it concerns an oral amendment to Amendment No 11 tabled by the Liberal Group .
It replaces the whole of paragraph 8 , not just the second paragraph .
Could you confirm that ?
If that is the case and if the Socialist Group supports Amendment No 11 entirely we are willing to withdraw the request for a roll-call vote .
If he only wants to replace the second part of the paragraph then we maintain our request .
It replaces the whole paragraph .
Then we withdraw our request for a roll-call vote .
Mr President , for the House 's information , I think it would be helpful if the Member who proposed this oral amendment repeated exactly what he wishes to delete , because in my opinion it amounts to a criticism of the Dutch presidency , and is of course politically motivated .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
Amendment No 14 :
Just for fun , Mrs Van Dijk wishes to propose an oral amendment .
Not just for fun , Mr President , but because I really do not think it is clear either to the Members of the House or to the public just what this amendment involves : what is it exactly that the Dutch presidency has deleted ?
I should like to clarify the amendment , which would then read in English :
strongly opposes and refuses the proposal by the Dutch presidency to delete sexual orientation , age and handicap from the anti-discrimination article put forward by the Irish presidency .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
Before the final vote :
Mr President , I have discussed this matter with various groups , and it appears that , although we were unfortunately not aware of the fact before the deadline for tabling amendments , the Dutch presidency did not attend the debate , and everyone was extremely angry about it .
I therefore propose to add a paragraph - you have the text of it in front of you - which reads as follows in English :
strongly regrets the absence of the presidency of the Council during yesterday 's debate on the development of the Intergovernmental Conference and condemns the presidency 's apparent lack of interest for the views of the European Parliament .
( The oral amendment was rejected )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , this afternoon we are due to vote on the Tillich report , but I would like to draw attention to an error .
Paragraph 10 states : ' Considers it essential that , if Member States ... ' , but instead of ' Member States ' it should state ' Council ' , which , legally speaking , is not the same thing .
I think the relevant services should speak to the rapporteur and correct the error before we move on to the vote .
Mr President , I am sorry to have to say that when I asked you how long you thought the voting would take you said five or ten minutes .
It has taken 15-20 minutes , but that is not my point .
It is becoming customary , and the same is continuing this week too , for the voting to continue until half past one or a quarter to two .
I consider this unacceptable .
We have said very many times that voting should end at one , or ten past one , or even a quarter past one , but no later .
If there are so many votes to be taken , let the voting start at 11.30 .
I ask you to convey both to the President of Parliament and to the Conference of Presidents what I have said , because I think that the Members are not at all disposed to give up their lunch when they work 12 and 15 hours a day .
There is a view in the Conference of Presidents that now that we have established a set beginning time for votes we should not alter that .
If we change the time it creates problems .
Mr President , I have two points to make .
It seems extraordinary to me that a political group can put down an amendment and then ask for a split vote on their own amendment which happened on Amendment No 9 in that final vote .
Could that be looked at by the Bureau ?
It leads to a lot of confusion .
Secondly , we all admire your presidency .
We all admire presidents who congratulate rapporteurs .
But there are a lot of reports which come to this House with a huge number of amendments .
The rapporteurs who get concise reports to the House which do not take up a great deal of voting time deserve congratulations but maybe some of the others do not .
I must congratulate my colleague Jean-Thomas Nordmann for his recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Co-operation , regarding aid to population policies and programmes in the developing countries .
It should be pointed out that this text was adopted unanimously by the Committee on Development , and that the European Parliament 's amendments have the virtue of recalling the commitments undertaken at the Cairo conference , especially by increasing Community financial aid to population programmes in developing countries to ECU 300 million by the year 2000 .
Furthermore , Parliament made a point of clarifying which committees had responsibility for each major region : the ACPs , the Mediterranean States and the Latin American and Asian States .
Population programmes can only be introduced at the request and with the participation of the States concerned , but they are today the only means of countering population explosions .
That is why I am voting in favour of Mr Nordmann 's recommendation .
Linkohr recommendation ( A4-0084 / 97 )
Already at the initial discussion of this report , I voiced criticism as to how the new research funds for the fourth frame program were to be used .
As a supporter of the Green Party I do not agree with the proposal on how these funds are to be used .
Too much money is for example put towards outdated means of transport when we ought to be investing in the development of economical and ecological means of transport .
In order to try and make some changes , I have proposed three amendments which I will naturally vote for .
However , I am not sure if we should give more money for research .
According to Swedish studies there is no evidence of research at EU level being more valuable than the research carried out in Member States .
I believe it would be more beneficial if the Member States invested the money in research in their native countries ( including the international research exchange currently taking place between universities ) or to support basic mainstream education .
Alan J. Donnelly report ( A4-0552 / 97 )
I spoke in the debate yesterday to express my support for the Commission 's communication and for the essence of the Donnelly report .
In this area , as in many others , we need a genuine European industrial policy .
I support an increase in research and also in forecasting studies , but more is needed in order to develop production and to combat unfair competition and social dumping .
The Renault case gives us cause for concern , but lamentations are not enough .
In order to keep factories there have to be cars to be manufactured and buyers to buy them .
Finally , I say again : Europe must not impose rules upon itself that its competitors do not impose on themselves , particularly in the area of mergers and direct or indirect government intervention , whether in the United States or Japan .
The Europe of the free single market is showing its limitations , and is now at risk of killing off the European idea as such unless it moves forward to a political and social Europe , an industrial Europe , a Europe of employment .
That is the fundamental problem raised by Renault , and not a problem of form or even of method .
I have voted against , because no new legal framework is required .
There is a need to conclude the agreements stipulated in the accession treaties and to complete the review process promised by Commissioner Bjerregaard , as Parliament has already decided .
Langen report ( A4-0040 / 97 )
I have voted for the report but do not agree with the proposal to construct a network of pipelines between factories in Europe .
This would be too dangerous both from a safety and environmental point of view .
Much more emphasis should have been placed on the chemical industry 's own responsibility for the environment , particularly with regard to waste from the industry .
Europe is truly at a crossroads .
Either it goes further down the road of neo-liberal deregulation as indicated by the Molitor Group , or it genuinely takes the road of comprehensively developing its environmental and social capacities for the future .
There is a need for political decisions to promote the development of a sustainable industrial policy worthy of the name , one which does not regard industrial production as a matter for manufacturers alone .
Environmental considerations are part of the production process , just as employees - with their skills , initiative and responsibilities - are part of a business , and not just a disposable source of labour .
Issues such as the introduction of eco-taxes and taxes on particularly harmful substances such as chlorine , the rehabilitation of contaminated areas and the long-term usability of certain substances and products are still on the agenda as matters of urgency , even though Parliament has not adopted a clear position on them in this report .
Only in this way can the conflict between sustainable social efficiency and a purely economic approach be resolved - even if this is a message that Commissioner Bangemann is apparently still not prepared to take on board .
Katiforis report ( A4-0030 / 97 )
In theory , the maritime industries provide a shining example of something that is simple yet difficult to achieve : a long-term , viable component of a mobility and production system that respects the environmental constraints within which people live , whilst encouraging the social progress that gives history its meaning .
In practice , however , the opposite is unfortunately the case . The overlong predominance of the neoliberal model of economic policy has wrought havoc in this sector throughout the world : the international fleet is ageing and far from ' state of the art ' in terms of safety and environmental protection ; the employment culture in the shipping industry has largely gone to the dogs as the result of flagging-out and the creation of a racist hierarchy within crews ; environmentally and socially responsible coastal shipping and inland waterway transport is being undermined by unfair competition from the road transport sector ; and the potential of ports and coastal towns as sites for innovative production and especially processing is in no way being sensibly exploited .
The means of reversing this unfortunate trend are well known , and are to some extent set out in the practical proposals from Mr Katiforis .
We need global solutions , but we cannot wait for them .
Europe can and must take the lead here by playing a more active role within the IMO , but also by introducing its own strict regulations wherever necessary .
From port state controls , through the introduction of stricter safety rules for vessels calling at Union ports , to the regulation of coastal shipping - whatever the United States and Japan are doing , the European Union must do to the same degree .
Morgan report ( A4-0325 / 96 )
Mr President , unlike many of my colleagues , I supported Mrs Morgan 's proposal in the vote on Amendment No 20 , since I believe that the cultivation of minority languages , for which she argues as a particular matter of concern in this report , is extremely important .
We advocate the protection and promotion of minorities throughout the world in our resolutions .
And we repeatedly advocate it as a principle in our list of demands to the IGC , I am glad to say .
But I believe that we must also do so when it comes to actual competences within the Union - legislation and practical measures .
It makes no sense to defend a principle and then not apply that principle in practice .
I therefore wish to thank Mrs Morgan for her report , which has my full and complete support .
The Danish social democrats voted in favour of the Morgan report , which deals primarily with the training of the population in the use of information technology .
The report points out that the rapid developments in information technology could easily lead to new inequalities in society as a result of differential access to the new information and communication technologies .
The existing social divisions would thus be deepened , with the risk of further marginalization of already disadvantaged groups .
The Danish social democrats would urge that initiatives should be taken to spread the knowledge of information technology in the education system , so as to avoid any marginalization of particularly vulnerable groups .
It is only through education and further training in the use of information technology that everyone can have equal access to the information society .
We do have one criticism of the report , however , as it completely fails to mention the situation of women in the information society .
Unless special attention is given to women 's opportunities for education and training in the information society , there is a fear that women will become completely detached from the developments in information technology .
I should like to start by saying that my group will unhesitatingly vote in favour of Mrs Morgan 's report .
As I said during the debate , we regard this report as an important element of European educational policy and we welcomed many of the suggestions that were made .
Because , although the information society must be regarded as a positive element in the provision of a modern education , we must nevertheless remain vigilant : the campaign against academic failure and the reduction of inequalities must remain our priorities , and there is no certainty that multimedia development is always beneficial to the achievement of these objectives .
We should also like to take advantage of this debate to say how sorry we are that this review of education , so basic to the future of young Europeans , was the subject of two debates : yesterday evening 's debate on the White Paper on the information society , held in the absence of the Commissioner responsible for it , Mrs Cresson , and the present Morgan report of which Commissioner Bangemann is the sponsor .
This entirely artificial division is , unfortunately , not a matter of chance because it reflects the highly dubious division because these reports on the basis of their having two distinct legal bases - training on the one hand and the information society on the other .
Even so , I believe that for the sake of consistency in our work , it would be as well to regard the education requirement as one and indivisible .
Committee of Inquiry recommendation ( A4-0054 / 97 )
Mr President , the excellent report by the Committee of Inquiry on Community transit highlights the crucial errors that have been committed during the last ten years with regard to European integration .
This transit system , which was designed to enable goods from third countries entering our territory to move through that territory without paying any customs duty or tax before arriving at their destination , is now a hotbed of tax fraud which is costing billions of ECU to the exchequers of the Member States and to the Community finances .
Why does this fraud exist ?
The Committee of Inquiry began by pointing out a number of technical reasons associated with the obsoleteness of a system that uses paper as its medium , disregarding information technology , and which has failed to cope with the increase in trade transactions .
But the Committee also , and more importantly , demonstrates that the abolition of checks at the Union 's internal borders enormously facilitates fraud , since a load can cross the whole of Europe without any country knowing it is there and without anyone knowing , if it happens to disappear , in which country the offence was committed .
That is why the report rightly concludes that there was , and I quote , a ' lack of foresight by the Commission in the introduction of the single market , which has been guided by the principles of market liberalization and the abolition of controls ' .
The report adds , perhaps disingenuously , that this lack of foresight by the Commissioners was incomprehensible .
In fact , in my view , it is entirely comprehensible since the issue as far as they were concerned was to ensure that the dogma of the abolition of controls won the day at all costs .
Well , it is clear today , perhaps pending the arrival of other systems that do not yet exist , that the internal customs services are still valuable , especially for keeping control of the transit of goods .
Furthermore , the report by the Committee of Inquiry , which does not venture to suggest that controls should be reintroduced at the internal borders , recommends that , listen carefully , I quote ' the customs code should be amended to permit spot checks anywhere within the territory of the European Union ' .
That 's progress : abolish the controls at the internal borders and then increase them everywhere else .
In conclusion , our congratulations once again to the members of the Committee of Inquiry for their intellectual honesty , and may we express the hope that the European Parliament will take the initiative to institute other inquiries of the same kind in connection with the problem of the borders , for example regarding intra-community VAT fraud .
The Kellett-Bowman report , the result of the efforts of the Committee of Inquiry of which I was a member , is intended to define the problems encountered with the setting-up of the Community transit system , established on the territory of the European Union and extended to include Switzerland , the EEA countries and the Visegrad States ( Poland , Czech Republic , Slovakia and Hungary ) .
It also proposes measures designed to improve the functioning of the transit system .
It is a good report that reflects the good work done by the Committee of Inquiry .
It should be remembered that the transit system allows the temporary suspension of customs duties , excise duties and VAT until these are paid at the destination of the goods .
The system is clearly indispensable for the functioning of the single market , but there is a need to combat crossborder fraud and to halt the loss of revenue , which amounts to several billion ECU since 1990 .
This level of fraud is intolerable .
That is why , in response to a proposal by the Committee of Inquiry , the European Parliament proposes that the transit system should be computerized as quickly as possible , that a system of physical control should be set up throughout the territory of the European Union , and that a specific legal framework should be set up with ' mutual recognition of evidence ' , a ' centralized legal office ' and national customs services functioning as if they were one .
I approve of these proposals .
The European Parliament considers that this problem of fraud control must be a subject of discussion with Switzerland and negotiation with the countries of central and eastern Europe and with Cyprus , not forgetting the customs union with Turkey .
Finally , the Committee of Inquiry welcomed the fact that the Commission accepts that it will not further extend the transit system until it has been reformed and computerized .
It is also happy to have succeeded in having the necessary resources for this project appropriated in the European Union budget .
It is only logical for there to be co-operation at EU level between national Customs Departments to fight fraud .
The Swedish Green Party remains opposed to the introduction of an internal market which automatically results in , for example , customs frauds as mentioned in the Committee of Inquiry 's report .
We take this matter very seriously and believe that the national Customs Departments within the EU must co-operate in order to prevent smuggling .
However , we strongly disagree with the introduction of a common Customs Department at EU level , as mentioned in recommendation No. 1 and at several other places in the documents of the Committee of Inquiry .
The Danish social democrats would like to thank the chairman and the rapporteur of the Committee of Inquiry for their excellent work .
The report indicates that the transit system is on the verge of collapse , and that Europe is being swamped by an obdurate form of crime as never before .
Thanks to the report , the politicians and the Commission have had their eyes opened to the problem , which many had approached with blinkers on .
The Danish minister responsible for taxation has written to us thanking the committee for its good work , and offering to the Commission that Denmark could act as a pilot country for the data system that we wish to see introduced to improve the transit system and to stop the abuses which are taking place .
The report shows that arrangements between individual states will not solve the problem .
The welfare of each and every person in the European Union depends on the secure and efficient administration of the internal market and the import and export system for the massive quantities of goods traded and transported every day .
The decision of the European Parliament to investigate the detailed workings of the system was therefore well justified .
We have found that the system is under strain and is not capable of efficiently handling the volume of trade .
Furthermore a relatively low , but unacceptable , level of fraud and irregularities have been found .
However , given the antiquated system in use it is a miracle that the level of fraud is so low .
Any level of fraud and irregularity is unacceptable and forces us all to pay more taxes .
The loss of one container of cigarettes , it is reported , costs us £ 800 , 000 in lost revenue .
Up to 15 % of the market for cigarettes in some Member States is supplied by the black market .
The extra taxes we must pay to make up for these losses runs to several billion pounds annually .
Of course , the problem of the inadequate transit system for the transport of goods in Europe is not related to the existence of the European Union .
Most of the increasing volume of trade would have occurred in any case and exposed the inability of the system to cope effectively .
What seems to have happened is that responsibility for the system is not clearly defined and both the EU and the individual Member States have neglected the problem to some extent .
I therefore fully support the recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry to improve the Community transit system .
We must computerize the control systems , make them more efficient and effective and reduce bureaucracy and delays on the external borders .
These measures are necessary in any case and will help eliminate fraud from the system especially if , as we propose , they are backed up with spot checks and mutual recognition of evidence .
As I did in my speech in the debate , I wish to declare my support for the Committee of Inquiry 's report .
However , I wish to sound a warning that the transcript of the committee 's proceedings could easily be misused as a virtual instruction manual for customs fraud .
I would therefore recommend that some thought be given to how such an undesirable outcome can be prevented .

First of all , I must congratulate the chairman of the Committee of Inquiry , Mr John Tomlinson , and its rapporteur , Mr Kellett-Bowman , for their exceptional efforts over the last 15 months .
In the seven years during which I have had the opportunity to follow the work done by our Parliament , there has never been a parliamentary project on the same scale as this report on efforts to combat fraud against the Community budget .
What I do rather regret is that our parliamentary committee , while endeavouring to find compromises , was unable , or perhaps unwilling , to play its most important role - as the driving force behind the progress of the European Community .
At a time when everyone is discussing the introduction of the euro as the single European currency , we are retreating in the face of a problem of European customs administration , necessary though it unfortunately is .
When you think that , according to certain cautious estimates , several billion francs are being lost each year , those losses are liable in the short term to undermine the confidence that Europe 's citizens still place in the Community institutions .
It is true , too , that this evil has many causes : bad faith on the part of the recipients of the Community 's funds , inadequacy of the controls carried out at both national and Community level , problems of proof and problems with the application of effective penalties , not to mention omissions and inaccuracies in the Community texts .
A second point I should like to make is the lack of any desire for change on the part of the Member States with regard to Community law .
In my view , the Member States should be induced to take action so that breaches of Community rules are subject to the same punishments or penalties .
I believe , in fact , that the Community must be given a punitive power - the power to impose uniform punishments to penalize breaches of its regulations anywhere in Community territory .
Mutual assistance in legal matters , as applied at present , is not really an instrument for combating fraud against the Community budget .
The Commission cannot make use of it and cannot really control it .
The European Union is a victim of fraud , but it relies on the goodwill of the Member States to be told about it .
Any positive action in this field is conceivable only if the Member States and the public really take cognizance of the fact that money from Brussels is not someone else 's money .
We have every reason to be impressed with the extensive work of the Temporary Committee of Inquiry when mapping out the extensive frauds in connection with transits .
We also agree with several sections of the analysis presented concerning the shortcomings of control by national Customs authorities .
However , we oppose the conclusions and the recommendations made by the Committee and especially disagree with the solutions aimed at strengthening the centralised structure of the Customs , e.g. the proposed introduction of a common framework ' to make the national Customs Departments work as one ' .
The current Intergovernmental Conference has expressed considerable doubt as to whether the sovereignty of Member States over the Customs should be removed .
This doubt is shared by the Swedish government .
The European Union 's own experience of supranationality , e.g. the Common Agricultural Policy , Structural Funds , various programmes for Eastern and Central Europe , leaves much to be desired as far as efficiency and control in the prevention of fraud is concerned .
The problem of fraudulent activity must instead be solved by strengthening national Customs Departments , not least when it comes to the employees , and by expanding the co-operation between all European states .
Europe is after all much bigger than the European Union .
Albania
Mr President , I voted against the joint motion for a resolution in the end , even though some of the worst of the Socialist Group 's amendments were rejected .
What concerned me was recital D , however . I do not believe that undermining President Berisha 's position at the present time will serve the cause of peace .
I believe that we must press him to compromise , and he is doing so already .
Undermining his position is the most dangerous thing that we could do , however .
That would make the peace process impossible for the foreseeable future .
The second point I should like to make is that there is a great deal of hypocrisy in this debate .
Parliament has frequently attempted to mobilize resources and other forms of support for Albania .
It has been thwarted by the Council and by certain Member States , in particular Greece , and what concerns me here is that now that the results of this mistaken approach are emerging , people are pointing the finger and expecting a society which has been isolated for decades to behave like a democracy which has been established for hundreds of years .
Moreover , it is those who have done the least for Albania and have blocked Community aid who are now being most critical of the country .
With relatively modest resources , we could have created a model of development in this small country .
Now we have lost that opportunity , and I therefore protest at this hypocrisy !
Although the negotiators for the PPE Group made great efforts and managed to improve the text , I too am unable to support the joint motion for a resolution , because it does not correspond to the facts .
It still pins the blame on the democratically elected President Berisha , a patriot and a democrat who made a crucial contribution to the liberation of his people from the totalitarian communist yoke .
The truth is that southern Albania is the stronghold of a mafia which , together with the KGB , largely controlled the pyramid investment schemes .
What happened was not a popular uprising , but a coolly planned operation by organized criminals to prevent the implementation of President Berisha 's measures to eliminate them .
The strength of these criminal elements lies not least in the powerful support which they receive from across the border .
It is therefore in no way in Europe 's interest to allow these elements , who call themselves social democrats but who reject socialist internationalism , to lead the people of Albania back into slavery .
Sakellariou report ( A4-0027 / 97 )
, in writing . ( ES ) I would like to express my full agreement with giving a parliamentary dimension to the process initiated by the Barcelona Euro-Mediterranean Conference and , at the same time , I would like to mention the following with regard to the report :
The first Euro-Mediterranean Conference marked the beginning of a new stage in relations between the Mediterranean countries and Europe .
A ' before ' and an ' after ' .
A new policy had to be inaugurated even though the European Community 's Mediterranean policy had already been in existence for 20 years . However , its purely trade-related approach and system of unequal treatment with a basis in colonialism resulted in its failure .
Perhaps the essence of the first Euro-Mediterranean Conference in Barcelona was , therefore , that it constituted a change in procedures and in the way in which Euro-Mediterranean relations were regarded - from that time on , such countries began to be regarded as partners and associates of the EU ; and the relationship procedure has become one of mutual agreement , based on principles of reciprocity and association aimed at shared work and objectives .
It is therefore essential to observe these rules .
We must pay close attention to how we have to go about things !
We must be careful that there is no possibility that , via this report , the EP should be seen to be making decisions unilaterally without the prior agreement of our partners and against their will .
As Vice-President Marín stated yesterday , the Euro-Mediterranean process must now be consolidated - this must be a priority - before new requests are made .
Finally , we should also have regard to the territorial approach : each partner must have its own relational space , in addition to the shared space , with no one feeling marginalized or relegated .
We should also protect the integrity of the Mediterranean area which is unambiguously defined by nature , geography , culture and history .
One can only agree with Mr Sakellariou 's report and his broad encouragement for a Community partnership with the Mediterranean States on matters of security , stability and economics .
I have read this report very carefully , and I note that in the chapter entitled ' Economic and financial co-operation ' , reading between the lines , there is evidence of a desire to change the Common Agricultural Policy .
This impression is confirmed in the explanatory statement where Mr Sakellariou frankly proposes a reform of the CAP and rapid liberalization of the trade in agricultural products .
For some time , I have been unable to escape the feeling that every report , or virtually every report , going through this Parliament becomes a pretext , directly or indirectly , for the reform of the CAP .
That reform , if there is to be a reform , must not be sketched out in odd paragraphs of reports that are more or less remote from the subject .
This pillar will have to be dealt with as such , through a process of in-depth analysis within the most competent committee concerned , which is the Committee on Agriculture .
However , I must caution those of us who favour a swift reform .
We have just formally celebrated the fortieth anniversary of the Treaty of Rome , and we must never forget that the Common Agricultural Policy , along with the ECSC , was the first pillar of European unity .
We should be cautious and vigilant . We must not be in such a rush to dismantle and dispose of our Common Agricultural Policy , which has done so much to hold our 15 Member States together .
Despite the generally positive outlook described in the report on the Barcelona Conference , there is one prospect which can hardly fail to alarm a particularly frail group of European citizens : farmers .
This is explicit in the explanatory statement , though it appears in more veiled form in the resolution .
The relevant sentence is in paragraph 14 under ' Economic and financial cooperation ' , where establishing a free trade area by 2010 is mentioned .
To achieve this objective , structural reforms of the various economic policies are proposed , starting with agricultural policy .
The point is made that there can be no free trade area unless there is rapid liberalization of imports of agricultural products from Mediterranean third countries .
It is right to emphasize the importance of a very close relationship between Mediterranean countries , and bilateral agreements between some of them have already been in operation for several years , as a result of which European Union markets are in fact already penetrable .
It is important for the measures to balance Community protection and free trade with third countries .
The agriculture of third Mediterranean countries is highly competitive with Community countries in terms of seasonality and plant variety .
Those countries also have the advantage of infinitely lower labour , land and processing costs .
IGC
Mr President , not liking to inconvenience too many people I shall make my explanation of vote orally .
The House has just debated , for the first time , a new idea floated at the Intergovernmental Conference - the possibility of enhanced co-operation , meaning joint actions which would not automatically involve the fifteen Member States but would be organized as required , possibly with a smaller number of participants .
This is what my group prefers to call , using a broader term , differentiated co-operation or a multi-speed Europe .
The most striking point , though , is that this idea - which could result in a Europe that is less rigid , less monolithic , better adapted to the specific needs of all concerned and therefore closer to the citizen - is being received by the European Parliament with extreme mistrust and a plethora of restrictive conditions .
This House is wedded to the idea of unitary progress , within a single institutional framework , to the point of caricature when it goes so far as to proclaim that the European Parliament , in its entirety , has the right of codecision regarding the legislative framework and administrative spending of differentiated co-operation , even when these joint actions would , by definition , involve only certain Member States and not all .
We believe that methods like these , on the pretext of introducing flexibility clauses into the Treaty , are in fact going to burden it with bureaucratic procedures which would obstruct everything and result in even greater rigidity .
That is why my group tabled , at the Committee on Institutional Affairs , numerous amendments designed to introduce genuine flexibility .
We believe that differentiated co-operation must be decided upon very freely by the participants , provided only that it is not in conflict with the Treaty and does not prejudice non-participating Member States .
The organizational form to be taken by these joint actions must also be very free , in other words free of compulsory intervention by the Community institutions , subject to any necessary co-ordination within the Council .
These proposals seem to us to offer a prospect of ending the current deadlock by returning the institutions of cooperation in Europe to the exclusive service of the citizens ' needs rather than of a federalistic ideology .
Our basic view is that the European Union should be a cooperation between independent states .
Unfortunately , the proposed resolution is going in precisely the opposite direction .
The resolution is in favour of increasing decision making by qualified majority vote in the Council of Ministers and increasing the influence of the European Parliament .
This will only lead to an even more ambiguous situation as to who is responsible for the political decisions in each of the Member States .
We believe that national parliaments should be the highest decision-making forum in Member States .
Consequently , we cannot possibly vote in favour of this resolution .
We must also put on record the substantial increase in the number of resolutions issued by this House in connection with the IGC and before and after the summit meetings held regularly in the European Union .
Lindqvist ( ELDR ) , Sjöstedt and Svensson ( GUE / NGL ) , Gahrton and Holm ( V ) , Bonde and Sandbæk ( I-EDN ) , in writing .
( SV ) The proposal involves an intensification of co-operation from a mainly interstate co-operation to a federal state .
For us development in this direction is unacceptable .
We are therefore voting against the proposal .
Common regulations could result in equal salaries for all members of the European Parliament which would increase the salaries of the Swedish members considerably , especially if the common salary is calculated as a percentage of the judges ' salaries in the courts of the European Union as proposed by the Presidency of the European Parliament during a press conference in Sweden .
This would most likely delay a settlement of the most controversial alternative regulations on expenses , e.g. the regulation concerning the travel allowance for business class travel when there are many other possibilities of travelling by less expensive means .
The most natural thing would be to start by changing the more controversial regulations on expenses , e.g. the travel allowance , so that payments in excess of actual costs are not made .
Our Parliament could , if it wanted to , make a valuable contribution to the essential in-depth reform of the European Union 's present institutional system .
The quality of the work that has been done by our first two parliamentary Committees of Inquiry , into mad cow disease and into the Community transit system , shows that Members of the European Parliament can , on occasion , demonstrate good sense , competence , a sense of reality and a zeal to expose the truth .
What do we actually learn from these two reports ?
They expose , arrestingly and very specifically , how sadly the European institutions have lost their way since the mid-1980s : the susceptibility of the Community system to the interests of the lobbyists at the expense of those of the public ; the extent of the problem of fraud , a structural secretion of the supranational institutional system ; and generalized irresponsibility in the absence of any democratic control over the Community actors .
Can Parliament learn the lesson of its own investigations ?
It should , in all logic , infer that there is a need for swift action to correct errors on such a scale that they largely explain why the public has lost its enthusiasm for European integration .
How can this be done ?
By abandoning efforts to secure the infinite growth of what is literally an ' institutional monster ' , of ever-increasing remoteness , complexity , opacity and uncontrollability , and start enthusiastically advocating genuine , controlled subsidiarity .
But what do we actually find ?
Parliament takes no notice of its own observations , especially those regarding the failings of the Commission , when determining its position on the IGC .
To the contrary , every error it identifies becomes one more pretext to justify the intensification and expedition of the process of total communitization , the supposed panacea to cure all ills .
Having denounced the ravages of the Commission 's bureaucracy , Parliament promptly recommends that it be strengthened .
This schizophrenic contradiction between relevant analysis when Parliament inquires and inappropriate recommendations when it deliberates is preventing this House from being a credible influence when it comes to proposals for institutional reform .
It is high time that Parliament abandoned empty slogans and ideological dogma .
No one would believe our lack of interest in putting right the errors that we ourselves have listed .
The IGC provides a unique opportunity for doing so .
By building on the very serious investigatory work it has begun and drawing specific conclusions from it , our Parliament can help to put European integration back on the rails and heading in the right direction , in line with the intentions of the founding fathers and the present expectations of the public .
If our institution fails to take this opportunity offered by the IGC it will bear a heavy responsibility , because if these errors continue the very idea of Europe is likely to be in jeopardy .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.45 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to welcome Mr Eddison Zvobgo from Zimbabwe , who has taken his seat in the Official Gallery .
Mr Zvobgo is a Minister and coordinator of the parliamentary reform committee in Zimbabwe .
He is visiting us to acquaint himself with our work and working methods .
We extend a warm welcome to him , and hope that he will be able to take back many ideas from Parliament to his country .
Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Madam President , this week saw the opening of the fortieth meeting of the UN Conference on Human Rights in Geneva , which is scheduled to continue until mid-April .
The House may know that Amnesty International has published a report for the meeting which names a number of countries where the most systematic and serious human rights violations are taking place .
This extremely interesting report also puts forward a number of suggestions as to how the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council of Europe could work together to develop a European human rights policy .
What I would like to talk about now are the countries which Amnesty names in the report .
It will come as no surprise to anyone here that one of the countries accused of systematic and continual human rights violations is China .
We in Parliament are therefore right to keep a close eye on the situation .
We cannot simply say that we have discussed it often enough , so we should not need to do so again .
We need to do it every time , unfortunately .
One of the ways in which the Chinese Government demonstrates its oppressive nature is in its treatment of Tibet .
This too is something we have discussed on a number of occasions and are discussing again this afternoon , because we in the House would like to make it clear that we wholeheartedly support the Dalai Lama 's proposal for talks on the future .
We hope that his offer will also be given serious consideration in Geneva , so that the parties could perhaps enter into talks through those channels .
This is what is needed at the moment to end the hopeless situation in Tibet : talks between the Chinese Government and Tibet .
Madam President , over the last year , we have seen the Chinese authorities step up their campaign of terror against the Tibetans yet again .
They have even made it an offence to possess a photograph of the Dalai Lama , for which dozens of monks have been arrested .
The campaign against the Dalai Lama and his followers has taken many forms and has recently become much more violent .
The Tibetans have been deprived of nearly all their fundamental human rights , and the world has simply stood and watched as the Panchen Lama has been held in captivity by the Chinese .
Why ?
The Dalai Lama has responded without violence and his calls for talks deserve our support .
He is not asking for independence , he simply wishes to have cultural and religious freedom .
This time , he has even made the concession that independence is not a precondition .
The Union must use its contacts with the Chinese authorities to get these talks started .
We hope that China will come to realize that oppression does not work , either with Tibet or Xinjiang .
China 's new leaders must see that they are simply turning the international community and their own people against them .
My group has every sympathy with this resolution today .
Madam President , I think that other speakers have sufficiently stressed the importance of this motion , which calls for negotiations to begin at last between the authorities in Peking and the Tibetan government in exile .
Despite a very bad start , I think the compromise text is satisfactory .
There is still room for improvement on one point , however : I feel that we cannot , in a European Parliament text , limit the aspirations of the Tibetan people to cultural and religious autonomy .
The Dalai Lama , when he visited Parliament , was very clear on that point : Tibet must have full and complete independence , even though the Dalai Lama , in the interests of promoting a dialogue with the Chinese authorities , was willing to give way on defence , security and foreign policy .
Otherwise , and it does seem to be very important to emphasize this , the Tibetans must be in a position to govern themselves without interference from the Chinese authorities .
I think this is a particularly urgent matter .
Today , as we know , the Tibetans are already a minority in their own country ; so we must act quickly , and I believe this motion is along the right lines , but the Council and the Member States should start making serious representations at the United Nations to demand that the question of the decolonization of the Tibetan people , and indeed their survival , is finally taken into account and dealt with by the international community .
I must thank all my colleagues , James Moorhouse in particular , and our Liberal friends for having combined effectively to change the purport of this motion , and I hope it will be adopted .
I ask you all to vote in favour of the amendment which would eliminate this restriction on religious and cultural autonomy .
We must be quite clear about this , and therefore I once again urge those who have not yet done so to reconsider their votes on this amendment .
Madam President , this is by no means the first resolution we have debated about the situation in Tibet .
Indeed no fewer than eleven previous resolutions dealing with various aspects of the problem have been adopted by this House over the past ten years .
This is a clear indication of the deep concern felt about the plight of the people of Tibet , a situation which continues to deteriorate , one regrets to note : so much so that there are real fears that Tibetan culture will become still further eroded .
One can only conclude that the Chinese aim is to cause the extinction of Tibetan culture .
The particular significance of this debate is that among other matters it follows the death of Deng Xiaoping and takes place three days after the anniversary of the Chinese occupation of Tibet .
Along with Olivier Dupuis , I joined 3-4 , 000 demonstrators from all over Europe in Geneva on Sunday to mark the anniversary of the initial occupation of Tibet .
That was a vivid illustration of the degree of support behind the Tibetan cause , which was prominently featured in the world news .
But the crucial point of our resolutions , which have a common thread , is that we now have the opportunity , we believe , for fresh negotiations about the future of the Tibetan people , with a possible move towards selfgovernment .
His Holiness the Dalai Lama has indicated that he would not be pressing for full independence provided that Tibetan culture , the way of life , can be safeguarded .
So we feel that we should back this new approach and hope that it will really come about .
I look forward to the reaction of the Commission .
Madam President , I should firstly like to say how pleased I am that the House is once again debating the situation in Tibet .
This problem has been discussed often enough , but little has been done about it .
That is no reason to stop discussing it .
Over the last ten years , we have had to listen to a great many speeches about bloody conflicts around the world , but I think we can say without cynicism that a war waged against the soul and culture of a people can ultimately be more devastating than a purely military conflict .
However , that is exactly what China 's treatment of Tibet amounts to .
The people of Tibet are largely prevented from practising their religion , whilst their temples are renovated beyond recognition - a tried and tested means of repression - and their cultural artefacts are shipped off to China .
I shall not address the wider issue of torture and human rights violations , as previous speakers have already done so .
When we consider that , according to a report by UNESCO , some 50 % of the world 's cultural heritage has been destroyed in the course of this century through ignorance , and very often through communist vandalism - in Cambodia , for example - it is clear that a stop must be put to China 's actions in Tibet .
The joint motion for a resolution refers to the cultural and religious autonomy of the Tibetan people .
In this respect , however , and here I agree with Mr Dupuis , I firmly believe that it does not go far enough .
It should also refer to the independence - with the exceptions referred to by Mr Dupuis - and the right to self-determination of the Tibetan people .
We should also not forget that the leader of the Tibetan people , His Holiness the Dalai Lama , has indicated to the Chinese Government his constant willingness to engage in talks , without making any substantial political demands ; his overtures have just as constantly been rebuffed by the Chinese authorities , however .
To my mind , Parliament is therefore obliged to adopt a clear and unequivocal stance on this issue , especially since a similar situation is now threatening to engulf the Uigur people of Chinese Turkestan .
That is all the more reason , I believe , why we in Parliament really do have a duty to speak out for the right to self-determination , religious freedom and democracy in Tibet .
Madam President , the motion has been drawn up with the inspiration not of the Holy Ghost and by Christian authors , but at the instigation of His Holiness the Dalai Lama as he is referred to in the motion .
All that has been said demonstrates the tendency and effort to liberate Tibet and censure the Peoples Republic of China , by maintaining that Tibet is under Chinese occupation .
Tibet has been an integral part of China for centuries , it is today , and it always will be .
Do not those who tabled the motion consider that if their fanciful plan were ever to come about , this would lead to destabilization in that part of the world ?
And they take as their point of departure what was said by His Holiness the Dalai Lama , who when he came to the Political Committee of our Parliament as the representative of the Tibetan people and I asked him how and in what capacity he represented the Tibetan people , answered : ' Ah , you have no idea ! In the name of the theory and practice of reincarnation ' .
Such then are the enlightened members of the European Parliament , those who have drawn up this motion , who are also inspired by the spirit of reincarnation in what they say in their resolution .
Madam President , I will vote against it because the motion does nothing to help relations between the European Community and that great country , the great market , but by making them more difficult , facilitates the penetration of American and Japanese multi-national companies .
That is what this resolution will achieve .
Is this unsuspected , or is it motivated by suspect interests ?
Mr President , I think our Parliament should recognize the benevolent and devoted commitment of the Italian and transnational radicals to the Tibetan people 's struggle for their rights .
If they were not constantly monitoring what is going on in Tibet and raising the issue , this tragedy would probably not have the profile it has in Italy , Europe and the UN .
The Italian Right is so sensitive to that struggle and solidly behind it , that during a recent demonstration of solidarity , many of our members hung out the Tibetan flag on town balconies and the much berated Berlusconi-Fini government was the first in Europe to receive a visit from the Dalai Lama in exile .
Having said that , we will obviously vote for the joint resolution because we are convinced that the only way to help the Tibetan people is to call on the Chinese government in every form and in every international forum to abandon its arrogant and prevaricating policy and finally concede the fundamental rights which will allow the Tibetan people to safeguard their identity and hence their survival .
Madam President , this question involves the human rights and the right to self-determination of the people of Tibet .
No one , not even the People 's Republic of China , is entitled to restrict human rights on the basis of their own philosophy or culture , let alone annul those rights .
As the previous speaker said , Parliament must therefore use all the means at its disposal to defend the human rights and the right to self-determination of the Tibetan people .
One thing is clear : the European Union and this Parliament can only interpret the right to selfdetermination as this is set out in the Helsinki Final Act , from which it follows that the right to self-determination does not imply the right to alter borders arbitrarily , since that violates the right to self-determination of other peoples .
That being so , we must stand up for the Tibetan people 's right to self-determination as a cultural and human right .
I therefore support the call made in Parliament 's resolution for the question of Tibet to be placed on the agenda of the UN General Assembly .
, Vice-President of the Commission . ( ES ) Madam President , Ladies and Gentlemen , an unchanging aspect of European Union policy regarding China has been the importance accorded human rights .
The Commission is therefore determined to improve the situation in Tibet and also shares the concern of this House about this subject .
The Commission condemns any attempt by the Chinese authorities to suppress freedom of speech and of religion and deplores the current situation in Tibet .
As you will be aware , the European Union has made constant reference to human rights issues in Tibet and the religious dimension of Tibetan identity in bilateral talks with China - both in the political sphere and regarding the specific subject of human rights , and at an international level .
The European Union intends to continue its efforts towards consolidating a constructive and positive relationship with China .
As regards Tibet , the European Union 's traditional line of action has been to attempt to foment direct dialogue , direct negotiation , between the Chinese authorities and representatives of the Tibetan people , including , naturally , the Dalai Lama .
At various times , both through specific approaches and via dialogue in international institutions , the European Union has expressed its concern regarding the fate of the Panchen Lama appointed by the Dalai Lama .
As you will already know , the European Union has always demanded guarantees regarding the safety and freedom of the Panchen Lama and will continue to do so .
Thank you , Commissioner Marín .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0198 / 97 by Mr Colajanni and Mrs Terrón i Cusí , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the Israeli Government 's decision to approve construction plans in Jerusalem ; -B4-0219 / 97 by Mr Bertens and Mr Vallvé , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on new settlements in Jerusalem and Israeli-Palestinian relations ; -B4-0224 / 97 by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the peace process in the Middle East ; -B4-0233 / 97 by Mr Pradier and Mr Vandemeulebroucke , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on Israel 's policy of new settlements ; -B4-0248 / 97 by Mr Wurtz and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on East Jerusalem ; -B4-0264 / 97 by Mr Provan and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the Middle East peace process .
Madam President , Ladies and Gentlemen , the 6500 dwellings authorized in the Arab district of Jerusalem by the current Israeli government undoubtedly herald , Madam President , an extraordinarily serious crisis in the extremely complex peace process which we have all supported in the past and continue to support .
In the Oslo Agreements , it was understood that , until such time as current phases and negotiations are completed , Jerusalem must retain its present status . That is a subject for discussion during the third phase .
Therefore , although good and faithful friends of Israel , we are given great cause for concern by the step taken by Netanyahu and we support this common resolution to the effect that the conservative government in Israel should not pursue this building project in East Jerusalem .
This decision , Madam President , Ladies and Gentlemen , can only help to undermine what has been achieved in such a difficult peace process and - Heaven forbid - could again open the flood gates to tension and violence which it would be difficult to stem .
Madam President , the peace process still has a long way to go .
There may be agreement on Hebron , but new obstacles have now emerged .
The Israeli Government 's decision to go ahead and build a new development in East Jerusalem was extremely unwise .
It may not contradict the letter of the Oslo agreements , but it certainly contradicts their spirit .
The negotiations on Jerusalem which form part of the last phase of the entire process are going to be difficult enough in themselves , and the Israeli Government must understand that its decision may only do it more harm than good in the long run .
The European resolution may have been blocked by an American veto in the Security Council , but there too there is growing unease .
Israel is playing with fire .
Furthermore , it needs to be made clear to the Palestinian President , Mr Arafat , that his attitude is also not helping the peace process .
He must not add fuel to the flames by threatening a unilateral declaration of independence for the Palestinian State .
And the European Parliament must not allow itself to be drawn into taking sides .
Now that the Union has a role to play in the peace process , the European Parliament must also behave responsibly and in an even-handed way .
Madam President , the decision by the Israeli Government has to be seen in a specific context .
Not only that , it is all the more serious because of the existence of other measures which may be less spectacular but indicate the same desire to compromise the peace agreements .
The context I refer to comprises , first of all , the texts : UN Resolutions Nos 242 and 338 , which very specifically exclude any further forcible acquisition of territory , together with the European Parliament 's resolutions , especially that of November 1996 , and the Council 's latest declarations .
Quite apart from these texts , though , we have History and the lessons it can teach us .
There is the symbolic significance of this region to the entire world .
There are other examples , such as the example of South Africa , where men of great worth are trying to overcome the difficult legacy of a bloodstained history through dialogue and negotiation .
Above all , perhaps , bearing in mind the values on which the Member States of the European Union are based , there is the need to proclaim that there is much more greatness in respecting an adversary , especially when he is down , than in constantly indulging in a show of force .
We must give our support to those , even in the Israeli community , who are concerned about future relations between Israel and the Palestinians .
Madam President , the Israeli-Palestinian agreement on Hebron gave a new stimulus to the peace process and raised hopes of new , constructive initiatives .
Before the ink was even dry on that agreement , the Israeli Government was creating a further obstacle to the peace process by deciding to authorize the building of a new settlement of 6500 homes in Arab East Jerusalem Jabal Abu Ghneim .
This project is designed to drive a permanent wedge between the eastern sector of Jerusalem and the Palestinian autonomous territories .
Jerusalem would thus be completely cut off from the West Bank .
It is an illegal decision , because the final status of East Jerusalem will have to be discussed during the third stage of negotiations , and because both sides have undertaken to refrain from any action that might change the situation on the ground .
The Israeli Government has been supported by the United States , which used its veto against a United Nations Security Council resolution banning the establishment of any settlements that would change the status quo laid down in the signed agreement .
The peace process is thus , once again , in jeopardy .
This House must firmly condemn the decision taken by the Israeli Government , with the complicity of the United States , and demand compliance with UN Security Council Resolution No 242 .
We must call upon the Council to become more involved in the peace process and to use all means at its disposal , including economic and political sanctions , within the framework of the agreement with Israel to persuade the Israeli Government to apply the peace process , respecting the Oslo Agreements and the United Nations resolutions .
Madam President , we are delighted that we have this opportunity of debating this issue today .
We are at a stage in the development of the peace negotiations in the Middle East which is causing great concern .
I am sure there are many who are greatly disturbed to hear that the Israeli Government has decided to go ahead with the building of the settlement in East Jerusalem .
All settlement building , particularly in this sensitive case of Jerusalem , risks damaging the peace process and preempting the final status negotiations that we all want to see concluded in a successful way .
We should urge the Israeli Government , therefore , not to proceed with these plans as we need to get a direction which is more positive .
We cannot expect a positive outcome to some of these negotiations while decisions which are seen to be confrontational are taking place .
Confrontation is not what we want to achieve .
We want to make sure that the peace is re-established and can move forward rapidly .
That is not happening at the present time .
Mr Arafat has decided that he wants to take up the cudgels and combat what he sees as some difficult situations in East Jerusalem .
Furthermore , we see even worse evidence today in the exchange of letters between King Hussein of Jordan and Mr Netanyahu , the Prime Minister of Israel .
That is a very serious development .
If one reads the correspondence as it has been published in some of the newspapers today , we are heading for something really quite serious .
I hope Parliament , therefore , can support the resolution when we come forward .
But this resolution must be well balanced and recognize the fact that there are difficulties on both sides and it is both sides that have eventually to come together and reach agreement .
Madam President , circumstances dictate that I must first express my condolences , on behalf of this House and my group , to the people of Israel , the families concerned , and the government of the country for the terrible incident on the Jordanian border , which has resulted in the death of several Israeli children .
And I do so as a friend of Israel and its people , and as a citizen of a country which has indissoluble ties of guilt with that country and its citizens .
It is precisely for this reason , however , that I wish to make it quite clear that I unreservedly share Parliament 's concern and regret at Israel 's colonization policy in East Jerusalem , and that I therefore support the demands set out in the joint motion for a resolution .
I should like to take this opportunity to say something personal , as a Christian and a theologian .
Jerusalem is the city of three world religions , and Judaism undoubtedly lies at the root of them all , but I wish to say that the Jerusalem of the twentieth century and , I believe , of future centuries will remain the city of Yad Vashem , the city of remembrance of the most systematically planned and executed attempt at genocide in the history of mankind .
Clearly , therefore , this city must possess a special moral authority within the international community .
However , this moral authority also has political implications , and I would therefore call on the Israeli Government to consider whether its colonization policy in East Jerusalem is in keeping with the moral authority which - for the reasons I have given - this city undoubtedly enjoys within the international community .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , Ladies and Gentlemen , the Israeli government 's decision to create a new settlement in the Arab sector of Jerusalem has regrettably given rise to a deterioration in the Middle East peace process , and we are currently at a delicate and difficult stage .
Like the rest of the European Union 's institutions , this House has repeatedly demonstrated its support for dialogue and peace .
Therefore , given our responsibilities as a player on the international scene , this Parliament must urge the parties involved to refrain from taking steps which might lead to an erosion of the confidence needed to pursue the application of the agreements and not to prejudice the result of negotiations regarding the permanent status of Palestine , particularly when , as recently as 24 February last , the European Union signed a provisional association agreement with the Palestine National Authority in which an evaluation is given of the special legal position of the Palestine Authority together with a provisional period identical to the transitional period of autonomy set by the Oslo Peace Agreements .
Our principal concern in the European Parliament , as we have repeatedly demonstrated in this House , must be and has always been the achievement of a lasting and stable peace in the region .
An essential condition for the achievement of peace in the region is strict application of the spirit which prevailed in Oslo , given that dialogue is the only way in which to arrive at a peaceful solution .
On very many occasions the European Union has condemned the settlements in the occupied territories as being illegal under international law , and they constitute a major obstacle to peace .
We have to bear in mind that this decision affects not only political interests , but also human interests - the interests of those citizens who feel themselves under siege and denied the right to free movement in order to carry on the activities of their everyday lives and , principally , to gain access to their place of work .
Dialogue and cooperation between the parties to the Oslo Agreements are , I say again , the only ways in which potential conflict in the region can be resolved .

I would like to conclude by calling upon Mr Arafat and Mr Netanyahu to allow wisdom to prevail and to have recourse to negotiation as opposed to confrontation , for the benefit of their peoples .
Madam President , what is happening at the moment is extremely depressing .
Israeli children have been killed visiting a peace project in Jordan , and Israel 's plans to build a new development have put further pressure on the peace process .
There should be no building work , no new intifada by the Palestinians and no declaration of a Palestinian State , since these all undermine the agreements .
With your permission , I should like to make one or two personal comments on the subject of Jerusalem .
East Jerusalem was captured as a result of a major external offensive .
It is a city of great significance to the international community .
Since 1967 , it seems , there has been a broad degree of religious freedom throughout Jerusalem .
The Bible mentions Jerusalem 811 times , and Jews throughout the ages used to long to live there .
The Koran , however , makes no mention of Jerusalem .
The Jerusalem question , as I have maintained right from the outset , is a matter for the Israelis and the Palestinians .
Last month , we saw both groups working very positively with each other on two occasions here in Parliament .
Outside intervention serves no purpose : they must sort things out for themselves .
And they will do so , of that I am confident .
Madam President , the compromise motion that we are in some danger of adopting has several defects .
The first is inaccuracy .
Israel could fairly be accused of excessive respect for the Oslo Agreements and of standing by the letter of those agreements , but not of violating them .
Now , this kind of inaccuracy gives the impression that we favour one faction rather than the other , whereas impartiality is what is needed .
Not only that , but this one-sided view is combined with dangerous short-sightedness , because developing a fixation with one point of a complex process where there are extremely difficult political equilibria to be respected on both sides is to miss the overall logic and consistency of that process and the difficulties which have to be faced both by the Palestinian leader and by the Israeli Government .
Madam President , peace is like a great painting : viewed from close up it breaks down into blobs of colour , but the aesthetic dimension requires a longer view , and then we see that there are sometimes areas of shadow that bring three-dimensionality and colour to the whole .
Madam President , Israel 's plans to build a major Jewish district in Jerusalem , Har Homa , are coming under fierce criticism .
From a psychological point of view , the decision is admittedly not very wise , but in legal terms , there is little that can be said against it .
The Oslo agreements do not prohibit the development of a residential district such as Har Homa , they simply specify that the legal status of Jerusalem will not be changed without a definitive agreement on the subject between Israel and the Palestinians .
Building work does not affect the official status of Jerusalem .
We must also remember that the building plans are not an isolated incident , but mark the continuation of the policy of successive Israeli governments to surround East Jerusalem with a ring of Jewish districts .
The background to this decision is the fact that during the Six-Day War in 1967 , West Jerusalem was bombarded from the surrounding hills .
We must also remember that the view is still widely held in Israel that Jerusalem will always be the indivisible capital of the State of Israel .
After the initial optimism regarding the Hebron agreement , the peace process appears to have ground to a halt .
However , the very fact that the agreement was reached made it clear that the Netanyahu government was able to overcome the divisions of opinion in Israel about the peace process .
It was adopted by a surprisingly large majority of 87 to 17 in the Knesset , and there were hardly any protests against it .
But we should not forget how careful the Israeli Government is going to have to be , now that the negotiations with the Palestinians have entered a phase where a number of sensitive issues such as the status of Jerusalem have to be resolved .
However , there are also more and more developments on the Palestinian side which are presenting problems for the talks with Israel .
Contrary to the agreement to resolve problems through direct negotiations , the Palestinian authorities took the issue of the building plans straight to the Security Council , and Mr Arafat 's calls to liberate Jerusalem and unilaterally to declare a State of Palestine have cast a pall over the conclusion of the Hebron agreement .
Furthermore , the network of government institutions which the Palestinian authorities are developing in East Jerusalem is actually contrary to the Hebron agreement , and the fact that the process of amending the Palestinian national charter is still not finished is equally unlikely to encourage Israel to trust the Palestinian authorities .
Outsiders little realize what a difficult predicament Mr Netanyahu and Mr Arafat are in , both in terms of their relations with each other and with regard to their own people .
This being the case , other parties should act with restraint .
It is not likely to help the peace process if the European Parliament constantly interferes in the incidents which regularly occur between Israel and the Palestinians .
Madam President , I should briefly like to ask the House to consider what would have happened if this incident had occurred a few years ago .
We can indeed see from the prudent reaction of the Israeli Government , which declared from the outset that this was an isolated act , that we have moved a considerable way forward .
Secondly , nowhere does it say in the Oslo Agreements that development in a city with a population of 600 000 must be stopped for several decades ; nor does it say that houses can only be built for Israelis , and not Palestinians .
Thirdly , I would ask the House to recall its fears when the present government was elected and to consider the progress which has since been made .
We should be highlighting that progress instead of always pointing an accusing finger , not least since the Knesset has so far refrained from criticizing us in the European Union for possible failures in our own area .
, Vice-President of the Commission . ( ES ) Madam President , Ladies and Gentlemen , the Commission fully supports the declaration issued by the presidency of the Union and its Council of Ministers on the very day the Israeli government approved the plans for the building of a new settlement in East Jerusalem .
The Commission regards the settlements in the occupied territories as contrary to international law and as constituting an extremely grave obstacle to the peace process .
The European Union 's position regarding the status of Jerusalem is clear and unambiguous : East Jerusalem is covered by the principles of Security Council Resolution 242 in that the acquisition of territory through the use of force is prohibited .
The Union , therefore , cannot and must not agree to East Jerusalem being regarded as part of the territory and sovereignty of the State of Israel .
The Israeli / Palestinian peace agreements explicitly prohibit the building of settlements inside or outside Jerusalem .
In addition , the Union is of the opinion that the fourth Geneva Convention fully applies both in East Jerusalem and in the occupied territories .
The Council of Ministers and the Commission therefore consider the Israeli government 's decision as particularly negative and unjustified at a time when the peace process was beginning to pick up again on account of a series of positive steps , such as the agreement regarding the Hebron protocol , the release of Palestinian female prisoners and an increase in the number of Palestinian workers with permits to enter Israel .
I can confirm that the peace process is at a very delicate stage and tension must be reduced . Naturally , the European Commission condemns the dreadful incidents of this morning on the border with Jordan and the regrettable deaths of a group of schoolgirls .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0191 / 97 by Mr Cars and Mr La Malfa , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on Kosovo ; -B4-0228 / 97 by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on Kosovo ; -B4-0263 / 97 by Mrs Lenz and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on Kosovo ; -B4-0190 / 97 by Mr Bertens and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on human rights violations in Argentina ; -B4-0247 / 97 by Mrs Miranda de Lage and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation of the Mapuche people in the province of Neuquén in Argentina ; -B4-0250 / 97 by Mr Puerta and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the situation of human rights and the Mapuche Indians in Argentina ; -B4-0260 / 97 by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the situation of human rights and the Mapuche Indians in Argentina ; -B4-0262 / 97 by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation of the Mapuche people in the province of Neuquén , Argentina ; -B4-0201 / 97 by Mrs Fouque , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on women 's rights and democracy in Algeria , Turkey and Afghanistan and International Women 's Day ; -B4-0235 / 97 by Mrs Leperre-Verrier and Mr Hory , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the detention of two French nationals in Afghanistan and the application of the Sharia ; -B4-0249 / 97 by Mrs Sornosa Martínez and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the violation of women 's rights ; -B4-0259 / 97 by Mrs van Dijk and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on International Women 's Day and the violations of women 's rights ; -B4-0252 / 97 by Mrs Pailler and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the release of Leyla Zana ; -B4-0194 / 97 by Mr Papakyriazis and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the extradition and trial of A. Brunner ; -B4-0192 / 97 by Mr Ford , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the welfare of migrants ; -B4-0230 / 97 by Mrs Roth , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the death of asylum seekers in the Mediterranean .
Kosovo
Madam President , this debate on Kosovo is to some extent the continuation of yesterday 's debate on Albania .
In fact on that occasion many speakers made it clear that the crisis in Albania could explode throughout the Balkans , particularly in the areas where there is a significant Albanian minority , like Kosovo and Macedonia .
We must reiterate that the Serbian government is pursuing serious and unacceptable repression against the Albanian community of Kosovo and that Community is really experiencing major tension and pressure at the moment .
In fact , although the confrontation in Serbia , which is important for democracy , has fortunately been nonviolent , one repercussion has been an increase in repression against the Albanian people of Kosovo , and what has happened in Albania encourages the tendency to have recourse to arms .
Fortunately the Albanian people of Kosovo have so far preferred to use non-violent methods of passive resistance under the guidance of the leader of the Kosovo Democratic League , Ibrahim Rugova .
But can we expect a situation like that to last for long ?
It is obvious that such tension can have serious repercussions .
That is why we support action to promote dialogue with the Belgrade government , create the bases for reconstruction of society , and make it possible to open a European Union delegation in Pristina .
Madam President , Kosovo is not an unfamiliar subject in the House .
It has long been a powder keg , and we have drawn attention to this repeatedly .
The easing of the situation in Serbia - if one can call it that - has brought Kosovo back towards centre stage , and that is a good thing .
The people there are becoming impatient .
There is the threat of assassinations by the Kosovo Liberation Army and these cannot be ruled out , even though the leader of the Democratic League is continuing to seek a peaceful solution .
This motion for a resolution also relates to another matter , however , which really cannot be passed over in silence : the conditions in the prisons , which are leading to torture and death , consequences which a delegation from our Parliament has been able to see for itself .
In our motion , we are therefore renewing our call for the release of the prisoners , for freedom of the media , and for the start of a genuine dialogue , with a view to finding a solution for the people of Kosovo who have long been subject to repression .
We are calling on the Serbian Government finally to open the office in Pristina for which we have long been asking and which has already been agreed to by the Commission - and as the UN special rapporteur , our colleague Mrs Rehn , has also requested - to show the people that the European Union is standing by them .
I believe that we should be exerting a great deal more pressure here , in order to make Europe 's stance in Kosovo really clear .
Madam President , two factors have changed the situation for the Kosovo Albanians : one is the increasing Serbian oppression , the other the Albanian resistance movement which has now started to execute all those they call collaborators .
The result is that Albanians are caught in the cross-fire from at least two directions .
Another event that most likely will be of consequence to the Kosovo Albanians , although we do not yet know in what way , are the open confrontations and the skirmishes occurring in Albania which is now one of the trouble spots in Europe .
Today 's debate and our resolution is really a manifestation of Parliament 's wish for the Council of Ministers and the Commission to act .
First of all , we would like to call a conference to discuss the situation in Kosova .
We are looking for analysis units in the treaty which hopefully will be agreed in Amsterdam .
Such a conference may not solve all problems but will demonstrate a desire to analyse the matter better and to find a reasonable solution for Kosova .
Madam President , I can basically endorse what was said by Mrs Lenz , although I must correct one thing .
There is not just a threat of assassinations , they have in fact been carried out , which means that this form of violence has taken place alongside the violence on the Serbian side , in the prisons and so on .
So the first thing we must call for is certainly that this violence should come to an end .
But Mrs Lenz was right to say that Kosovo is a powder keg , and we also have to realize that the Kosovo question can only be solved within the context of the overall situation in Yugoslavia .
I should therefore briefly like to mention the following five points , which seem particularly important to me and to our group .
Firstly , there must be fair and transparent elections , in other words the elections which take place must really offer every person , every party and every section of the population the chance to present their programme and their candidates .
Secondly , there must be media laws , but above all media practices too - and this was brought home to us on our visit to Yugoslavia - which correspond to freedom of the media .
It must also actually be possible for human rights abuses , whether in Kosovo or other areas , to be described publicly and discussed , because there are many citizens who know nothing at all about these , since such matters are concealed from them in many cases or across the board .
Thirdly , the European Union and above all its cities and regions must support the new municipal authorities , thereby signalling that this new democracy also has Europe 's full support .
Fourthly , there must of course be full recognition of human rights , in particular the minority rights of all groups .
In this context , I would very much refer to the Hungarian minority .
Lastly , a real solution must be found to the problem in Kosovo .
It is important here to make it clear to all sides : stop the violence , take part in talks , and find a solution within Yugoslavia .
If we are talking here about holding a conference , then all the factions must be prepared to engage in dialogue , and the European Union needs to spell it out to all of them that this dialogue must take place inside Yugoslavia .
We can provide help from outside , but the solution to the problems must be found in Yugoslavia itself .
Madam President , since we are talking about Kosovo , I would like to make a few things clear .
I should not dream of questioning the merits - even the excellence - of the intentions underlying this motion for a resolution , nor of underestimating the gravity of the events taking place in Kosovo because of the two communities living there .
There are four reasons why I personally felt I could not endorse this motion .
First , if words have any meaning , it seems to me inappropriate to refer , as this motion does , to apartheid in connection with Kosovo .
Secondly , I also regard it as inappropriate to exacerbate the ethnic divide by calling for support for Albanian civil society only , whereas it is the entire civilian population in the region that deserves aid and consideration .
Thirdly , our attention is constantly being caught by thousands of human rights violations throughout the world .
Yet always , obsessively , prompted by those who regard it as literally a crusade , Parliament comes back to condemnations of Serbia .
I am not aware that our past resolutions have had any pacifying effect in the Balkans .
Fourthly , and perhaps most importantly , amid countless difficulties , a democratic dialogue seems to be taking place in Belgrade .
Is this any time to obstruct that dialogue and fan the flames of anti-European paranoia in Serbia ?
Let us not forget that the day will come when we will have to integrate Yugoslavia into Europe .
Argentina
Madam President , this debate should be looking not just at the problems of the native peoples of Argentina , but at the problems of the entire population .
The native population does of course deserve our attention .
Half a million people are being deprived of the land on which they live , and speculators are pushing them out even further .
This must be stopped , of course , and it is an issue that should be broached in the Union 's contacts with Mercosur .
But we must not just consider the native peoples .
Argentina is still carrying the burden of the past , and the legal authorities are still refusing to cooperate fully in investigating all the disappearances during the junta years .
Those who stand up for justice face intimidation and opposition .
The famous ' mothers of the Plaza de Mayo ' , the symbol of Argentina 's legacy , still do not really know what happened to their children , and they too are being hampered in their quest .
Democracy and freedom of expression are still being covertly undermined in today 's Argentina .
Critical journalists have even been killed and newspapers gagged .
Democratic activists have been murdered , and the situation is deteriorating , but the authorities refuse to acknowledge the facts .
Human rights violations must be punished , even those committed by members of the armed forces : they must accept this in Argentina , otherwise there can never be a proper feeling of democracy in the country .
The Union 's representatives must draw the Argentine Government 's attention to these issues .
Democracy and respect for human rights are the foundations on which relations between the Union and third countries are based , including Argentina .
Madam President , the European Union bases bilateral cooperation on respect for human rights .
The conditionality clauses appearing in the texts of agreements with Latin America have served to consolidate democratic systems and also - and this is a fundamental aspect - to help guarantee the freedoms and rights of citizens .
These conditionality clauses are quite distinct in their philosophy from certification procedures and are , on the eve of the new millennium , the most positive contribution being made , in the context of globalization , to humanize international relations and the expansion of democracy .
If this House is on occasion critical of situations where there are abuses , shortfalls or breaches , such criticism must be understood as a positive contribution aimed at strengthening democracies and defending the weakest against injustice and inequality .
The resolution we are debating today on the problems facing the Mapuche communities aims to make a positive contribution in helping to resolve an acknowledged conflict because , if this conflict did not exist , the Pulmari Interstate Corporation set up a few years ago would not exist either .
The shortfalls detected in this corporation 's system of management , the judicial processes open to indigenous leaders and the departure from set objectives through errors in interpretation have given rise to deep concern in social sectors and the Argentine Parliament itself has heard voices raised in favour of amending the regulations governing the corporation .
Lastly , and within the general context of the defence of the human rights and freedoms of all Argentine citizens , we call upon the authorities to remain active and vigilant .
Our Parliament awarded the Sakharov prize to the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo and maintains close cooperational links with that group of women , the majority of them now old ladies , who are history 's record of a time of madness which left thousands of victims and much pain and grief in its wake .
Harmony in Argentine society is being achieved with difficulty but with tenacity .
The problem is not solved by attempting to deny that there are , on occasion , attacks which are , without doubt , perpetrated by minority groups unwilling to accept a pluralistic democracy in which all citizens have a role to play .
Nor is it solved by limiting constitutional guarantees .
Therefore , Madam President , our Group will be supporting each and every one of the paragraphs of this resolution .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , we are all aware of the political will behind your call for the conditions of the clauses in defence of human rights to be complied with when agreements with the Mercosur countries or the one with the Argentine are signed and we condemn once again the three human rights violations already denounced here .
These are the death of a journalist , José Luis Cabezas , in January , when the death of Salvador Aguirre , a defender of human rights , remains unpunished , and there was an attempt to assassinate a friend of his .
We condemn the expulsion of the Mapuche Indians and also the threads made to the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo .
In my opinion , the Commission is in a position to demand the following of the Argentine government : firstly , that the lands , regarding which such suspicion persists , should be returned to the Mapuche indigenous peoples ; secondly , that an investigation be started to ascertain the nature of the threats against the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo ; and , thirdly , that crime should not go unpunished in Latin America .
What I mean is that if a photo-journalist is assassinated and the murder of a defender of human rights remains unpunished , I am convinced , Mr Commissioner , that you have in your hands the power to put pressure on the Argentine government .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the treatment of the Mapuche in Pulmari by the Argentine Government is illegal and marked by shameful corruption .
It deserves our condemnation , and the fact that this has turned out so weakly in the resolution is only because of the appeasing influence of the PPE Group .
We are concerned about the Mapuche , and we are also deeply disturbed at another sign of growing repression in Argentina .
This involves the press .
In the past , the press has played a crucial role in this country .
I would remind the House of how it revealed the terrible human rights abuses by the armed forces during the military dictatorship , or how it shed light on the scandalous corrupt practices of Argentine politicians and officials .
I am thinking of how it reported on revolts against the government 's disastrous economic policy in several provinces of the country , or how it has supported the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo , who are constantly under threat .
The precondition for all this is freedom of the press .
But that is now in jeopardy .
On 25 January , the photojournalist José Luis Cabezas was killed because he was trying to shed light on the dark and criminal machinations of certain politicians .
We condemn that , and I hope that when President Menem visits Brussels in the coming months , he will clarify these events for us .
Madam President , I would say to Mr Telkämper that there is a difference between lecturing people in a positive and a negative way .
The relations between Europe and Argentina are undoubtedly among the closest that exist between continents , and that is also why every word we say here is interpreted very sensitively in Argentina .
If we are devoting this resolution chiefly to the indigenous peoples , whose very existence had previously been denied , then I would say that in our view that is an entirely good and sensible thing .
It will therefore also have the support of my group .
However , I do not believe that the situation in Argentina is as disastrous as Mr Bertens also portrayed it , but precisely because we are Europeans , because we have many political groups here , we have to exercise a proper influence and actually talk to the Argentines about these matters .
Of course the murder of a journalist is a terrible thing .
Of course it is right to discuss such things as the threats to the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo - who incidentally are here nearly every month , and hold talks with us .
My group will only be requesting a separate vote on this paragraph because we do not think it is right in terms of the methodology of the resolution .
But the resolution will certainly have our support .
Women 's rights in the world
Mr President , this part-session opened with President Gil-Robles ' timely and much appreciated speech on International Women 's Day and , a few hours from its close , we turn to the issue of women 's rights , focussing our attention on women in countries which do not belong to the European Union .
The European Parliament and the European Union renewed their commitment to them in the debate and resolution passed after the Peking Conference , and the Commission and Parliament have referred to them in the programmes and initiatives in progress .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , we are speaking of women who suffer particular violence linked to the customs of their countries , and , with all due respect to the cultures of those countries , the European Union should contribute to eradicating that violence : I refer to sexual mutilation of such humiliating cruelty that it is difficult to describe ; women and children beaten , raped , forced into prostitution and even starved .
Those of you who took part in the meeting yesterday in this Parliament on women refugees ' right to health were horrified to hear that women and their children in concentration camps are at direct risk dying of hunger because those who distribute the food - and they are always men - refuse to recognize them as heads of families . Women are suffering the violence of fundamentalist interpretation of their own religion .
Women are risking their lives in the ongoing struggle by demonstrating publicly against violation of their rights , which are fundamental human rights , as the Peking statement confirmed .
As we commemmorate and celebrate International Women 's Day , we should be thinking of our less fortunate sisters with reaffirmed commitment .
The suffering and outrage faced by those women goes far beyond any discrimination and difficulties we European still have to bear on the eve of the third millenium , and we must condemn that and take urgent action against it .
Madam President , wherever it occurs in the world , fanaticism - religious or nationalist - leads to human rights violations and in particular to violations of women 's rights .
That is no exaggeration , as we can see from the UN statistics which show that the overwhelming majority of victims of human rights violations are women and children .
Wars and other nationalist or religious conflicts very often lead to the subconscious or conscious suppression of women .
Women are ordered to do certain things , but are prohibited from doing others .
Women must not go onto the streets , women must not receive an education , women must not work , but women must ensure that their men are well looked after .
They are raped and abused and even sexually mutilated .
And all this is often perpetuated by those in power .
A number of things need to be done as a matter of urgency .
Women 's rights need to be put higher on the agenda in the Union 's and the Member States ' international and bilateral relations with countries where these kinds of things occur .
The right to asylum on the grounds of sexual persecution must be recognized , as a vital step towards ridding the world of this problem .
We must work very hard , both here and outside the Union , to have the sexual mutilation of women banned .
That is why it is vital for the UN Human Rights Commission to appoint a special observer to monitor cases of sexual mutilation , so that we can have a clearer picture of what is happening and actually do something about it .
Madam President , a day devoted to women 's rights is all very well , but it would be even better if we had any certainty that the European Union would fight all the year round for women 's interests , in Europe and elsewhere .
Because , as we know , women are the primary victims of human rights violations , in breach , incidentally , of all international conventions .
So we have a duty to take action to put an end to this discrimination .
Another subject of concern is sexual mutilation .
UNICEF puts the number of female victims of this , worldwide , at 130 million - an enormous figure , and all the more appalling in that it is still rising .
So , contrary to the sometimes deceptive impression that women are becoming better integrated politically , economically and socially , not only is their status not progressing , or not yet progressing sufficiently , but in some cases it is regressing , and to an alarming extent .
First , we must be concerned by the proliferation of these Islamic fundamentalist movements which are reducing women to the status of minors .
In this respect , the situation of women in Afghanistan seems to me particularly detestable .
The Taleban who came to power a few months ago are forbidding them , in the name of the Sharia , to work , to speak in public or to participate in public demonstrations .
The wearing of the veil is obligatory , and adulterous women are stoned , as in the Middle Ages .
So we must react firmly , condemning such activities of course , but also withdrawing all forms of co-operation with Afghanistan until such time as the basic rights of its citizens are once again respected .
Also , the European Union must fight for the immediate , unconditional release of Frédéric Michel and José Daniel Llorente , two French citizens employed by ACF , who were arbitrarily arrested and imprisoned simply for having lunched with some sixty Afghan women .
We cannot tolerate this kind of arbitrary action , or the terror tactics used against these women .
Madam President , a good many points have already been made here with which I entirely agree .
I shall therefore not repeat them all now .
I think that in Afghanistan , there is the worst official repression of women that we are currently aware of in the world as an official policy .
However , this topic is also dealt with in the other resolution marking International Women 's Day .
It cannot be made clear often enough how vulnerable women 's rights still are in many countries .
The world women 's conference in Beijing is over .
Europe should now be in the very front rank of those helping to put into effect the decisions that were secured with great difficulty , in other words to campaign against the trade in women , girls and children , to combat prostitution , child labour and sexual mutilation in traditional societies of a kind that we still see to some extent in Europe , for the most part among emigrants .
Once they have left the family unit , perhaps expelled from it , women are often regarded as fair game , and it is almost inconceivable in our emancipated society how they can be pursued .
However , we do need a cautious approach to help us win these women over to our side , because a society can only change from within .
But we must support this in our contacts with governments , and I hope that Commissioner Marín will do this in particular , since he was once responsible for women 's issues here in the European Parliament , in his dealings with the Committee on Women 's Rights .
Madam President , we should be hanging our heads in shame that , today , in March 1997 , it is necessary to reiterate firmly that the rights of women and of minors ( especially minors ) are an inalienable , integral and inseparable part of universal human rights .
This only reveals that women and minors are still not yet universally considered to be human beings .
This is just point 1 of our motion for a resolution .
I agree with the reiteration and the firmness , but at the same time I wanted to share with you the shame that I feel .
The preamble to this motion did not paint a full picture .
There is a lot missing , in particular on the social front , in what is independent from religious options and cultural atavism and what results from considering others , of either sex , as bearers of merchandise to be exploited .
Therefore , fortunately , this is just a rather weak show which justifies indignation as well as shame .
Equally vehemently , I would like to express solidarity and condemnations of what we are going to approve .
Not as an act of relieving my conscience but - also ! - as a reaffirmation of a determination to fight .
In a practical way .
On a day-to-day basis .
Leyla Zana
Madam President , fourteen months after being awarded the European Parliament 's Sakharov Prize , Leyla Zana is still being held prisoner in Ankara , together with three other Kurdish Members of Parliament , for having , in her capacity as an MP , asserted the Kurds ' right to their culture .
Leyla would not forgive us , today , for simply referring to her prize and her detention in a spirit of sentimentality .
After meeting her in prison in Ankara and at the time of her trial , I still remember a young woman of incredible strength and determination .
Her struggle is our struggle - the struggle for respect for democracy and universal rights .
Today , she is in prison , and we in the European Parliament can do nothing about it .
We voted - though my group did not - for customs union .
Although I didn 't vote for it , I did want to believe in it .
Today , though , we have to acknowledge - with great reluctance - that we were right .
Because from that time onwards violations of human rights in Turkey have escalated .
Today , I am no longer able to visit Leyla Zana , as I used to do before customs union .
We have frozen the agreements , which of course increases the problems faced by the Turks , and human rights are still being treated with contempt in that country - a country which we like to see as being close to Europe but whose government makes no concessions and laughs at Europe .
Let me end by allowing Leyla Zana to speak for herself , in the words she used to me when I visited her in prison in Ankara . ' I am a Kurd and I am defending my identity .
I believe the role of women is very important .
As a woman and as a Kurd , I want this bloodbath to end .
I want it all to end .
My struggle for human rights will advance the cause of democracy in Turkey .
I am clear-thinking , and a price has to be paid for that today .
I am here for the Kurds , and for the Turks as well . '
And I should add that she is there for us , to show us what the dignity of democracy means .
Madam President , the imprisonment of Mrs Leyla Zana epitomizes Turkey 's failure to respect freedom of expression .
She has not committed any terrorist crimes , she only said what she thought .
At present , there are three countries which are holding their own Sacharov prize-winners in prison : Turkey , Burma and China .
This puts Turkey , a European country with which we have signed a customs union and maintain close relations , and which is a member of the Council of Europe , in exclusive company .
When is this country going to keep the promises it made to the Union , or at least to the European Parliament when it voted in favour of the customs union ?
Four of the six Kurdish members of parliament are still in prison , and should be released immediately .
If Mrs Ciller meant what she said at the beginning of this week about improving human rights in her country , she should start by freeing these four members of parliament and , of course , Mrs Zana .
As a way of solving a problem , imprisoning members of parliament is the most counterproductive .
The Turkish Government must be persuaded to begin talks with the democratic Kurdish organizations .
This is the only way to reach a permanent solution , and the only way in which we can hope to cooperate successfully with Turkey - which is , after all , a European country .
Alois Brunner
Madam President , in this Chamber on 30 January , a few days ago , we debated and voted on what was in my opinion a fundamental declaration on racism , xenophobia and antisemitism , on the opportunity of 1997 - the year against racism .
In 1995 we paid tribute to the 50 years since the Holocaust . However , today we see the recurrence of some effort to tarnish the memory of the victims and deny that the genocide ever took place .
My compatriots , my Jewish fellow-citizens in Thessaloniki , paid a heavy price in blood during the Holocaust , and one name stands out in connection with the annihilation of Thessaloniki Jews , the name of Alois Brunner .
Recently , articles in the international press have repeated that the war criminal Brunner is still living , and is in hiding in Syria .
The motion which I have the honour to present today on behalf of my political group , asks the Council of the European Union to take specific and energetic action to expose and prosecute Brunner .
Because crimes against humanity cannot be forgotten , and we here must be certain that no war criminal will remain unpunished .
That is the highest symbolism , the vigilance and the sense that we attribute to the year against racism , xenophobia and antisemitism .
Madam President , the personal history of Alois Brunner is a history stained with the blood of innocent people , Jews from Thessaloniki and victims of racism .
It is one more instance of the psychopathy of the Second World War criminals .
While nothing can bring back lost lives , the dispensing of justice is a historical imperative and helps to heal the wounds created by the personal history of Alois Brunner .
For that reason , Alois Brunner must be found , exposed , condemned and punished as an example .
You have before you a motion which the European People 's Party supports and calls on you to vote for .
Madam President , the question of whether there is any point in having urgent resolutions is the subject of debate in every committee and working party in the House , but if ever there has been a useful resolution , it is the one tabled by our colleague from the Socialist Group today .
The subject should have come earlier on the agenda .
Brunner was an assistant of Eichmann , who was responsible for the deaths of 125 000 people and for the deportation of Jews from Austria , Greece , Yugoslavia and France .
If Syria is serious about wanting good relations with Europe and showing good will towards the peace process , then it should hand this man over .
Commissioner Marín , you visit this region often , including Syria .
I hope that you will make sure that our wishes are delivered to the right address .
The last known address was 7 , rue Hadat , and I expect you to bring a reply back with you .
Boat people
Madam President , this resolution concerns the drowning of 282 immigrants off the coast of Greece on Christmas Day last year .
This was a crime either of omission or , more likely , of commission , when their boat was deliberately rammed and sunk .
There has been no major investigation into this crime against humanity ; it has disappeared into a judicial black hole , because the authorities in Greece , Italy , Malta and Egypt - all involved in this passage of illegal immigrants - have largely ignored the problem .
Some of the people who could bear witness to it in fact have been extradited and sent back to India by the Greek authorities and , therefore , are unavailable to provide evidence .
Unfortunately , this is but one incident of many : in 1993 the human rights organization Amsterdam United estimated that 393 people had died trying to enter the European Union .
Illegal immigration is illegal immigration , but it does not imply that the death sentence is available .
What we need and want is coordinated action to track down and prosecute those people engaged in this crime , no matter where they are - whether they are in or outside the European Union .
We need coordinated action by EUROPOL and by EUROPOL via INTERPOL around the world , because until that happens these crimes will continue to be committed and people will continue to suffer the death sentence for merely wanting to travel to the European Union .
Madam President , the episode just mentioned by Mr Ford is one of many episodes which unfortunately occur periodically in the Mediterranean and along its shores .
At the moment there is a criminal racket in illegal transport of migrants , encouraging clandestine immigration .
This racket is also linked to the racket in illegal labour , employed in domestic service , agriculture and construction , but also unfortunately in prostitution .
Women and children are particularly subject to this abuse .
The criminals we are talking about are unscrupulous people and effective action must be taken against them .
For this reason we ask for an investigation into abuses victimizing clandestine workers . We also ask for maximum respect for the human dignity of these migrants and real determination to deal with those who profit from the difficulties and needs of our neighbour peoples .
I think this should be put on the agenda for the EuroMediterranean Conference in Malta on 15 and 16 April .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to make a statement of principle : the Group of the European People 's Party is in favour of discussing human rights , it is in favour of any violation of human rights being pointed out and punished , and in favour of preventive measures being taken wherever possible to stop such things occurring .
However , the discussion of human rights should not be misused simply to drag into Parliament topics from the left and generally ideological wing of the House , with the aim of scoring political points here and there on various issues .
It should not happen in the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , where the left demands such things as the right to health or the right to social security under the heading of ' human rights ' , and certainly not as part of the topical and urgent debate .
We are in favour of human rights abuses being pointed out , of targeting the discussion on that point and focusing on it .
The PPE Group will therefore be voting against this motion tabled by Mrs Roth and Mr Ford , because it simply seeks to impose on us here in Parliament an ideological debate on migration policy and police cooperation in Europe and beyond , and ultimately threatens to obscure our main concern - and that of the Union - which is to protect human rights .
I could in fact have cut you off pursuant to Rule 47 , Mr Pirker , because you were not speaking on the subject , but engaging in a discussion of principle .
I was pleased that at the end you did nevertheless use the term human rights , which helped me to avoid making such a decision .
That brings us to the end of this debate .
Mr Marín will now speak on behalf of the Commission on all the issues which have featured in the debate .
, Vice-President of the Commission .
( ES ) Madam President , I intend to answer all the various points individually . I will attempt to be as brief as possible .
Firstly , on the subject of Kosovo , the situation there is indeed characterized by serious violations of human rights and ongoing frustration of the legitimate political aspirations of Kosovo Albanians , and it continues to be one of the main sources of concern for the European Union in that region .
Given the current state of unrest in Albania , there is a risk that this will become a still greater source of destabilization .
The European Union 's position has always been to seek greater autonomy for Kosovo within Yugoslavia 's internationally recognized borders .
It has also urged the Belgrade authorities to begin a dialogue with the Kosovo Albanians in the presence of a third party .
However , I regret that I have to say that such efforts have still not borne fruit .
Violation of human rights continues and Belgrade maintains that the status of Kosovo is a purely internal matter . In a similar manner , Belgrade rejects the European Union 's request that it also establish a presence in Kosovo .
Full normalization of relations between Yugoslavia and the European Union will be possible only if Belgrade fully respects human rights and the rights of minorities and grants the necessary degree of autonomy .
The European Union will continue to urge the current and future authorities in Yugoslavia to make progress towards that objective , but it will also have to make it perfectly clear to the Kosovo Albanians that it does not support their claims to independence .
Genuine democratization in Yugoslavia would facilitate a solution for Kosovo .
Consequently , the Commission is drawing up a strategy to support democracy , civil society and independent media .
As regards the Argentine , in recent years the European Commission has generally supported efforts by Latin American countries to establish and consolidate genuine democratic states which have respect for human rights .
It will therefore continue to monitor the results of efforts on the part of both civil society and the authorities to continue down the road to justice and the full safeguarding of human rights .
This is an appropriate approach under the terms of both the 1990 bilateral cooperation agreement between the European Union and the Argentine and the more recent agreement signed between the European Union and the Mercosur countries in December 1995 , in which it was laid down that one of the common values we share - and upon which our relations must be established - is , in fact , based on respect for human rights .
During the period from 1990 to 1996 , the European Commission financed a series of initiatives aimed at developing and consolidating the rule of law , including respect for human rights , the total amount of this being ECU one million two hundred thousand .
Amongst other things , support was given to work carried out in connection with the Association of the Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo , who have , as you are aware , benefited from Community aid on several occasions , particularly in the form of assistance in identifying their missing children .
Likewise , we have recently been implementing a very interesting programme in connection with the situation of detainees in Argentine prisons , amounting to a sum of ECU 300 , 000 .
I have to say that , in this area , we have found the Argentine authorities to be most open in their approach .
More specifically , as regards the indigenous Mapuche communities in the Neuquén region , we share the concern of this House and I am able to inform you that the current situation is as follows : the Argentine government has not rejected political dialogue with the European Commission on this matter , quite the contrary ; it has accepted a plan under which , on 15 February this year , the Secretariat for Social Development of the Nation has , in agreement with the Governor of Neuquén and the indigenous communities themselves , set up a committee whose task is to propose a resolution to this conflict within 90 days .
The solution has been a positive one .
I cannot deny that , naturally , the Argentine authorities immediately submitted to us a project for the economic and social development of this region whereby , perhaps via the economic and financial cooperation chapter , it will be possible to achieve the small advances which , ultimately , if we persist in our efforts , will eventually bear fruit .
Finally , in connection particularly with the Wiqui Matacos indigenous communities in the northern region of Formosa , I would like to inform you that the Commission has just approved a cooperation programme worth ECU 5.5 million , also in collaboration with the Argentine authorities .
This means that , independently of the pressure it is possible to apply - to respond to some of your points - it must be acknowledged that the Argentine authorities are cooperating , are allowing us to work and , in the case of the Mapuche people , we have at least entered into a 90-day moratorium period , and , in the case of other minorities , have initiated economic and social development projects which already have concrete form .
Now , the matter of women and the problematical situation of women in Afghanistan .
Naturally , the European Commission fully shares the views of the European Parliament and we believe that the extreme interpretation - I would stress the word ' extreme ' - of Islamic law by the Talibans is behind the setting-up of this system which so discriminates against women .
Lastly , there is yet another series of questions relating to the internal situation in Afghanistan where , regardless of the efforts it might be possible to make , it does not appear possible in the short term to work with the Afghan authorities , in political terms , outside the NGOs system owing to the internal situation of that country .
Consequently , I have little to offer you in the form of a concrete solution and can only join with you in condemning the current situation there .
As for Leyla Zana , we have , of course , called upon the Turkish authorities a number of times , urging them to make a significant gesture in the case of Leyla Zana and also in the case of other imprisoned DEP elected representatives .
Some but by no means all have been released , as Mr Bertens has informed us .
We are still calling for an improvement of the human rights situation and for the country to continue with democratic reforms begun at the end of 1995 .
Such reforms are essential , particularly since the Turkish government is currently putting itself forward as a candidate for full membership of the European Union .
I am able to tell you that we are aware of the open-minded approach - or at least the announcement of an open-minded approach - on the part of Mrs Çiller in adopting , between now and the end of 1997 , a law abolishing remaining obstacles to freedom of speech in Turkey .
This is good news and a positive step forward .
We do not believe that all problems can be solved in this way , but this is the kind of thing we want , namely ongoing and continuous development , albeit one step at a time .
The Commission has also been making representations in connection with the presence of Alois Brunner in Syria , as has the Council of Ministers ' troika .
What I am able to tell you is that the Syrian government categorically denies that this war criminal is present on Syrian territory .
There are reports by journalists but , when we requested confirmation at a formal diplomatic level , we were told more than once that this war criminal is not in Syria .
Be that as it may , the Commission naturally shares the view that war criminals must be detained and put on trial .
Now for the matter of the boat people spoken about by Mr Ford and other members of this House - of course , this is nothing more than exploitation of citizens from third countries by criminal networks organizing clandestine immigration !
We are , of course , aware of this problem and agree that trafficking in human beings and working illegally must be combated and that the clandestine networks involved in the transport of migrants must be brought to justice .
Now , three points related to this subject : a number of measures have been taken in connection with the specific subject of trade in human beings for the purposes of sexual exploitation .
In January this year , approval was given to a joint action relating to the typification of the behaviour of traffickers and to improved cooperation between Member States .
A training programme , the STOP programme , has been organized , the aim of this being the exchange of information and training in the campaign against trafficking in human beings and the sexual exploitation of minors .
In December 1996 , approval was given to a joint action whereby the mandate of the European Drugs Unit was expanded with regard to trafficking in human beings .
And the Union , the European Drugs Unit , has already commenced work in this field .
Secondly , on the wider question of the criminal networks organizing illegal immigration there is a regular exchange of information within the corresponding Council Working Group , which is called the Centre for Information , Discussion and Exchange on Crossing of Frontiers and Immigration .
An attempt is being made to review the entire field of offences relating to illegal immigration .
Illegal immigration promoted by criminal gangs and by criminal networks is essentially a crime and , although this may appear trivial , we must direct our attack at the very basis of the organization of such networks if we wish to be effective .
Thirdly , the Council of Ministers has been looking at the problem of illegal working on the part of citizens from third countries and the text approved by the Council of Ministers indicates that illegal trafficking in manpower should be regarded as a crime and be subject to criminal penalties .
Such penalties must be effective and make it possible to block additional benefits or other advantages accruing to employers .
The legislative work being done by Member States and the authorities themselves signifies a major change and , therefore , what we are doing -in connection with a subject Mr Ford is sufficiently familiar with - is also to apply the budget line for the campaign against racism , xenophobia and anti-Semitism to this subject .
Attempts are being made - an old debate you took part in many , many years ago - to , in some way , draw up a political response .
However , I would say again , according to the data available to the Commission , these are criminal networks which must be viewed essentially from the standpoint of control and , naturally , of criminal and judicial repression .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0197 / 97 by Mr Morris and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the NonProliferation Treaty ; -B4-0221 / 97 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the Non-Proliferation Treaty ; -B4-0229 / 97 by Mrs Schroedter and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the revision of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and Nuclear Weapons Convention ; -B4-0241 / 97 by Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the Non-Proliferation Treaty ; -B4-0253 / 97 by Mr Alavanos and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the Non-Proliferation Treaty .
Madam President , the development of weapons of mass destruction , especially nuclear weapons , is an enormous threat to the safety of the Union and that of the world .
The European Union has also played an important role in halting the spread of nuclear weapons and in disarmament .
As indicated by the Canberra Commission , no one will be entirely safe until all nuclear weapons are destroyed .
During the nonproliferation conference in 1995 and the inspection conference it was decided to extend the Treaty for an indefinite period .
Parliament is playing a key role in matters concerning nuclear weapons . This does not mean that the agreement runs without supervision or that there are conditions attached to its extension .
The Preliminary Committee will meet in New York on the 7-18 of April .
The work will then begin to bring about a new and effective monitoring of the non-proliferation agreement .
Each step towards nuclear disarmament is naturally an encouragement for the non-proliferation treaty .
Article 6 of the Agreement does in fact stipulate that the nuclear powers should disarm their nuclear weapons .
In our resolution and proposed amendments we have emphasised the importance of the statement from the International Court on the illegality of using nuclear weapons . The Canberra Commission 's report on a nuclear free world and the official opinions of the ex-generals and ex-admirals in December 1996 as to the responsibility of the nuclear powers to work in good faith for nuclear disarmament .
These opinions are important contributions for the realisation of Article 6 of the NPT .
We would also like to remind you of the U.N. General Assembly 's resolution on the launching in 1997 of negotiations leading to a convention on nuclear weapons .
The resolution asks the Council to present a series of proposals in order to reinforce the NPT and the work of the European Union in conjunction with the NPT conference in New York . These proposals could for example include combined action to be taken jointly to concentrate on the point at issue , the revision of both the agreement and its principles and aims , a new formal system for the reporting of the results achieved and any future proposals for implementing the NPT and finally that the Preliminary Conference in the year 2000 be used only to prepare for the Inspection Conference , so making it possible for the three previous preliminary conferences to discuss the point at issue .
We request that all Member States immediately ratify the test-ban treaty and act together to persuade other states to do the same .
Finally , we ask the Member States to support the negotiations starting in 1997 that could result in an agreement on the elimination of all nuclear weapons .
Madam President , my thanks to Mrs Theorin , who has just expressed my very thoughts on this issue . There are still one or two points I should like to make , however .
We all wish to see progress on nuclear disarmament , and this is why the forthcoming meeting of the Prepcom in New York is so enormously important .
The revision of the NPT could give fresh impetus to the whole process of nuclear disarmament , and the Union played an important role in the conclusion of the NPT in 1995 .
The Council must take this new opportunity to bring its considerable influence to bear by speaking with one voice in the negotiations , and by seeking compromises between the two extremes .
That is why we have urged the Dutch presidency , through Mr van Mierlo , to give this issue its closest attention .
The Union must make every effort to ensure that the revision conferences are well structured and effective by focusing them on evaluating how far countries keep the promises they make during the international negotiations .
The first task is therefore to ratify the CTBT and to introduce measures to ensure that it is implemented as widely as possible .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the joint motion for a resolution which has been tabled by six groups contains nothing that we have not been saying for a long time already .
Parliament is thereby closing its eyes to the latest developments .
There is no doubt that nuclear weapons are being internationally shunned .
Maintaining the nuclear threat , let alone planning for a first strike , is now even being rejected by the generals , because it has no strategic advantages but would bring endless suffering to mankind and the environment for generations to come .
1997 is a year of major steps towards nuclear disarmament .
At the Clinton-Yeltsin summit , far-reaching proposals on the dismantling of strategic nuclear arsenals will be on the agenda .
Parliament must insist that France and the United Kingdom take an active and serious part in these disarmament efforts and proposals .
If it wishes to be credible , Parliament has a responsibility to prevent the Non-Proliferation Treaty from being furtively undermined in the harmonization of the common foreign and security policy .
It has a responsibility to call for negotiations on disarmament now , and to ensure that the capacity of France and Germany to act is not suddenly Europeanized and furtive talks with Germany or attempts to create de facto situations at the FrancoGerman summit do not become the norm .
Do you not think , ladies and gentlemen , that it is worth campaigning for a nuclear-free Europe , as a symbol of a Europe which is at peace ?
Madam President , I think we should be talking about civil nuclear disarmament as well , because according to information published recently in the press there are nuclear power stations that cause pollution only at low tide .
That 's just one example among many .
In Japan , too , it has been noted just recently that the civil nuclear installations were quite dangerous .
So I am not going to focus on military applications .
I am very glad , though , that Commissioner Marín had the patience to stay with us a few minutes longer because when it comes to disarmament an important problem involves bringing in India and Pakistan .
India , in particular , has a neighbour which is not exactly a shining example of democracy but is powerfully armed : the People 's Republic of China , a member of the Security Council and one of the nuclear powers which , broadly speaking , determine the speed of disarmament .
It is absolutely essential to include India , which has major security problems , including 30 , 000 km2 of territory still occupied by the People 's Republic of China , and which is in no condition to negotiate and guarantee its security .
As Mr Marín has responsibility for that part of the world , I hope he will find an opportunity to take some appropriate action .
Madam President , I would say to the last but one speaker that Germany has no nuclear weapons , does not wish to have any , and will not have them .
I should just like that to be noted .
As a member of the Committee on Development , I see with some concern that it seems possible that certain countries are making the possession or development of nuclear weapons into a kind of status symbol , so we do need to look particularly critically at the course of events with regard to the newly industrialized countries .
We have to rely on the good will of all those who sign such non-proliferation and test ban treaties .
But we never have any means of ensuring compliance with these treaties .
I therefore welcome the statement in the joint motion for a resolution that greater efforts are needed in this direction , and that countries must be enabled genuinely to accept agreements of this kind on test bans and non-proliferation .
Madam President , Enrico Fermi wrote that anyone who is not afraid of nuclear energy is not normal .
He was implicitly stating that fear is a common heritage and collective fear is therefore normal .
People want to escape this situation and ask for protection from nuclear fear .
The means are now available and offered to us by the nuclear non-proliferation treaty , which is strengthened by the agreements already signed on review times and by the disarmament principles and objectives .
But we are asking the Council to put the necessary pressure on Member States to ratify the treaty preventing nuclear experiments as well , and to intervene with those countries which have not yet complied with the nuclear moratorium , and indeed to provide for possible suspension of existing cooperation agreements .
, Vice-President of the Commission . ( ES ) Madam President , on the eve of the first meeting of the Preparatory Committee in the strengthened review process of the Nuclear Weapons Non-Proliferation Treaty , which will be taking place in New York from 7 to 18 April 1997 , I am able to inform you that the Commission is of the understanding that the European Union will do its utmost to play a constructive role at this meeting in order to obtain positive initial results and to put back on the right road , from the very beginning , the new review process of the Non-Proliferation Treaty .
With this in mind , the Commission is of the opinion that all the Non-Proliferation Treaty rights and obligations must be reviewed without exception since the Treaty is the cornerstone of the international non-proliferation mechanism .
The decision adopted in May 1995 on the principles and objectives of non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament is an important document for evaluating application of the NonProliferation Treaty and the European Union wishes to take maximum advantage of what is offered by an improvement in the review process .
As for the specific questions Mr Dupuis put to me , my impression is that , after having accompanied various troikas to the countries you mentioned , I do not , in the short term , envisage any significant movement on the part of any of the parties you mentioned .
Naturally , however , the European Union 's position has been openly presented .
I am certain , finally , that members of the European Union will take the objective of this resolution into account , since it is virtually along the same lines : when embarking upon the second review process , the objective is to review effectively and without exception all - I repeat - all the rights and obligations deriving from the Non-Proliferation Treaty .
Naturally , this is a recommendation the European Union will make , but I will not hide from you the fact that debate on this specific question will always be very , very difficult and complex .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0200 / 97 by Mr Apolinário and Mr Colajanni , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the earthquake in Iran and the need for humanitarian aid ; -B4-0243 / 97 by Mr Pasty and Mr Azzolini , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on the need for humanitarian aid to the victims of the earthquake in Iran ; -B4-0265 / 97 by Mr Pettinari , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the earthquake in Iran ; -B4-0203 / 97 by Mr Correia and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the storms in the Azores ; -B4-0205 / 97 by Mr Miranda and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the floods in Mozambique .
Earthquake in Iran
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has taken a firm , clear and determined position to condemn the policy of violating human rights pursued by the Iranian authorities - including the persecution against Salman Rushdie , which are quite obvious successive violations of human rights , which are quite obvious at the Sarqi prison , which are quite obvious in international terrorism , which may be inspired by the Iranian Government .
We are condemning and quite clearly setting out our position .
However , through this resolution we wish to manifest our solidarity with the people , because our fight , our criticism , is not of population but of the government concerned . We should launch an appeal so that , through humanitarian organisations , we can offer all of the conditions of solidarity to the people themselves who are victims of this recent earthquake .
Madam President , Mozambique , the Azores and Iran have each suffered from a natural disaster , and I should like to express my own sympathy and that of my group with the families of the victims and those who have suffered .
It goes without saying that we fully support the aid to be provided there by the Union .
However , Madam President , I should also like to express my own regret and that of my group at the fact that no agreement has been reached on adding the Algerian situation to the list of emergencies .
Although this is not a natural disaster where we could bring aid , I do regard terrorism as a disaster , and one which unfortunately certainly exists in Algeria .
The suppression of freedom of expression , violations of human rights and terrorism are everpresent in Algeria , and I cannot share the optimism of Mr Ataf , whom we heard this morning claiming that the elimination of terrorism is just a matter of time .
When speaking on this subject previously , I stressed the fact that the press is muzzled in Algeria .
Well , silence perpetuates oppression .
The press must be given back its voice , because it is being subjected to fundamentalist violence and governmental pressure .
Every time the Algerian authorities are accused of human rights violations , they react with indignation .
There is no doubt about one thing : but for international solidarity , the independent press would long since have disappeared in Algeria .
In conclusion , Madam President , I deplore the fact that the European Parliament has still not defined any clear position regarding the Algerian problems .
Observer status at the forthcoming elections would result in increased commitment by the European Union , but , unfortunately , we have not yet been invited to attend .
I venture to hope that the Algerian Government will review its position and that we shall be able to continue working together calmly and dispassionately .
You have completely confused me , because you did not speak on any of the subjects on the agenda .
Storm in the Azores
Madam President , last December the Azores were assailed by violent storms which provoked terrible damage especially on the islands of São Miguel , Graciosa and Flores , while the harbour at Punta Delgada and the population of the Povoação district were the worst hit .
Fortunately there were no deaths .
But the estimates for the cost to rebuild and repair the damage exceed 13 , 000 million escudos .
If it were not for the prompt action by the Portuguese Government and the Government of the Autonomous Region of the Azores and the solidarity of the communities in the islands , Christmas for these European citizens would have been much sadder .
The fact that this is an ultra-peripheral region , where people are faced not only with isolation and structural backwardness but also frequent damage caused by storms , means that perhaps now we should set up a special fund aimed at dealing with this type of situation .
After all , this is not the first time this has happened , and there are even plans in the new guidelines of the Community INTERREG Initiative to cover natural disasters , floods etc .
On 19 December , I sent a letter to the President of the Commission calling for Community support for the Azores .
I must thank Mr Santer for his positive reply , which informed me of an extra 26 million ECU to repair public and farming infrastructures on the islands .
We hope that we will see further signs of this willingness to support the needs of the peoples of the Azores .
Despite this we have decided to present once again this motion for a resolution whose approval we hope will show European solidarity with the people and the regional government of the Azores and support enshrinement in the Treaty of a special scheme to deal with and help ultra-peripheral regions of the European Union .
It is not our habit to turn people 's suffering into an act of demagoguery .
At the European Parliament and in the Azores , the reason behind our proposal is to help our fellow-citizens .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I come from the Azores .
Of course , I did all I could to make sure that this issue should be the subject of the European Parliament resolution .
This was justified given the extent of the damage done and the need to continue programmed investment .
I did not succeed in having this put on the agenda of the part-sessions of January or February and these storms took place back in December .
There are signs that some people seem to think that my position in the Azores was more important than having this resolution passed .
I therefore resolved to back the initiatives taken by others and back it even though , in this case , the text of the resolution is completely innocuous .
It is important , very important , that this text should be approved , in the end and despite everything .
The interests of the people concerned should always come before meaningless one-upmanship .
I hope that it will be the beginning of a new position in the future , where the people themselves are more important than other issues .
As for the situation of the Azores , there is a lot to be done .
We really must get humanitarian aid to the families concerned and it is vital that we add to the support already given .
Portugal can resort to the Cohesion Fund in order to finance investment in the fields of transport and the environment .
Inexplicably , to date , since the Cohesion Fund was launched , it has never been used for the Azores .
Finally , it is fundamental to ensure direct support by the European Union to farmers who have lost their crops .
And yet there is no proposal on this !
Madam President , obviously I am also behind the people of the Azores after what has happened and on this matter we have already presented and formulated a particular type of process , but the reason I am speaking before you today is because of another situation , a recent event which took place in Mozambique .
This is a situation which has arisen after terrible floods which have had tragic consequences : dozens of dead , some 400 , 000 homeless , 25 , 000 of whom are trying to find refuge in neighbouring countries , crops destroyed , infrastructures destroyed , problems of a possibility of epidemics , in particular of cholera and malaria , in other words a truly tragic situation , particularly important when we bear in mind that this is a very poor country .
That is why I am here today and I think we should bear in mind the assessment which has been carried out by the Mozambican Government of damage , something around 30 million US dollars , and therefore I would like to ask the Commission to take action on this matter and also - since the Commission is here , to give us an idea about the possibilities of taking action in this field in general .
, Vice-President of the Commission . ( ES ) Madam President , regarding Iran , the Commission naturally shares the concern of this House for the victims of the earthquake which struck the province of Ardebil in Northern Iran .
There have been requests from the humanitarian aid department of the United Nations , the International Federation of the Red Cross and the Red Crescent and we have at this time placed ourselves at the disposal of these organizations , through ECHO , and are offering to do all we can on behalf of the European Union to coordinate aid , above all for the earthquake victims .
Up to now , we have had no concrete response either from the United Nations , the Red Cross or the Red Crescent , but as soon as one is received , our response will obviously be a positive one .
As regards the Azores , a first consideration is this : the meteorological system of all Member States is sufficiently advanced and the problem is not predicting major downpours or hurricanes , because you are all well aware that hurricanes , typhoons , periods of extremely cold weather and rain can perfectly well be predicted .
The problem is that human beings are unable to stand up against nature when it is unleashed and it is therefore impossible to prevent catastrophes which are therefore referred to as natural disasters .
I can confirm to you that the Commission has already taken a decision to earmark ECU 26 million for the Azores operational programme , within the Community framework of aid for Portugal , which means that de facto solidarity has been established between the metropolitan peninsular area of Portugal and the government of the Azores because , finally , a transfer of internal income from the continental part of the country to the islands is now taking place .
We believe this is a good and positive step targeted specifically at assisting victims of the disaster .
As for the floods in Mozambique , our delegation is perfectly up to date with the situation in the regions in central Mozambique affected by the floods .
The Maputo delegation is in contact with non-governmental organizations present in the region .
Regarding potential action by the European Union , we will be able to act straight away since we have compensation funds available in Maputo and equipment which can be mobilized immediately to alleviate , in addition , problems which arise for the affected population .
The only thing both our delegation and ECHO are telling us is that it will be necessary to wait for the waters to recede before a proper evaluation of the situation can be made .
This is not , therefore , a problem of financial resources - the financial resources exist - but simply one of whether or not it is possible to work out in the field .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
Did you have something further to say , Commissioner ?
, Vice-President of the Commission . ( ES ) We have finished ten minutes early .
I shall therefore now suspend the sitting .
We shall begin the votes at 5.30 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 5.20 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m. )

Votes
Madam President , I would just like to recommend that the House adopt this amendment , provided that a reference is added to the Committee of Inquiry into the Community transit system , as well as that on BSE .
I was hoping that the rapporteur would delete the last three words .
These are guidelines for the 1998 budget and the last three words are : ' and subsequent budgets ' .
We really should not be voting on those three words .
It would be far better if those three words were deleted and if the rapporteur could take that on board .
. ( DE ) I agree with the Socialist Group , Madam President .
( Applause and isolated heckling ) - on paragraph 37
Madam President , before we vote on this paragraph , I ask you in your capacity as President to make a decision to declare the end of this paragraph inadmissible .
The Commission of the European Union is the guardian of the Treaties .
We can hardly ask it to violate them .
But we are now asking it to present to us , before the end of this year , a plan for the creation of what is literally a European Foreign Service .
Indisputably , no provision of the Treaty allows such a service to be set up .
So this part of the paragraph is not admissible .
We knew of course that this problem would be raised .
The services responsible have considered this question and the paragraph is in fact admissible .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to give a very warm welcome to the members of a delegation from the standing committee of the Land of Baden-Württemberg , who are visiting Parliament and have taken their seats in the official gallery .
I should note that this meeting forms part of the exchanges on European media policy and the exchange of information between our institutions .
I sincerely hope that this meeting will be a very fruitful one , especially as regards relations between the European Parliament and the regional parliaments of our Union .
Votes ( continuation )
The first Tillich report was absolutely unacceptable since the objectives of the Treaties concerning solidarity and economic and social cohesion were completely absent from it .
Similarly , the principles set out , such as that of subsidiarity , which in practice means translating a rejection of social policies , sent back to national level , and the re-nationalization of common policies , or indiscriminate cuts in all budgetary chapters , were unacceptable .
Thanks to almost 140 amendments tabled and the excellent work carried out by the Committee on Budgets , we are now faced with a much more sensible , balanced and pro-European report .
The main reasons which have led me to vote in favour of this report , in its new form , are :
the clear and systematic affirmation of the principle of economic and social cohesion ; -the elimination of any reference to subsidiarity ; -the express consideration that the Structural Funds make an important contribution to strengthening the economies of beneficiary regions and helping Member States to meet the convergence criteria and that the revision of regulations , to be presented by the end of 1998 , heads in the direction of rationalisation and increased efficiency ; -the condemnation of the negative attitude of the Council in relation to social policy ( compulsory approval by unanimity ) and the decision to include pilot projects on social exclusion , the elderly , the disabled and families , as well as strengthening activities designed to help with the execution of a sexual equality policy ; -the willingness of the European Parliament to make an active contribution to setting up at European level a general policy to combat organised crime ; -the importance of making budgetary allowances for the new needs of European citizens and promoting in practice the creation of jobs , both directly and by means of support to small and medium-sized undertakings .
One of the good things about the Tillich report is that it focuses on a small number of priorities for the 1998 budget .
The emphasis on helping small and medium-sized firms is particularly welcome , since this is where the greatest potential lies for creating jobs .
On the other hand , I think it is wrong to include in the priorities a number of youth , education and culture programmes , which are all areas where European policy should not encroach on the Member States ' responsibilities .
The report also rightly criticizes the growing gap between commitments and payments under the Structural Funds .
The amount of unused appropriations has grown into tens of billions since 1986 , and the ceiling for appropriations that was agreed at Edinburgh was manifestly too high .
Many projects do not meet the Commission 's criteria , and there is also the fact that each Member State has to match at least half of the European subsidy provided , so that in years of budget discipline , the system is clearly much less successful .
The budget amounts should at least be based on realistic expectations .
Finally , there is agricultural spending , where strict budget discipline is also needed .
I do not agree with paragraph 10 of the Tillich report , which urges that savings should be made by changing the regulations .
In 1992 , it was decided to have a programme which shifted support from prices to incomes , and this was completed in 1995 .
However , the Union will now have to bear the budgetary consequences of this decision , and direct income support is now a heavier burden on the European budget than price support ever was , as we can see from the enormous increase in spending in the cereals sector .
Then there are the extra income allowances that were introduced to compensate for lower prices : if these are now to be axed , as the Commission proposed in the prices package for 1997-1998 , it will mean reneging on the Commission 's earlier promises .
The report attempts to use the current BSE crisis to justify reducing incomes in the cereals sector , but BSE is a one-off problem , whereas the reduction in the extra income allowances is likely to be permanent .
All things considered , I decided to vote against this report .
On the Kittelmann report ( A4-0031 / 97 )
Ever since antiquity , close cultural and historic ties have existed between Armenia and a number of European countries .
Also , the existence of large communities of Armenian origin in some Member States , including France , calls for a closer partnership between the European Union and Armenia .
Armenia , the smallest of the republics making up the former USSR , long since undertook economic and democratic reforms .
However , in a region as unstable as Transcaucasia , this landlocked country has been exposed to intolerable economic pressure from its neighbours Turkey and Azerbaijan .
As the rapporteur emphasizes , the economic embargo imposed on Armenia because of the conflict in Nagorny Karabakh must be lifted without fail !
Although the growth of the Armenian economy has been facilitated by the cease-fire since May 1994 , the political instability of the region is having many adverse effects on the country .
The new Partnership and Co-operation Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Armenia , concluded for a period of ten years , is intended to promote economic and social reforms and the restructuring of the economic and trade systems .
Hitherto , Armenia has not really been the main concern of the European Union .
The change of attitude by the Member States thus indicates the dawning of a new period of co-operation between the European Union and Armenia .
The Greens regard the implementation of the PCA with Armenia at this stage as a serious mistake , and were therefore unable to vote in favour of it .
We approve of close relations between the EU and Armenia , but Armenia is still in a state of war with Azerbaijan .
The peace talks are not making progress .
The OSCE 's call for the moves towards a peaceful settlement to be stepped up - on the basis of OSCE principles and with the key requirement of an autonomous region with the maximum degree of self-government within the internationally recognized borders of Azerbaijan - was not accepted by Armenia .
The talks on the status of Nagorno-Karabakh have since come to a complete standstill .
Linking the implementation of the PCA to a peace agreement would not only have given the necessary impetus to the peace negotiations , but possibly also have led to them being swiftly concluded .
The majority in Parliament has declined to see this opportunity , and has casually loosed its grasp on an important instrument of legislative potential within a CFSP .
In the draft texts produced by the IGC , Parliament 's legislative rights with regard to international agreements should be drastically curtailed .
Perhaps things have to reach that point for the House to realize how important such apparently minor contributions can be for peace in Europe , and what far-reaching effects they can have .
The Greens are also critical of the fact that the Council has incorporated a so-called repatriation clause in the text of the PCA , thereby linking economic cooperation to the repatriation of refugees , without the necessary conditions for this existing in the country .
On the Schwaiger report
The Greens regard the implementation of the PCA with Azerbaijan at this stage as a serious mistake , and were therefore unable to vote in favour of it .
The Green Group approves in principle of a PCA with Azerbaijan , and sees this - if it is implemented on the basis of partnership - as a valuable aid to the conversion process , to the extent that the EU assistance is geared to the real needs of the region and not just provided for reasons of self-interest .
However , the fact that Azerbaijan is still in a state of war with Armenia and that a front line runs through the middle of the country excludes 20 % of it from participating in the benefits of this aid .
That is why there must first be a peace agreement with Armenia which includes the lifting of all regional economic blockades .
This also means , however , that Azerbaijan 's interest in an attractive proposal for self-government for Nagorno-Karabakh , on the basis of internationally recognized principles , must be brought to the negotiating table without delay , and the negotiations thereby taken forward .
Given the dramatic situation of expulsions in Azerbaijan and the absence of a proper rule of law , both in terms of fair jurisdiction and civil rights , the linking of the so-called repatriation clause to the cooperation agreement is both unreasonable and incompatible with the UN convention on refugees .
The Greens would criticize the Council for creating an unjust form of linkage here , shaped by its own interests in securing demarcation .
We doubt that things can be dealt with quite so simply when it comes to the settlement of conflicts .
There is still a broad gulf between intentions and actions in Europe 's foreign policy in terms of achieving peace on the continent .
On the Chesa report
Preparation for UN General Assembly Special Session of June 1997
The next item is the report ( A4-0083 / 97 ) by Mrs Dybkjær , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the communication from the Commission entitled : ' a common platform : guidelines for European Union preparation for the United Nations General Assembly Special Session to be held in New York in June 1997 to review Agenda 21 and related outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development held in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992 ' ( COM ( 95 ) 0569 - C4-0656 / 96 ) .
Madam President , just in the last few days , two clear examples from the heart of Europe - Paris and La Hague - have shown that the world is a long way from sustainable development .
The first example is the warning signals which are now being posted in Paris .
If the pollution becomes just a little worse , cars will only be allowed on the roads in Paris every other day .
The second example is the escape of radioactivity at La Hague .
In other words , we have car pollution on a scale which we used to think was reserved for places such as Mexico City and , at a pinch , Athens , which is after all a long way away - with apologies to Greece .
The pollution has now struck deep into Europe 's central nervous system , just as the escape from the processing of nuclear waste is of a scale which we used to think was reserved for the former Soviet Union .
It is against this background that we should view today 's report , which deals both with how we should put our own house in order and move towards sustainable development , and how we should bring our influence to bear on the international stage .
Having made these introductory comments , I should like to thank the members of the committee and also the Committee on Development for their work on this subject .
I am pleased that there has been such a broad measure of agreement on an approach which seeks to tighten up the negotiating proposals put forward by the Council and the Commission .
Clearly , this gives added weight to the European Parliament , and that is badly needed .
I was present at Rio in 1992 , and I remember well what the atmosphere was like when the conference came to an end .
There were certainly no wild scenes of jubilation - the results were not far-reaching enough for that - but there was a certain satisfaction at the adoption of Agenda 21 , and that sustainable development had thus been put on the global agenda .
The mere fact that the countries promised each other that they would work positively towards sustainable development was a step forward in itself .
Now , five years later , we unfortunately have to ask ourselves if the world 's leaders had their fingers crossed behind their backs when they delivered their promises .
As already illustrated by my opening comments , things are still moving in the wrong direction in a number of areas .
We shall not have to foot the bill for this , but will pass it on to future generations , who will have to pay it with compound interest added .
It is becoming more and more expensive to achieve sustainable development , the longer we wait to take action .
The first task of UNGASS must therefore be to make clear the seriousness of the situation and to put sustainable development back at the top of the international agenda .
At the same time , it should be stressed that we do not need prophets of doom .
We should recognize the progress which has been made , in spite of everything : no one should be led to think that the task is so great that this is not of any use .
That only leads to paralysis .
We should be forward-looking , which means that we should be constructive , purposeful and realistic .
Ultimately , this is a question of political will , and it is appropriate for us to start by showing some of this ourselves .
In practical terms , this means that the European Parliament has laid down a limited number of key priorities , which show where we ourselves should take action , where the world must take action in the first instance , and what we therefore expect as regards the final outcome of UNGASS .
The EU has a very special responsibility which we are not fulfilling at the moment , neither internally nor externally .
Internally , we are still a long way from sustainable development .
Clearly , our international negotiating position is weakened if we are unable to put our own house in order .
We need to tackle this , for example by revising the fifth action programme on the environment .
Externally , the EU has not supported the developing countries to an adequate extent .
The other rich countries certainly have not done so either , indeed they are actually worse than us , but that is no excuse .
It is incredible that only three of the Member States are fulfilling the Brundtland report 's recommendation that at least 0.7 % of GNP should be donated in development aid .
The most important thing for the developing countries , however , is for them to be integrated into the international economy .
Sustainable development is not only about the environment , as the rich countries might otherwise seem to think .
It is also about creating reasonable conditions for the developing countries to move forward .
The aim is to improve the partnership between the rich and poor countries in order to encourage sustainable development .
Such a partnership can only be successful if we recognize that different parts of the world have different problems .
In our part of the world , the problem is overconsumption .
In others , it is called survival .
If leaders from all over the world are still meeting at these international conferences , it is because there is coming to be an understanding that we live in a world of common fate .
Our task now in UNGASS is therefore to evaluate , to reassess , to revitalize - speaking more figuratively , to give the process a kick in the pants .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the PPE Group supports the report by Mrs Dybkjær on the subject of sustainable development .
Unfortunately , the Rio Conference has so far produced very few really positive results .
This situation has to change , and I am pleased to say that we agree on that here in the House .
For example , if the production of CO2 continues throughout the world as indicated in the last five years , the result will be an economic , humanitarian and environmental disaster .
The argument which is often put forward - that the European Union is not in a position to solve this problem throughout the world , because of course we are not responsible for all the CO2 emissions , and there are high rates of increase in India or China , for example - is unacceptable , although it is a comfortable argument if one wishes to do nothing .
If we , as major industrialized nations , cannot manage to reduce our emissions of CO2 and other harmful substances , then those who are campaigning for environment policy in the newly industrialized and developing countries will have no chance of success .
We must therefore act as a positive role model , and more should be done in this respect .
At the same time , however , we must act intelligently .
I always put it dramatically and say that we do not need to go back to living in caves , but must use modern technology to cut down on CO2 and other harmful substances .
Only then can we be a real model , because the people in the developing countries would also like to achieve prosperity , and we have to show that - with modern technology - sustainable development , prosperity and conservation of the environment are all possible .
I believe - and once again this is a very current issue , which was discussed yesterday by the Commission - that fiscal measures are also needed for this purpose .
The Commission 's proposal for an energy tax is a weak one , but it is at least a step in the right direction , and the European Union should at last begin to take some action here !
Madam President , the European Union has so far been principally an organisation for trade , economy , markets and competition .
This is good , but it is now time for environmental issues , social questions and employment to move up on the agenda , partly because this is necessary for world development and partly in order to strengthen our relationship with the general public and to increase their confidence in the EU .
This is an excellent report and a good example of how these questions can be raised .
I myself had an opportunity of visiting Rio de Janeiro in 1992 during the U.N. conference on the environment and development .
I was not in any way representing the Government , but a non-state organisation , Stockholm County Council , plus an environmental organisation called ' the People 's Campaign Against Nuclear Power in Sweden ' .
The whole experience was fantastic and left me with an urge to achieve something positive .
I believe that the conference was a breakthrough , although mainly in terms of public opinion .
The actions taken as a result of the conference were however rather poor .
In many areas the development has in fact gone backwards , some of these areas being the ones raised in Rio ; the question about biological diversity and the climate .
This must be changed !
The report reveals many beneficial proposals that must be carried out if we are to produce a credible environment policy for the world around us .
Let me take up some examples and their positive aspects : Agenda 21 has been introduced by many countries .
As an example I can mention that this program has been tried by the Swedish communities for every individual citizen to be able to work with environmental questions locally .
We have accepted Agenda 21 for the Baltic Sea and have made some progress in our work .
As mentioned in the report , we must also raise the level of our ambitions prior to the conference in New York .
The EU i.e. our Member States , must also set a good example , so that we at least can fulfil the minimum requirements of the environmental directives which we ourselves have adopted .
Our concern for the environment must be incorporated in all areas from transport to energy , consumption , trade and the contact with developing countries .
The proposal for binding international legislation and an environmental court is very good .
I would also like to emphasise the following things : Alternative fuel , bioenergy instead of nuclear power , extended environmental labelling and manufacturer 's product responsibility - all this will simplify environmental choices for the individual person which is the best method of improving the environment .
The question of a carbon dioxide tax must be resolved and we must also ensure that procurement is carried out with regard to environmental issues by the communities , the county councils and by nations .
The European Union can become a powerful instrument in pushing forward environmental improvements within the EU and in the world at large .
This is an excellent report .
It is now up to us to make this work successfully .
Madam President , in truth , I am unaccustomed to speaking for four minutes , so I don 't know if I will be able to use them up .
We agree with the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , with Mrs Dybkjaer 's report and the amendments that other Groups have tabled .
She herself recommends modifications to her report which also improve the text at the end .
We are in agreement with some significant aspects of her report .
Firstly , she states that it is indeed true that there have been positive results since the 1992 Rio Summit , for example the Climate Change Convention and the Biological Biodiversity Convention .
However , the following is also true , namely that we are further away now from genuine sustainable development than we were in 1992 .
And it is also true that the European Union must take a very active part in the forthcoming United Nations Summit .
As she herself says , we probably lack the credibility we ought to have , since the objectives the European Union set itself in Rio have not been achieved .
Perhaps it should be remembered - this is an extremely significant debate taking place within the Committee on the Environment - that it will be very difficult if not impossible to succeed in limiting CO2 emissions at their 1990 level .
The Commission itself acknowledges that they cannot be limited - they will only increase .
There is also a call for the environmental aspects to be integrated into the Treaty . This , for us , is a fundamental aspect .
For many years there have been calls for environmental policy to be common to all European policies : agricultural policy , industrial policy , economic policy , etc . , but this is not how things are , integration has not yet been achieved .
We therefore agree with what the rapporteur says about the need to have specific objectives , to state precisely what these objectives consist of and the fact that there should be a proper plan aimed at achieving them .
I would not like to end without emphasizing something extremely important in the report which was key to the Rio Summit and is still key today .
By this , I mean the failure to transfer resources from the developed to the developing world .
The rapporteur herself quotes figures in her report which are truly illustrative , stating that , in 1990 , the richest 20 % of the world 's population enjoyed 30 % more income than the poorest 20 % and that , in 1995 , this percentage had doubled , the income difference between the poorest and the richest populations being 60 % .
Therefore , if we do not achieve progress in this direction , it will be very difficult to fulfil the Rio objectives and to renew commitment to them at the forthcoming United Nations Summit .
In short , I hope that , tomorrow , Mrs Dybkjaer 's report will be approved at voting time , because this will constitute a platform document enabling the European Union to adopt a united front at the forthcoming UNGASS Summit , this being the next summit to review , restore order to and give new impetus to the Rio objectives .
In truth , if we were to look at the contents of Mrs Dybkjaer 's report in all its minute detail , we would have to devise a different economic and consumer-oriented model because , if the developed world does not reduce its level of consumption and does not help the developing world increase its own level of consumption to survival levels , it will be very difficult to impart renewed vigour to these objectives .
I believe that the European Union , together with the Non-Governmental Organizations and local and regional authorities , has to play a fundamental role at the forthcoming United Nations Summit .
Madam President , the Green Group also congratulates Mrs Dybkjær on her report , which it welcomes .
In Rio , the industrialized countries accepted the main responsibility for the worldwide environmental crisis and for correcting the ecological mistakes of the past .
As yet , no action has followed this expression of remorse .
That point has already been made .
Environment and development policy is stagnating , and indeed we should actually be talking about a ' roll-back ' in environment policy .
Nor has the EU taken on a pioneering role .
It gauges its measures not by the scientific need for them , but by the willingness of industry to compromise .
Of course , the same also applies to the Member States .
Hence the energy tax in Germany is blocked by the argument that Brussels is responsible for it , and Brussels argues that the responsibility lies with the USA and Japan .
It is clear to us that the sparkle of Rio has gone .
Now we can see the reality .
And the reality is that we have no biodiversity convention , no biosafety protocol and no climate protocol .
Kyoto is scheduled for December , and we still do not know if we shall succeed in adopting a protocol on climate protection there .
And we are still miles away from a convention on forests .
Not even Rio could agree on that .
We must therefore put the subject of sustainable development back at the top of the world 's political agenda .
The Special Session of the General Assembly in New York must send out some clear political signals , to the effect that implementation of Agenda 21 needs to be binding - too many of its provisions are still optional .
We really need binding force here , the introduction of minimum social and environmental standards in world trade , a binding framework convention on climate , with a biodiversity convention containing climate and biosafety protocols , and an agreement on the protection of forests .
I hope that UNGASS succeeds in doing this , because otherwise Rio will have achieved nothing , and we shall be set back years in our discussion of the environment .
Madam President , I should like to begin by thanking both the Commission and the rapporteur , Mrs Dybkjær , for their very positive efforts towards making a success of the UNGASS conference at the end of June 1997 .
This will be difficult enough , since the enthusiasm for Agenda 21 that was generated in Rio in 1992 is now ebbing away .
Of course , this is partly because steps are now having to be taken to put sustainable development into practice .
Targets are having to be set , schedules met and past promises kept .
In short , the time has come to do battle to reduce environmental damage in both the developed and developing countries .
This is all taking place against a background of declining interest in the environment and development .
Other subjects such as unemployment and meeting the EMU criteria are competing for the attention of governments and public alike , and it is obviously difficult to keep attention focused on long-term projects such as environmental protection and development .
That is why it is so important to give the environment fresh impetus as an issue .
We need not only a strong and effective policy , but also people , leaders , who are capable of putting it into practice , leaders whose personalities are likely to inspire and who are prepared to persevere in the long term .
Mrs Brundtland has been doing this for a long time now , and her report made a noticeable difference to people 's thinking on sustainable development .
Now that we have come to the actual implementation of Agenda 21 , perseverance will be important .
Will the main players be able to get to grips with the practical implications of Agenda 21 ?
I think the Commission and the rapporteur have identified a number of good priorities here .
We certainly need flexible organization within the UN , with better work structures and more money , but the main need is for all countries to show determination in working towards the targets set , particularly on climate policy , for example .
New York will be a very important preparation for the conference in Kyoto , and the Commission is right to focus on it .
It is encouraging that the Dutch presidency has succeeded in reaching agreement on the CO2 reduction target for 2010 , and although we really need much more than 15 % , at least we now have agreement within the Union .
We will have to do everything we can to persuade the United States to come up with a percentage target too .
I think that this form of ' burden-sharing ' that we have now developed in Europe could well serve as a model for the rest of the world .
It is logical for the biggest users to bear the heaviest burden , and since the United States accounts for more or less a quarter of all energy consumption each year , it must have certain obligations towards the rest of the world .
I sincerely hope that it will take the lead on environmental policy , because otherwise UNGASS will not be a success .
Mr President , the Group of the Party of European Socialists supports Mrs Dybkjær 's report .
We are facing the reality that the rich countries have not shown sufficient commitment to the priorities agreed at Rio , either in their own actions or in helping the Third World .
Species and habitats , especially forests , are still declining across the world and this underlines the pressing need for agreement on a forest convention .
The Commission 's communication is predictably cautious and Europe must take a lead at UNGASS in calling for a more far-reaching programme , in particular to demand binding environmental legislation and targets .
We should be looking more carefully at the non-compliance issue and the implementation of existing multilateral environment agreements .
UNGASS is a step on the road to the Climate Change Conference in Kyoto in December and climate change continues to pose an enormous challenge .
There seems to be little momentum to change the status quo .
It is essential therefore to push for an agreement on abatement of greenhouse gases and a target for CO2 reductions of 20 % by 2010 with more to follow .
The only way that we can begin to forge a partnership with poor countries is for ourselves to show a good example so that we in Europe should be working towards this reduction by 2005 .
Vision and leadership are the missing ingredients at the moment to meet the global environmental challenge and we need both of these at both of these conferences .
Finally , the European Parliament must formally be associated with the European Union delegation to these conferences and I look forward to a commitment on that from the Commission .
Mr President , it has taken five years for many of those who criticized the organization , development and results of the Rio Conference in 1992 , who even went as far as organizing a parallel meeting , to now recognize that the objectives and items that were approved at Rio continue to be a reference point , a very important reference point for future decades .
I had the honour of representing this House at the Rio Summit and I am pleased that there is this convergence and that there is now recognition that it was a landmark in history acknowledging , at world level , that the concepts of sustainable development and environmental protection were complementary and not opposed .
In my opinion , much more progress has been made than is being acknowledged today in this chamber .
I pay tribute to the laudable effort Mrs Breyer and other colleagues have put in and to the concern they show . They see everything in fairly black terms .
My feeling is that we ought also to see the situation somewhat more ' greenly ' .
There is , however , one topic which causes me concern , because it was a problem at the Rio Conference , namely the European Union 's presentation : governments and the European Commission have to come to an agreement to the effect that this joint Commission / Parliament resolution genuinely represents the European Union with a sole voice at the conference .
This is a call we have to address to all governments .
I also believe that it is fundamental to insist on the final resolution - there are some essential points .
One worthy of special consideration must be the request to governments that they strengthen the environmental dimension of their macro-economic policies .
Another must be giving a higher profile to the considerable problem of trade at world level and of environmental protection , which is another concern of this Parliament . National policies must be consistent with international resolutions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to thank Mrs Dybkjær for her excellent report , even if it does not make pleasant reading .
A temperature increase of 2ºC by the year 2030 , a rise of 50 cm in the world sea level , an alarming fall in the area of rain forest - the unwelcome trends in the environment go on .
We rejoiced at Rio .
Today , we are disappointed .
We have hopes of New York .
Perhaps this is our last chance .
We all know that first the forest dies , then the people .
Climate change is alarming , there is a shortage of fresh water , there is radioactive waste - why do we make no progress , when we are all familiar with everything ?
In my opinion , a very important point here is the fact that many countries , including a good many in Europe , still believe that economic development and conservation are opposites .
That is wrong !
Conservation creates jobs , it gives fresh impetus to the economy , it is a great challenge for research and technology .
The Germans invented the social market economy .
The Austrians - I am proud to say - invented the eco-social market economy .
This means using the market mechanisms for conservation , it means creating economic incentives to reward environmentally friendly conduct and to punish pollution .
And it also involves using taxes to exercise control .
I believe that only the EU will really succeed in providing the necessary political weight for conservation and development aid .
Only the EU , only the rich countries , only the economically developed nations can really succeed in reconciling the economy and the environment , and in enabling both the economy and the environment to flourish !
, Vice-President of the Commission . ( ES ) Mr President , the debate in this House today is undoubtedly very opportune , given preparations for the special session .
I would like to thank Mrs Dybkjaer for the report she has submitted on the subject .
As you know , last November the Commission approved a communication regarding this matter and the Council approved its conclusions in December . In the intervening six months up to June 1997 , account must be taken of all the important preparatory work that is being done .
With this debate and with your report , Mrs Dybkjaer , Parliament has the opportunity to play a part in defining priorities with a view to the special session , bearing in mind the changes which have occurred .
Firstly - this is the Commission 's opinion - it must be acknowledged that there was no real progress at the Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization last December on subjects relating to commercial exchanges , trade and the environment .
In addition , as predicted , negotiations regarding a protocol on the Climate Change Convention , establishing binding objectives in the form of a reduction of emissions of greenhouse gases , are proving , predictably , to be very difficult .
Lastly , the Intergovernmental Group on forests concluded its deliberations last month without defining recommendations on a whole series of key topics , including the need for a forest convention .
Obviously , all these topics - commercial exchanges and the environment , climate change and forests - require political impetus at the highest level at the special session .
The resolution is on target regarding this point and , naturally , the Commission would be delighted to continue conversations with the European Parliament with a view to defining our strategy on the basis of our 1996 communication , which is still our major strategic approach .
As regards climate change , as a number of members have pointed out , certain decisions have already been taken in the Environment Council which relate to the reduction and quantification of harmful emissions .
Although the target is 2010 , an agreement between Member States has finally been reached .
It might be thought that progress on reductions could have been made more rapidly , but the fact that an agreement has already been arrived at on this thorny subject at the Council of Ministers is one more step forward .
In this context , we regard it vital to concentrate on legally binding reductions by 2005 , 2010 and 2020 .
The demand formulated in your report , in subparagraph 18 D of your resolution , for a global maximum emissions limit , is interesting , but , to be realistic , you ought to accept that this will in any case be a fairly long-term aim .
Another very important priority for the special session which the European Commission would like to highlight is the growing scarcity of fresh water and the implications of this for people , agriculture , food security and also poverty .
Finally , there is another very important matter mentioned in your resolution : the flow of finance to developing countries , sustainable development naturally having to be supported by both public and private development aid .
This is obviously an important aspect influencing sustainable development which makes it possible , as some of you have stated , to export environmental technology .
Therefore , as Mr Valverde rightly pointed out , there is no such contradiction between development and environmental protection ; there are many complementary aspects and it is important to make progress aimed at increasing this type of capital transfer .
Admittedly , in overall terms over the last few years , the increase in direct investment in countries in the southern hemisphere has been spectacular , but one has to look at this critically since , although the figure is spectacular in global terms , we can see , if we examine the volume of investment , that what is actually happening is that there is a concentration of such transfers towards so-called emerging regions which are in fact developing very rapidly . This does not reflect reality in all countries , much less in the poorest countries .
Lastly , I would now like to refer to the Commission 's working programme on sustainable development .
We think that , over the next few years , we ought to define a series of priorities . It is our belief that the limits set in the resolution are appropriate for effective progress .
Lastly , regarding European Parliament participation , the Commission obviously agrees , as in the past at the Rio Conference , that the European Parliament should participate in the United Nations General Assembly session .
Mr President , I would like to ask the Commissioner how this institutional participation is envisaged .
He mentioned that the European Parliament will be represented , but how will the Commission itself be represented and how will matters be coordinated with the Council ?
Will the Member States have to waive their right to take part on an individual basis and will there be just one spokesman ?
I ask this because , at the Rio Conference , our role was somewhat uncoordinated .
Secondly , will we be able to take to this Conference an evaluation of the national plans agreed to by the various governments which signed the Rio Agreements and , above all , Agenda 21 ?
The Commission has given us no information on this aspect .
, Vice-President of the Commission . ( ES ) Bearing in mind that the Intergovernmental Conference will apparently be able to rationalize this problem , I am able to tell you what the Commission would like .
Regarding this subject , as regarding all others connected with external relations , the Commission supports the Presidency of the Council / General Secretariat of the Council + Commission system representing the executive part and the management part .
Then we think that the European Parliament should be represented within the Community delegation as Parliament .
I believe this is the most rational approach .
To move on , you mentioned something which could involve us in a potentially lengthy debate .
At the next Summit , if you will allow me to call it that , it will be very difficult for the European Union to be represented by one party . The EU made a public undertaking at the Rio Summit - as both you and I remember very well - to make available a budget of ECU 2000 million , this being aimed specifically at solving problems arising in connection with the future of the world environment .
We all know that our Member States were never able to approve such a figure nor even to agree as to the distribution of such an amount .
We have to recognize this fact .
Very few States have fulfilled their financial undertakings contained in the Rio Group 's decisions .
In my opinion , what we need now is prudent reflection together with the Council . The next step , naturally , will be to bring up the matter of evaluations of each and every one of the Member States which , I believe , it will be possible to do together with the Commission .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Withdrawal of GSP from Myanmar
The next item is the report ( A4-0085 / 97 ) by Mrs Theorin , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposals for Council Regulations :
I.temporarily withdrawing access to generalized tariff preferences for industrial goods from the Union of Myanmar ( COM ( 96 ) 0711 - C4-0085 / 97-96 / 0317 ( CNS ) II.temporarily withdrawing access to generalized tariff preferences for agricultural goods from the Union of Myanmar ( COM ( 97 ) 0058 - C4-0086 / 97-97 / 0041 ( CNS )
Mr President , I welcome the three reports from the Committee on Budgets , the Committee on Development and Co-operation and the Committee on External Economic Relations all of whom support the proposal .
I am glad to be able to say that the Committee on Foreign Affairs also stand unanimously behind the proposal .
In December 1994 , the European Union and Burma entered into an agreement giving certain industrial products generalised tariff preferences .
On the 1 January this year , an identical agreement concerning agricultural products came into force .
The agreements can be revoked at any time in the case of forced labour .
The definition of forced labour in this connection was defined by the Geneva convention in 1925 and 1956 .
The Commission has on the basis of the complaints about industrial products and agricultural products which in June 1995 and on 1 January 1997 were filed by the European Trade-Union Organisation and the International Free Trade-Union Organisation , carried out an investigation into alleged forced labour in Burma .
The result of the investigation showed the military regime had made forced labour a frequent occurrence and a demonstrable reality .
Forced labour means mass deportation of men , women and children in conjunction with the construction of certain infrastructures that often lead to the people forced to work being killed or mutilated .
The human rights situation in Burma has been of concern to the European Union and the European Parliament for a long time .
I have in the explanatory statement described the human rights situation in the country .
The military regime came into power by force in 1988 .
A reasonably free election was allowed in 1990 but the leader of the democratic party , Aung San Suu Kyi , who in 1990 was awarded the Sakharov prize for freedom of thought by the European Parliament , was not able to stand for election .
She has been under house arrest since 1989 .
The democratic party won the election with an overwhelming majority , but the military regime did not respect the election result and remained in power .
According to information received , 18 per cent of the elected Members of Parliament are being held as prisoners .
San Suu Kyi has requested that all foreign investors should pull out of the country which is what Pepsi , Levis , Apple and other companies have done .
There is strong evidence that human rights are extensively violated , e.g. summary executions , torture , rape and other harassment of women , assault and battery of prisoners , etc .
In addition , freedom of speech , freedom of assembly , religious freedom and mobility are also being severely restricted .
According to Amnesty , two thousand people are today imprisoned as a result of having demanded human rights reforms and harsh restrictions still apply to Aung San Suu Kyi .
Amnesty International declared the year 1996 as the worst year this decade for human rights in Burma .
The European Union is now not alone in reacting to the situation in Burma .
In USA , a proposed bill has been drawn up for action to be taken against Burma .
In addition , many companies from both the USA and the EU have now cancelled their investments in the country , in many cases as a result of a consumer boycott and other pressure campaigns .
However , it is embarrassing to see that certain European companies financially , politically and morally support the military regime by still being involved in projects with the regime .
Forced labour has been used for building hotels , roads and other infrastructures .
A large group of Members of the European Parliament has therefore pleaded with Club Med in a letter today to halt its tourist packages to Burma .
The Commission 's proposal to impose specific sanctions against Burma is entirely new in its way and well worth supporting - and we give them our full support .
This is the first time that the European Union has proposed sanctions against a country that is consciously violating human rights through forced labour .
I therefore appreciate - even if it is an obvious point for me to make - that Parliament has been heard in this matter .
The regulation about the generalised tariff preferences lays out in detail how a temporary cancellation is to be carried out .
How they are to be reinstated is however not mentioned .
Hence , I have proposed that the Commission should continuously monitor the circumstances surrounding forced labour .
Should there be evidence of forced labour ceasing to exist , the Commission should , after thorough investigation , submit a proposal to the Council which after having informed the European Parliament should decide whether the regulations should all be revoked .
Naturally , it is of the utmost importance to inform and consult Parliament about the reinstatement of the generalised tariff preferences .
It would not only be ironical if Parliament was not to be consulted about the reinstatement of the preference system , as Parliament was consulted on the cancellation of the generalised tariff preferences , but totally unacceptable from a political point of view .
Finally , let me call attention to an irritating detail .
The result of the Commission 's investigation has not been made public .
I have in my capacity as a rapporteur asked Commissioner Marin on several occasions if I may study the contents of this report but have always been refused on the basis of some official legal reasons .
I do not disbelieve the Commission 's conclusions arising from the investigation but see it as a question of principle .
Parliament must be able to study the documents in a matter of this sort .
The least one can request is therefore for the rapporteur to have access to or to be able to study the investigation documents ; this is crucial when introducing tariff preferences .
It has been a hard day 's night for the Commissioner and for us all .
However , I still wonder , Commissioner Marin , if we ought not to look into the possibilities of finding a solution so that Parliament can gain an insight in the future ; I can accept that it has not happened this time .
I have hopes of Parliament supporting the proposal unanimously and that the Council on the 24 of March will decide to revoke the generalised tariff preferences .
Anything less would be a scandal and would create a strong political reaction .
Mr President , the European Union is for the first time imposing sanctions on a country which is violating workers ' rights , and we must welcome this decision to withdraw Burma 's access to the generalized preference system .
For many months , we in this House have been campaigning for measures to be taken against this military junta in Burma , as mass deportations of men , women and children continue to take place .
The Burmese army is involved in these practices and is maltreating these victims of forced labour .
According to the ICFTU , the number of people involved is 800 , 000 , several thousand of whom are said to have died already at these sites .
Consequently , on 6 June 1995 , the international trade union confederations filed a complaint with the Commission requesting that Burma be excluded from the GPS as far as industrial products are concerned .
On 1 January 1997 , the same unions filed the same complaint with regard to agricultural products .
Two-thirds of Burmese agricultural and industrial exports benefitted from tariff reductions at that point .
In view of the appalling disregard for human rights , it was essential that the European Union should react , even if it did not go as far as a full trade blockade .
However , we would like to see the Commission adopting an even more pro-active attitude : in addition to the decision taken by the European Commission , it would also be appropriate for the Member States and the Council to adopt an identical position towards Burma and impose harsher sanctions , the more so since , although these procedures are commercial , their political impact must not be underestimated .
In addition , Burma 's membership of ASEAN causes a serious problem .
Although this is exclusively a matter for the States making up that body , it would be appropriate for the European Commission to maintain pressure on the States in that region and to reinforce what it calls the critical dialogue that it seems to have instituted .
Finally , I should like to make one comment on behalf of my group , because we would like to see the same determination applied to every country that shows this kind of contempt for workers ' rights and indulges in forced labour , which is slavery under another name .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Theorin on her excellent report which has been brought before the House today .
Action against Burma is well overdue .
I welcome the proposal to withdraw access to the GSP or generalized tariff preferences for industrial and agricultural exports .
This will cost Burma an estimated ECU 2 , 262m in additional customs duties .
The grounds for these economic sanctions are quite clear .
The use of forced and slave labour in Burma breaches the Geneva Conventions of 25 September 1926 and 7 September 1956 and Conventions 29 and 105 of the International Labour Organization .
There are other broader moral grounds for taking action against Burma .
SLORC , the State Law and Order Restoration Council , is a brutal military dictatorship which violently seized power in 1988 .
SLORC refused to accept the result of the 1990 election which was won by the opposition National League for Democracy .
Aung San Suu Kyi , who won the 1990 election , has been the victim of house arrest and continual harassment .
Apart from the killing and wounding of slave workers , the general human rights situation is appalling .
Disappearances , rape , arbitrary arrest and execution are the order of the day .
Political opponents , ethnic minorities and the wider population face daily intimidation and worse .
Against this background it is to be welcomed that a number of US and European companies , including Heineken , Carlsberg and PepsiCo , have pulled out .
But other companies still trade in Burma , turning a blind eye to the human rights abuses occurring all around them .
TOTAL Oil company and Club Med continue to do business in Burma .
There is documented evidence of human rights abuses at the sites of TOTAL 's gas pipeline project , including the execution and torture of forced labourers .
This is just not acceptable .
What are these European companies doing with Burmese blood on their hands ?
The European Union should continue to question Burma 's possible future membership of ASEAN .
ASEAN 's credibility will only be damaged if Burma is offered membership of this prestigious South-East Asian club in the near future .
It will also complicate ASEAN 's relations with the EU .
For many years the European Parliament has called for a clause guaranteeing the fundamental rights of employees to be included in agreements when the EU grants generalized tariff preferences .
Such social clauses could be used to improve human rights across the world .
Certainly when our political and trading partners fall below universally accepted standards of human decency , it is right that the EU should impose political and economic sanctions .
I warmly support Mrs Theorin 's report .
I hope the EU maintains the pressure on the Burmese authorities so that they feel compelled to embrace democracy and liberate the Burmese people from their suffering and oppression .
Mr President , Burma is a country with a violent military dictatorship , and with an elected opposition leader - or really an elected president - who received 80 % of the votes and has been under house arrest and effectively held hostage for six years .
It is a country where 80 % of the elected members of parliament are imprisoned or have disappeared .
It is a country where a sizeable section of the population are obliged , through forced labour , to help to build all manner of government projects , a country where slave labour is being used .
It is a country where , according to Amnesty International , the worst human rights violations are happening at the moment .
There are still people who ask what is wrong with this relatively unknown country , why the United States Congress has passed a law banning investment , and why the European Union is proposing to withdraw its tariff preferences , which is effectively the start of an economic boycott .
I hope that all these facts show that the regime in Burma is not fit to govern and can no longer be respected or tolerated by the international community .
I am delighted that the Commission has reacted positively to Parliament 's resolutions of July 1996 and October 1996 , and has put forward this proposal to withdraw the system of tariff preferences .
I should also like to congratulate the Commission on its careful work in determining the nature and scale of the slave labour .
It has done a most thorough job , so no one can accuse it of proceeding hastily and without due care .
In 1994 , I was Parliament 's rapporteur on the preferences system , and we were then very careful to include the clause which we are now using .
And this example - the first time the clause has been invoked - shows that it contains some good provisions and can be applied in practice .
I am therefore quite happy with the approach we adopted in 1994 .
Parliament is sure to approve this sanction against the military regime in Burma today , and the next step is now up to the Council .
I would like to ask the Commissioner what the situation is in the Council .
Does he think it will approve this proposal fairly quickly ?
I have two further comments to make before I end . This proposal to withdraw the system of preferences marks the beginning of an economic boycott .
If this does not help , we must be prepared to go as far as the US Congress , and ban investment .
Secondly , as has already been mentioned , we should urge people not to go on holiday to Burma , and we should call on all holiday companies and tour operators to stop organizing trips to Burma , because the hotels and all the rest of the infrastructure for the tourist industry are being built with the help of slave labour .
I hope that the steps we are taking in Parliament today are quickly followed up by the Council , but I hope most of all that the opposition leader who is currently being held hostage will one day become president of her country , that the members of parliament who are in prison can one day take their seats , and that human rights will be respected .
I wish Burma well , and I hope that our actions here today will do some good .
Mr President , today 's debate is quite timely as industrial leaders in different parts of the world are pressurizing governments into dropping any plans for sanctions against Burma .
Earlier this week the US-ASEAN Business Council , which represents the cream of American and South-East Asian business people , made a strong denunciation of economic sanctions against Burma .
Instead it called on the US to adopt a strategy of constructive engagement with the Burmese authorities to maintain economic links with Burma while pushing for change .
Constructive engagement was exactly the policy which Ronald Reagan pursued in South Africa .
That policy prolonged the suffering of black people and it was only when the international community was mobilized into taking strong economic measures against South Africa that the apartheid regime crumbled .
Recent events in Burma also show the need for decisive action at EU level .
The oppression of Burma 's six-millionstrong Karen minority has become increasingly ferocious over the past few months .
The Karen are seeking an autonomy which the British guaranteed them when they made Burma independent in 1949 .
There have been numerous allegations of mutilation , rape and indiscriminate firing on civilians fleeing across the Burmese-Thai border .
The Burmese military junta cannot use its ongoing conflict with the rebels of the Karen National Union as an excuse for attacks on civilians .
Amnesty International has estimated that almost 2 , 000 people were arrested for political reasons in Burma last year .
The vast majority of them are believed to have been involved in entirely peaceful activities .
When the Burmese Prime-Minister-in-exile visited Dublin recently he expressed fears that the European Union would ease its pressure on the generals in power for trade reasons .
We need an assurance from both the Commission and the Council that this will not happen .
The Greens fully support the EU 's decision to withdraw trade preferences for Burma on both industrial and agricultural goods , but more action needs to be taken .
TOTAL , the French state-owned oil company , has been active in Burma for many years and there have been allegations that it has used forced labour , including child labour , in its work .
A few months ago it , along with the US company UNOCAL , signed a new contract with Burmese oil and gas enterprises to expand natural gas explorations in the Andaman Sea .
This summer ASEAN is expected to admit Burma as a member .
During the ASEAN January meeting efforts were made by certain foreign ministers to keep human rights off the agenda .
If Burma is admitted the EU must raise its ongoing abuse of human rights there at every opportunity .
Mr President , Presidents of Parliament pass by , honourable Members come and go , but Commissioners remain .
That is all to the credit of Commissioner Marín and it is all to our advantage , because the Burma question is one of his cases and I am very glad it is .
I think this decision to suspend the GPS is particularly important because a meeting to set up an international network of support for democracy in Burma has just been held in Tokyo .
So I think that the signal that could be sent by the European Union is particularly important for the Asian countries , many of whom attended this forum in Tokyo and exhibit a great deal more interest in this matter than the European Union does , I must admit .
But that doesn 't mean that it isn 't important .
Also , I believe the decision is an important one because it is the first of its kind in the European Union 's policy .
This is in fact the first time we have used such a strong instrument of economic policy in the interests of defending human rights and advancing democracy .
I congratulate Mr Marín for having handled this matter as he has .
I should say to previous speakers who believe that Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi has a great deal of charm - which is also my belief - that there are other people in various countries in that region , such as Wei Jingsheng and Wang Dan and many other dissidents , who also have a lot of charm .
I hope that will give them ideas for the future .
I shall not ask Mr Marín if he thinks Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi is particularly charming , but I would like to ask him if he thinks - and I hope he won 't pass this straight on to Sir Leon Brittan - that it would be possible , at the request of the European Parliament , to launch similar procedures for other countries in the region .
I think that the present case involved an initiative by the unions , but would it not be possible for Parliament itself to take the initiative in similar procedures to suspend the GPS for other countries in the region ?
To my way of thinking , this would represent a determined and positive step by the European Union towards strengthening its foreign policy .
Thank you , Mr President .
First and foremost what I would like to do is to add my congratulations to those of the rest of the House to Mrs Theorin for her excellent report and very sensible amendments to the text .
It is also very good to have the opportunity to congratulate the Commission on what is a historically significant action .
I think the action on preferences on industrial and agricultural products is very welcome , although the complete ending of trade , particularly by oil companies such as TOTAL and Premier , is sadly not yet likely .
But those measures do at least bring the EU into line with the strong US position .
What I would like to do is actually share some views - from experience , rather than just received through the media .
If you go to Rangoon covertly as I and others did late last year you unequivocally see the child labour and the forced labour on the roads in Rangoon district , building the hotels and the roads there .
You see the high emphasis that the SLORC regime places on international investment there .
Today I and colleagues Kinnock , Thomas and Ford have presented a strong protest to the Club Med travel company here in Strasbourg , demanding that they stop their tours and their activities there and take notice of the others that have pulled out , however attractive the Burmese people and country are .
Vital though western action is , SLORC will continue to be underpinned by neighbours such as China , who , it is alleged , have a flourishing , poisonous , underground drugs and jewel trade through the country .
This directly funds and nourishes the repressive regime which is murdering indigenous peoples near and across the Thai border as we speak tonight .
In that context the moves to include Burma in ASEAN are deeply depressing but predictable , and I call on the Commission in all trade negotiations with the ASEAN states to urge them to reconsider .
I hope that these actions on GSP are effective and do weaken the SLORC , but while they take effect I hope that this House will recognize the dedicated work of all the people striving for democracy in Burma , as well as the Burma Action Group , other networks , and NGOs , keeping open international contacts and channels of hope .
We in this House cannot debate Burma every month , but we must think how we can help the Burmese people every day until they are free , and this report and these proposals are a part of that process .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when the European Union granted tariff preferences to Myanmar - formerly Burma - in 1994 , the political situation there was already extremely tense .
Nonetheless , relief was given for certain industrial goods and agricultural products , not least in the hope that improvements in the social situation could be achieved .
The opposite has happened .
In Myanmar , human rights are trampled over , and ill-treatment , arrests and torture are everyday occurrences .
The democracy movement is subject to repression , and for years now Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi , President of the National League for Democracy , has been under house arrest .
She is a holder of the Sakharov Prize and of the Nobel Peace Prize .
How can we effectively combat a regime which treats those holding different views as criminals ?
As has already been pointed out , the forced labour taking place in Myanmar is a form of slavery which breaches the international agreements , the Geneva Convention , the ILO Convention and so on .
Suspension of the tariff preferences is absolutely essential .
In the opinion of the Commission , the Council , the NGOs , Amnesty International and the State Department , human rights abuses in Myanmar increased further during 1996 .
It has been and remains the aim of the European Parliament to make development cooperation dependent on respect for human rights , an example of this being last year 's cooperation agreement with Nepal .
Parliament must therefore be consulted before any future decisions by the Council on the restoration of tariff preferences , as rightly proposed by the rapporteur , Mrs Theorin .
A legal basis exists for this to happen .
We must continue to apply pressure through the political and economic means at our disposal .
No consideration can be shown towards ruthless policies .
At the same time , we wish to give a sign of encouragement to the democracy movement in Myanmar .
Its peaceful resistance to the junta which has seized power is exemplary .
It deserves both solidarity and success !
Mr President , I welcome the Council 's proposals to withdraw access to GSP for both industrial and agricultural goods from Burma .
Hopefully this action will put further pressure on the military dictatorship of the SLORC in that sad country to stop its massive use of forced slave and child labour to construct its infrastructure of hotels to try to boost its tourist trade .
Last December Mrs Kinnock and I visited Aung San Suu Kyi clandestinely .
We videoed an interview with her .
Her message was absolutely crystal clear : End investment in Burma ; impose sanctions .
Clearly these would not be without impact on the Burmese people .
Yet the need for action was absolutely clear to her and who better to speak for the Burmese people .
In 1990 her party , the National League for Democracy , received 80 % of the votes .
When Mrs Kinnock and I returned from Burma we took the opportunity to meet both with Commissioner Marín and the Irish presidency .
They were both sympathetic but were awaiting the response from the regime to a request from the Commission for an investigation team to visit Burma to investigate the allegations of forced labour .
Within a few days of our meeting the Burmese junta peremptorily refused permission for the Commission to visit .
We therefore congratulate the Commission and the Council for moving so swiftly .
I would particularly like to congratulate Commissioner Marín for the very tough line he took in Singapore and the way he stood up to the criticisms from some Member States .
I also hope that the industrialists of Europe are listening to this and that TOTAL and Club Med will follow the line taken by Heineken , Carlsberg , PepsiCo , Levi , Apple and Thomas Cook .
Two final points .
The European Parliament is rightly emphasizing its links with Asia .
As one of the Bureau members of the Japan delegation , I had a meeting yesterday with other representatives of Asia delegations to talk about ASSET II , an inter-parliamentary meeting between Members of the European Parliament and the Asean parliaments .
I hope it is crystal clear to everybody that will only include Asean parliaments with which we have a relationship .
Finally , I would like to ask Commissioner Marín if he could assure us that the Council is not now going to block this proposal because of the actions of a fag-end government in one Member State .
, Vice-President of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , the Commission would firstly like to express its thanks for the support given by the European Parliament to the recommendation to withdraw the preferential treatment Myanmar enjoys under the generalized system of preferences because , to a degree , Mr Ford , if we manage to have this decision approved on 24 March next at the Council of Ministers , it will be the first time that the Commission , Parliament and the Council of Ministers have managed to agree - the first time - on the fact that certain social standards have to be respected within the sphere of trade also .
An additional point , regarding the European Parliament 's viewpoint : the Commission - I myself - recommended that the Council consult Parliament on this proposal owing to the political interest this institution had always expressed in the observance of a specific system of social ethics in international trade .
Independently of the way in which it is applied , I would like the decision to be made on the 24th . We will then have time to consider how it will be applied in the future .
The reason for this ?
Essentially because the basis of the decision we have to make was specifically to verify the reality and extent of the use of forced labour in Myanmar and the responsibility of that country 's authorities in this matter .
To achieve this objective , the Commission opted for a procedure which was intentionally long , complex and detailed so that the rules established in the Regulations of the Generalized System of Preferences were scrupulously complied with , with a sole objective : that when the Commission proposed withdrawal , there could be no possibility of legal attack .
The decision depends on Parliament and the Council of Ministers .
Now there are no excuses .
A decision has to be made and whoever answers ' yes ' will have to explain it politically . Whoever answers ' no ' will also have to explain themselves .
It is not possible to say ' There are defects in the procedure , the work has not been carried out satisfactorily , therefore the judicial procedure has to be repeated once again ' .
Therefore , I always stated - Mrs Maij-Weggen will remember - that I preferred to be slow but sure .
Therefore , the Commission 's services , in cooperation with internationally acknowledged experts who assisted us , proceeded with the task of verification and the analysis of 42 witness statements , and heard various witnesses who have had to be protected under the terms of a confidentiality agreement .
Our opting for confidentiality is based , Mr Dupuis , on the fact that there was no advantage in publicizing to the military junta exactly who was coming forward as a witness .
I myself lived under and worked against a dictatorship in my own country , Spain , and I know how basic a requirement it is when one is underground to be as prudent as possible with regard to persons lending assistance from the inside .
This work therefore , logically , has to be undertaken confidentially .
The facts were examined and the Myanmar authorities were given a verbal note asking them to take part in a meeting with a view to ensuring the procedure genuinely included views from all sides . This was done irrespective of the intellectual or political repugnance any one of those of us there may have felt .
In a verbal note , the Burmese government rejected our invitation . However , the Commission has upheld the idea that this is a procedure in which all sides can state their views , by protecting the confidentiality of those who were giving statements and , secondly , also giving the authorities in Rangoon the chance to have their say .
We arrived at the conclusion , under our responsibility , that forced labour continues to be used on a large scale under the direct responsibility of the authorities at all levels .
Forced labour in Myanmar affects the population as a whole , without distinction for age or sex , both in rural and urban areas , although the inhabitants of urban areas have greater financial resources enabling them to purchase exemption from such work .
Cultural and religious pretexts were refuted by the witnesses and , naturally , contacts were also made with the Buddhist area of the country , where it was in fact confirmed to us that Buddhism is in no way a protection against slavery .
Consequently , the Commission decided to propose this withdrawal of access to the Council , independently of the argument as to whether this is a CFSP decision or a ' Commission 113 ' decision .
Mr Dupuis , I think it would be a very bad thing , this week , prior to the Council of Ministers ' decision on the 24th , to discuss whether this concerns doves , partridges , rabbits or hares .
We are attempting to establish a precedent , set up a basic principle and a body of law .
Then we will have time to look at how to structure this initial solution in the future .
This is my point of view but , naturally , I respect Parliament 's autonomy and sovereignty .
Finally , Mrs Maij-Weggen , Mr Ford and Mrs Theorin , I hope that the Council of Ministers makes the decision .
If , after all the work we have done , after all that happened in Singapore , after this debate in the European Parliament , we are incapable of making a decision in the Council of Ministers , I , for one , will be deeply unhappy .
But I hope that we will indeed be able to make it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 8.05 pm )
Approval of the Minutes
The minutes of yesterday 's session have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , on page six of the Minutes of yesterday 's sitting , three reports are listed under what is referred to as the ' Hughes procedure ' .
I would prefer in future for the correct rule from the Rules of Procedure to be quoted , instead of using the name of some random Member .
We have actually finished with the approval of the Minutes , but I shall pass on the suggestion that we could perhaps add something to the expression ' Hughes procedure ' , in order to make it clear to those Members who do not understand what is meant by that expression .
( The Minutes were approved )
Madam President . I just wish to inform the House that tomorrow morning in Liverpool a commemorative service will be held for our late colleague Ken Stewart .
The President 's Office has very kindly agreed to send a letter of condolence .
I want to record my thanks to the President for that .
Given that the Commission is here , I also wish to mention that last week the Commission issued a press release supporting an expedition to investigate the wreck of the bulk carrier Derbyshire , which vanished in the Pacific in 1980 .
This was an issue which Ken Stewart fought long and hard for in his years in this Parliament and he would be most pleased that the Commission is investigating this .
Indeed , as we all know , he fought very hard on all issues of maritime transport , for the safety of those who earn their living and the passengers who sail on the ships .
So we are pleased to record that the Commission supports the expedition .
Ken would be pleased .
Thank you for this information .
Madam President , on a point of order .
I refer to the tragic events on the Israeli-Jordanian border yesterday .
I would ask the presidency to send an appropriate note of condolences to the people of Israel and particularly the families involved .
Thank you very much Mr Hallam .
Madam President , I should also like to go along with the request made by the previous speaker and send my condolences in respect of the terrorist attack perpetrated yesterday in Israel , which cost the lives of six schoolchildren and a teacher at the Jordanian border .
I think that there are deeds which go against the peace process but there can be no greater assault than the irreparable loss of human life .
I think that the Parliament should therefore send its condolences and condemn acts such as this one .
Thank you very much Mr Vallvé .
Madam President , I should like to say that I share Members ' special commitment to the Middle East .
I would ask Parliament to observe a minute 's silence , so that we can give special expression to these tragic events , and show how much we , as Members of the European Parliament , wish to be involved , in every way , in the events taking place in the Middle East .
Thank you very much Mr Sichrovsky .
Votes
Madam President , on a point of clarification .
Yesterday , Commissioner Marin made it clear that he understood that this decision was going to have to be made on the basis of unanimity .
Certainly , in earlier discussions , the point had been made by the Commission in formal discussions that the decision in principle which required unanimity had already been made and the implementing decision would only require a qualified majority vote .
Can the Commission look at this point and come back to us ?
I will gladly arrange for this point to be checked again , but obviously I am not in a position , here and now , to give any opinion other than the one given by my colleague yesterday .
Madam President , there are a number of countries where the human rights situation is very depressing , but in Burma the situation is particularly extreme .
The military regime abuses people in the most terrible manner , not only by using forced labour for infrastructure projects , but also by forcing people to work as pack animals transporting arms and ammunition for the army .
As the rapporteur also described , slave labour is not the only abuse in Burma .
People are being driven out , being forced from their homes and killed .
The desperate plight of the two million minority in the Karen tribe deserves special consideration here .
The United Kingdom promised when it left Burma in 1948 that this overwhelmingly Christian tribe would have the right to self-determination .
A few weeks ago , the Burmese army started a major offensive against the Karen National Union , triggering a flood of refugees across the border into Thailand , which then refused to protect them .
So in addition to the issue of forced labour , there is every good reason for the Council to consider the Karens ' desperate fight for survival against the Burmese regime and the Thai Government .
This is the first time that the Commission has proposed to apply world trade sanctions on humanitarian grounds , and it has certainly done its work very thoroughly .
Forced labour is one of the grounds for withdrawing preferences mentioned in Article 9 of the regulation .
From what Commissioner Marín has said , the Council seems certain to adopt the proposal unanimously on 24 March .
One question that has not been answered is the conditions attached to the continued withdrawal of preferences .
Will the preferences be restored if forced labour is abolished ?
Or will it be a condition that the human rights situation in general must be improved ?
And how does the treatment of Burma relate to countries like China , Cuba and Libya , where there are also many human rights abuses ?
We hope that the Commission will be able to give us details in due course .
We unreservedly support the proposal to withdraw tariff preferences for Burma .
Dybkjær report ( A4-0083 / 97 )
We are nearly blue in the face using the term ' sustainable development ' , given the virtual paralysis of the European Union in developing this concept worldwide .
At various times , we in the European Parliament have already maintained that the Rio Summit , for many European leaders , was little more than a photo opportunity and unfortunately we have been proved right .
There is no political will and without political will and economic solidarity , with so little north-south dialogue , it is going to be very difficult for us to achieve the aims of Agenda 21 , since as the rapporteur properly points out , the worldwide environmental situation has gone from problematic to alarming .
The European Union must take much of the responsibility in order to achieve any success in the New York Conference .
What do I want them to be told ?
I think that the current Commission is going through bad times - that is why it is necessary for the European Parliament to play the role which the citizens of Europe have given us in this area and strengthen its presence at that Conference .
Therefore , my vote is going to be above all a sceptical one .
Permanent abandonment premium for winegrowers
The next item is the report ( A4-0077 / 97 ) by Mr Martin , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 1442 / 88 on the granting , for the 1988 / 89 to 1997 / 98 wine years , of permanent abandonment premiums in respect of wine-growing areas ( COM ( 96 ) 0706 - C4-0047 / 97-97 / 0009 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , Council Regulation No 1442 / 88 of 24 May 1988 on the granting , for the 1988 / 89 to 1997 / 98 wine years , of permanent abandonment premiums in respect of wine-growing areas was last amended by Regulation 1595 / 96 of 30 July 1996 .
The amended regulation provides that the Member States shall designate the regions affected by the grubbing-up measure .
This decision may be made subject to conditions designed to guarantee a minimum level of production in the areas in question and respect for the ecological balance .
I should remind the House that , on the occasion of the debate on the 1996 / 97 price package , I and a number of other Members tabled certain amendments on grubbing-up .
Those amendments were rejected in the plenary on the ground that there were not enough vines in the European Union .
At that time I highlighted the specific problems of Charentes .
Unfortunately , some of those in the trade adopted a somewhat demagogic stance .
I regret that because , in view of trends in the production and consumption of wine products in the European Union , there is clearly a structural surplus for the 1996 / 97 wine year of around 15 million hectolitres .
The abandonment policy therefore needs to be brought more into line with economic and environmental reality so that it provides stronger incentives and ceases to be irreversible .
Rapid answers are therefore needed .
To achieve that end , a number of measures are proposed .
The first is to extend the period of applicability of planting rights , which at present is only eight years , eight wine years , after that in which a duly declared grubbing-up of vines has taken place .
Some wine-growers are therefore tempted to replant their vineyards before the date on which their right to do so expires .
The new system should make it possible to extend this period of validity to twelve wine years , and this should include the rights currently held by wine-growers .
Next , a temporary abandonment scheme is proposed .
The abandonment premiums as defined by Regulation 1442 / 88 involved permanent abandonment and caused extreme inflexibility , which renders the measure less effective .
The new system proposes temporary abandonment for a period of 12 years , with a premium of 40 % of the permanent abandonment premium , and the abandonment may be the subject of a transfer as referred to in Article 7 ( 2 ) , second subparagraph , of Regulation 822 / 87 , or replanting within a period of eight years after grubbingup .

These measures could both improve the transfer of enterprises , inter alia by enabling young wine-growers to become established more easily , and at the same time help enterprises to respond to developments in their market .
Temporary abandonment is therefore a dynamic rather than a static response to changes in markets and enterprises .
The measures proposed in this chapter are not contrary to current provisions planned for the 1996-97 wine year , but would allow wine-growers additional measures to increase the flexibility of enterprises in relation to market trends .
In the particular case of wines subject to Article 36 , it is important to consider the value of this procedure .
It is clear - the main example being the special case of Charentes - that producers obtain very high yields , far exceeding the capacities of the traditional outlets , which consequently disrupt the traditional markets of other wine-growing regions .
Finally , with regard to regional development , it should be borne in mind that some regions are economically dependent on wine-growing .
Permanent abandonment entails an irreversible loss of economic potential .
For obvious reasons , both temporary and permanent abandonment must remain voluntary , and therefore no element of compulsion should be introduced .
That , Madam President , is what I wanted to say about this report .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are dealing , by urgent procedure , with the Commission proposal to postpone the time limit for presenting applications for permanent abandonment premiums by one month , i.e. from 31 December 1996 to 31 January 1997 - note January , despite the fact that today 's date is 14 March .
My group , the PPE , supports Mr Martin 's report .
Mr Martin is proposing that the time limit should be postponed not by one month , but by three .
This certainly makes sense , not only because the time limit has already expired anyway , but also because Member States are experiencing real difficulties in implementing the set-aside scheme .
As a result of the changes introduced in 1996 by Regulation No 1595 , set-aside quotas were allocated to Member States for the first time .
For example , my country , Germany , was given only 50 ha for the permanent abandonment of wine-growing areas .
Major problems arise simply from the question of how this small area is to be distributed among the 13 wine-growing regions .
It must be possible to transfer areas for which no application for abandonment was made in 1996 / 97 to the following wine year , so that the grubbing-up quota does not lapse .
The permanent abandonment of wine-growing areas , and thus the withdrawal of areas from wine-production , is a measure intended to stabilize the wine market in Europe .
The structural surpluses in the EU still amount to about 15 million hectolitres .
The first market-regulating instrument in the case of wine has to be sales promotion .
We must make every effort to maintain our market shares , and also to increase our exports .
Only in this way can we protect jobs in Europe , and only in this way can we guarantee that our culture and our cultivated landscape are preserved .
In the European Parliament , we have asked for financial resources for wine sales promotion , as part of the new arrangements for the organization of the wine market .
The reform of the organization of the wine market still leaves much to be desired .
Fundamental changes are needed .
What we are doing now is a mere patching-up exercise .
Grubbing up vineyards without offering any alternatives for individual regions may be the ruin of those regions .
This would , of necessity , result in structural compensatory measures .
Wine production is an economic factor in Europe .
Good wines are produced throughout the world , and they are penetrating our markets , both inside and outside the EU .
By unilaterally withdrawing from the market , we are losing not only economic potential and jobs , but also a piece of our cultural identity .
Market regulation must be tackled with moderation and understanding , and the permanent abandonment of wine-growing areas must always be done - and here I agree with Mr Martin - on a purely voluntary basis .
It must also be possible to control it in such a way as to ensure that it is the less successful sites , and those sites that do not help to shape our cultivated landscape , that can be taken out of production .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , grubbing-up is one of the Commission 's favoured ways of reducing production .
But there are many others .
Downstream , there is distillation , a traditional tool .
At the production stage , the grapes can be harvested before ripening , fertilizer use can be reduced or ceilings placed on yields .
Upstream , mention should be made of programmes relating to the planting of quality varieties , automatically reducing production .
Finally , vineyard areas can be reduced by permanent abandonment , the main instrument used by the Commission and the only one that receives 100 % financing .
However , wine production can also be reduced , for example , by diversifying the outlets for grape products : we have grape juice or its derivatives , for example , or grape sugar although this is still a marginal method .
Getting back to the idea of reducing production through quality , we need to realize that by 2010 , 5 % of European consumption will come from biological farming - including wine .
Furthermore - and this is what matters - quality wines under a registered designation of origin or local wines will constitute the majority of the market .
What quality wines have in common is that the yield per hectare is low ; so they do offer a genuine way of controlling production .
As for grubbing-up , it should remain , for preference , a tool to be used for the restructuring and requalification of vineyards .
Thus , in my own region of Alsace , thanks to a strict quality policy , yields have fallen over twenty years from 120-130 litres per hectare to about 60 hectolitres for the best growths .
By the combined implementation of strict quality policies , therefore , the wine-growers have succeeded in maintaining their incomes while reducing production volumes , without abandonment , and while increasing their export markets .
As far as I am concerned , I still reject a general policy - a suicidal policy for Europe 's wine-growers - designed to control production by permanent abandonment with all its familiar effects on the countryside in wine-growing areas , on soil erosion , on the abandonment of the land resulting in economic decline , rural exodus and youth unemployment , not to mention the lost means of production for the world market .
Any such policy is in total conflict with the desire for integrated rural development and the protection of the land , and it conflicts , too , with the idea of regional economic development which , as we know , relies essentially on agricultural resources such as vine and wine products .
And , of course , I have said nothing about the cultural , historical and symbolic aspects of vine growing , which can look back on two or three millennia of tradition in southern Europe .
Its permanent abandonment has to be regarded as an act of radical surgery , to be undertaken only in extremis .
Grubbing up the vines to replant them with a view to quality production is the only sane way of planning this measure . So any policy of grubbing-up must be selective and temporary .
It must include an economic aspect , in the form of increased premiums per hectare , a social aspect in the form of retirement aid and establishment aid for the young , and an environmental aspect - here I am thinking of sanitary set-aside and erosion prevention .
All this must , of course , go hand in hand with a controlled policy for those regions that really do have surplus production for which they cannot find a market .
In conclusion , I would say that only a realistic policy , appropriate to the needs of the population , the environment and an increasingly high-quality market , is capable of achieving the objectives which we think the European Union should be aiming at in terms of viticultural policy .
On this basis , the Group of the European Radical Alliance obviously supports the report by our colleague Mr Martin .
Madam President , in some European wine-growing regions we are witnessing an escalating crisis of excess production which should be eliminated immediately by a carefully structured programme of action .
We support Mr Martin 's report , because it contains not only immediate measures to achieve this but also useful suggestions for the future .
The immediate measures are those proposed by the Commission for the 1996 , 1997 and 1998 wine years , but they are merely a stopgap .
They do not solve the whole problem .
This is why our group studied the second part of the report , on the improvement of the grubbing-up procedure , with the greatest interest .
The need now is for the Commission to move quickly to present proposals aimed at reforming the common organization of the wine-growing markets , a project which has been hanging fire for two years although the European Parliament previously made proposals on the occasion of the Fantuzzi report .
As far as this reform is concerned , the abandonment aspect must take due account of the rapporteur 's proposal .
Apart from the looming crisis , it is absolutely essential to preserve a future for our wine-growing regions .
The only way of achieving that is voluntary , temporary grubbing-up rather than permanent abandonment .
It is a matter for regret that the House did not follow our lead on the occasion of the 1996-97 price package by voting in favour of the amendments proposed by our group , which have now been adopted by the rapporteur .
We were told at that time that there were no wine surpluses .
Well , we know today that the European Union has had to distil no less than 15 million hectolitres during the present wine year .
What a waste ! What losses for our wine-growers !
Let us retain a degree of flexibility in the management of wine-growing enterprises , through temporary grubbing-up .
And let us remember that any permanent abandonment entails the equally permanent loss of the right of production , and that the land thus released can no longer receive aid under the CAP .
Regarding the specific case of Charentes , it would be suicidal to abandon permanently , as some people have nevertheless suggested , some 20 , 000 hectares - 25 % of the wine-growing potential of the region .
Those vineyards would be allowed to lie fallow , and we would see the loss of a vital economic asset in that region and the destruction of a traditional human equilibrium .
For these reasons , we urge that the reform of the common organization of the markets be pursued as soon as possible .
Madam President , Mr Klass has expressed my group 's position and I do not want to repeat what he has said .
Instead I want to make the link with the general issue implicit in this morning 's debate , which is the need to renew structural measures in the wine-growing sector to update rules that are now obsolete and no longer capable of meeting current needs .
As other members have said , action must certainly be taken to reduce the surplus further , focusing on quality and market outlets . Action must also be taken through measures like grubbing-up and replanting to reinvigorate the wine-growing sector for the future and take account of the real situation in the geographic areas of the European Union .
I do not know if the solution is to renew the COM which , by the way , was approved by Parliament a year and a half ago . Nor do I know whether we also need to review the proposals we made then .
I do know that last year I myself tabled an amendment to the ' price package ' , which was passed by the Committee on Agriculture and which made it very clear that Regulation 1442 / 88 on grubbing-up was such an antiquated , obsolete and rigid regulation that it should not be extended and that there was therefore a need to draw up a new regulation which would take account of the need to establish a market balance between demand and supply , affecting the nation states , but also specific geographic areas .
An example is the region of north east Italy where all of local wine production is sold and where further market outlets are needed .
So we need to have a more flexible instrument which reflects the specific positions of European Union regions .
First of all , we should like to thank the rapporteur and Parliament for accepting the urgency of this proposal .
It goes without saying that we shall have to make the changes proposed here if we want to continue to operate the measures that have proved so successful up to now .
Naturally this is not a final arrangement to improve the organization of wine-growing areas and wine markets ; that much is absolutely clear .
Those speakers here today who have said that of course this is only a continuation of what we have already been doing are quite right .
However , the Commission has not said anything different .
On the contrary , in this regulation we have indicated , yet again , that this arrangement is needed only until the final measures have been proposed and adopted .
I should like to thank you for the debate that we have had here today .
We have no problem in accepting all three amendments , and so we shall now be able to push this measure through very quickly .
The fact that it is to be implemented by the Member States , and that difficulties may arise in the process , is quite right .
That is , after all , what happens when you have a system of subsidiarity .
If certain tasks are delegated as a result of subsidiarity , then of course it becomes more difficult for those who have to take on those tasks .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Madam President , naturally I have supported the excellent report by Mr Martin , because the interests of our wine growers are at stake .
But I did so with a heavy heart , because of course any withdrawal from production of wine-growing land means a setback as far as our culture and civilization are concerned .
Mrs Klaß was right when she said that the areas of poorer land should be the ones to be set aside .
Often , however , the only question is how to decide which are the poorer areas .
We are fortunate today , that our session is being presided over by a President who represents one of the best wine-growing areas of Europe , namely Lower Franconia .
I am very glad about that , because it sends out a positive signal , because we must be quite clear about one thing : set-aside is a setback .
We must do more to concentrate our deliberations on the effects on people 's health of moderate wine consumption .
We must urge the Council Presidencies to finally do something about it .
Unfortunately , Ireland and the Netherlands have done nothing , and so we are now putting our faith in Luxembourg , which is itself a wine-producing country .
Finally , I should just like to say , quite clearly , that we should be doing all we can to spread the message that , as Europeans , we should be drinking less Coca Cola and more wine .
We are voting in favour of the report , especially as we believe the entire policy of helping to close down vineyards on such a large scale is wrong .
It should be the market and the individual wine-grower who should decide when to close down a vineyard .
In addition , the proposal would involve higher subsidies for closing down vineyards in the Charente region .
Setting a longer timescale will also facilitate payment of the subsidy .
In summary , the proposal involves an expansion of the subsidy policy which we cannot possibly support .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Guarantee against losses for EIB loans
The next item is the report ( A4-0078 / 97 ) by Mr Tomlinson , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a Council Decision granting a Community guarantee to the European Investment Bank against losses under loans for projects outside the Community ( Central and Eastern Europe , Mediterranean countries , Latin America and Asia , and South Africa ) ( COM ( 96 ) 0586 - C4-0018 / 97-96 / 0278 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , guaranteeing European Investment Bank loans in third countries has long been a concern of the Committee on Budgets .
Historically we have seen a pattern of role reversal in which the European budget has been assuming all the risks and yet the major political decisions have been taken by the European Investment Bank .
In a resolution of Parliament on loans and guarantees last year in July , Parliament expressed yet again some basic principles that the Budget Committee has long held : firstly , the necessity to protect the Union 's general budget from exposure to higher loan risks ; secondly , the need to ensure an adequate provisioning of the guarantee fund in relation to the level of risk coverage ; thirdly , the assumption that defaults on guaranteed loans are increasing , as well as the risk to the European Union budget .
Because of the historic position we have taken , it was Parliament that insisted at the time of the last major revision of the financial perspectives that there should be a separate guarantee fund established in order to protect the budget from exposure to the guarantees it gave to EIB loans .
At the European Councils in Cannes and Madrid it was concluded that the European Union would extend the lending and borrowing activities of the Community to third countries .
We , as they say , had established the principles on which we wanted to see those guarantees provided .
The proposal that has now come from the Commission , instead of renewing specific mandates to those parts of the world that are mentioned in the title ( Latin America , Asia , South Africa and the Mediterranean ) , is seeking to renew the loans together globally , under a single mandate ; and also , simultaneously , to make the expiry dates coincide with the period covered by the financial perspective while reducing the guarantee to the European Investment Bank to 65 % .
Although the Commission proposal was made properly and in due time , the Council of Ministers has been laggardly indeed in the way it has dealt with it .
Once again I draw the attention of the House to the fact that something that could be the subject of conciliation seems to be debated without adequate representation from the Council .
We have approved , in principle , the aim of the ECOFIN Council which was expressed as far back as November 1995 : that the responsibility of the European Investment Bank for loan risk should be increased .
We consider that the chosen proposal was an interesting change in the approach .
But it is clearly inadequate , in our opinion , to achieve the declared aim .
We feel that there is still the possibility of the European Union budget being exposed to greater risk than before in the proposal that the Council has chosen to follow .
The reduction of the guarantee will , we believe , lead to an increase in the global amount of the loans available , thus increasing the potential risk to be borne by the European Union budget .
The responsibility of the European Investment Bank is increased because the risk that default payments are more than 65 % is close to zero .
In considering what is a highly technical but also highly political proposal , the European Parliament Budget Committee has proposed two amendments , which follow the traditional view expressed in this House .
At the same time , the Budget Committee is commending to the House the somewhat more political , less technical amendments that have been adopted by the appropriate committee to give an opinion - the Committee on External Economic Relations .
With those few introductory remarks I commend the report .
I urge the House to support not only the two amendments of the Budget Committee but those that were tabled by the REX Committee in its opinion and have subsequently been adopted by the Budgets Committee .
Madam President , the subject of guarantees by the European Community to the European Investment Bank against losses for loans granted for carrying out projects in third countries is of great importance for the European Union 's co-operation policy .
The EIB 's loan operations are in keeping with the objectives of that co-operation policy .
The aim of the Commission 's proposal is globally to renew all of the existing mandates concerning third countries .
The uses and instrument of the European Union 's co-operation policy means that the guarantees which the Community gives the European Investment Bank for external loans should be shared out in a balanced way among the different regions .
That is why I wish to express my satisfaction to the Committee on Budget and Mr Tomlinson for having approved and incorporated into their report the opinion of the Committee on External Economic Relations which I hope will also be approved by the Assembly as whole .
The need for the European Investment Bank to step up its activity to finance exemplary transfrontier projects between countries in the Mediterranean Basin and the lack of appropriate infrastructures in the areas of transport and telecommunications are one of the main obstacles to development of external and interregional trade as well as regional co-operation in general .
It is therefore necessary to guarantee improved visibility of the financial effort .
It is necessary for the citizens to perceive and know that the Community is taking part in the joint financing of projects together with other international financial institutions .
The need for the assessment of the functioning of the new guarantee system to include an assessment of its economic and social impact on beneficiary countries is a vital element which will allow these countries to accelerate their economic development and guarantee the most effective possible use of resources and guarantees under the Community budget .
I also wish to mention the timetable suggested in the opinion of the Committee on External Economic Relations , adjoining the report , and the demand for periodic information from the Commission to the European Parliament on the economic and social impact on the beneficiary countries of these loans .
I also wish to express by satisfaction at seeing that Amendment No 4 has been included - in it the Committee on External Economic Relations proposes that the overall guarantee limit should be redistributed among the regions in order to strike a coherent balance .
In the Commission document it was possible to note a timetable for loans from 1997 to 1999 in which Asia and Latin America were the only regions in which the volume of guaranteed loans remained capped to the level of 300 million ECU .
This has been resolved by the last amendment and I should like to thank the European Parliament for approving these amendments and the Tomlinson report by the Committee on Budgets .
Madam President , in the Bible it says that Moses , when he saw the Jews dancing around the golden calf , smashed the Ten Commandments in his anger .
I am always reminded of this picture when I listen to Mr Tomlinson , because the Bible also says that this was a righteous anger , and I am grateful to Mr Tomlinson , for bringing righteous anger into this otherwise too peaceful House !
However , I should also like to add something to what Mr Tomlinson has said .
It is not directly connected with it , but there is a connection , nonetheless .
We are dealing here with the fact that , in our credit policy , we are gradually losing our conscience .
We criticise the Albanian government for not banning the pyramid selling schemes .
But we come up against other pyramids , and we ourselves are involved , every day , in building pyramids .
What our banks are doing here is no longer tolerable .
They are not putting their own money in , they are putting in the money that belongs to the people who have invested it with them , just like the pyramid schemes in Albania .
I read in this morning 's papers that we are once again going to give a large loan to Russia , but I think we should start to realise that there are political risks there that make these loans extremely dangerous , and that we should therefore be much more careful .
I am also very grateful to Mr Tomlinson for once again pulling the communication cord with regard to the European Investment Bank , because slowly but surely we are heading towards a nasty shock as a result of these loans that we are giving to Russia .
We have already given them much too much .
On the other hand , when it comes to certain countries that have been liberated from Communism and are demonstrating that they are conscientious , countries such as Hungary and the Czech Republic , we slam the brakes on , whereas Russia is receiving unlimited credit , and slowly but surely this will place our savers at risk .
I should therefore like to thank Mr Tomlinson and ask him to keep up the good work , so that eventually we can restore real order here .
( FI ) Madam President , the European Investment Bank was founded to promote those objectives which the EU considers most important .
Financing must also be directed at third countries .
The activity of the European Investment Bank is not risk-free , because it is directed at projects in which the common good has to be defended and striven for .
If it was risk-free , financing would be obtainable for development projects from other lending institutions , and the European Investment Bank would be unnecessary .
The report before us states that the financing risks are divided into political and economic risks , and that the EU guarantees only the political risks .
Political risks are regarded as arising from the banning of foreign currency transfers , compulsory payments , wars and internal unrest .
This definition seems obvious , but in practice it is hard to distinguish between political and economic risks .
Economic difficulties are , for example , also often caused by internal insecurity and unrest .
Very often it is political difficulties which cause damage to economic activity .
Therefore , in my opinion , a practice ought to be introduced whereby loan decisions contain a political risk assessment , otherwise , when a default occurs , the temptation may be to blame purely political factors .
Two types of practice would be possible : either each country in question would be assessed in advance and a decision taken for that individual country on what proportion of the EIB 's risk in the country was political in origin ; or each financing decision should have an assessment annexed to it concerning the division of the risk between political and economic factors .
As I said , inability to pay arises only rarely from a single factor .
Therefore in my opinion the concept of political risk should be agreed upon in such a way that , in the event of a default , the damage would be divided in advance into political and economic risk .
For example , if the bad debt was ECU 1 million and the political risk had been assessed in advance to be 40 % , under the proposal in this report the European Union guarantee would be only ECU 400 000 .
In other words , this decision would not be allowed to cause the relationship between the political and economic risk to be changed subsequently .
Mr President , subject to these remarks I am prepared to adopt the report .
Madam President , once again our discussions here today have concentrated , quite rightly , on the question of how such risks should be covered , and that is , of course , Mr Tomlinson 's main proposal .
Mr Tomlinson knows that this question has been discussed within the Commission , in other words in the Budget Committee .
We indicated that the system proposed by him , in our opinion , need not be applied , at least at the present time , for the following reasons , which I shall quote in English :
' The new Guarantee system for EIB lending in practice is because of the substantial improvement on the outlook of the possible defaults for 1997 / 1999 relative to the recent past and the probability of the Guarantee Fund reaching its target amount in 1997 and the likelihood that the fund would be able to cover potential defaults in the medium term . '
These were the reasons given to Mr Tomlinson for the Commission 's position .
He asked then for a note which we gave him and he was kind enough to judge it as interesting but not relevant .
( Laughter ) Of course we took note of that as well .
I would propose that for the time being we can accept the first half of the first amendment but for the rest we would like to stick to the present system , as we have said .
If Parliament wants to go to a conciliation procedure that would be interesting - and relevant !
The Commission noted the applause with which Mr Tomlinson 's speech was greeted by his colleagues and I began to fear that he was preparing himself for a cabinet post in the next government .
However , when he was praised by Otto von Habsburg , this fear disappeared .
( Laughter )
Madam President , I deliberately only took four and a half of my five minutes because I thought thirty seconds might be needed to reply to the Bangemann circus .
When you heard those words read by Mr Bangemann it shows the predictive capacity of the Commission depending on a crystal ball .
It was promising that everything in the future is likely to be better than the empirical evidence of the recent past .
Hope springs eternal !
We have to be more prudent with our responsibilities for the Community budget .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , on a point of order .
Very briefly , Madam President , Mrs Green , the chairman of the Socialist Group , is not here , but I am sure that what I have to say will be passed on to her .
I should just like to follow her example in extending a welcome to a group of visitors in the gallery , who have come here in accordance with the rules ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
This is not the time for speeches .
I am sorry , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , but we are going to hold a vote now , and this is not the time for giving a speech .
The Rules of Procedure do not allow it .
Perhaps you could say what you want to say personally to Mrs Green .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
RTD cooperation with emerging economies
The next item is the report ( A4-0066 / 97 ) by Mr Pompidou , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the communication from the Commission entitled ' Promoting RTD cooperation with the world 's emerging economies ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0344 - C4-0494 / 96 ) .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , I am standing in for the rapporteur , Professor Pompidou , who has been called away to Paris - as you mentioned , Madam President - by other commitments .
I do so with pleasure , both out of respect for Parliament and because of the involvement I have had in the debates on this report in the Committee on Research and the Committee on External Economic Relations .
The Commission 's communication on cooperation in science and technology with the emerging economies covers design and implementation of specific cooperation instruments adapted to the characteristics of groups of countries with economic situations not classifiable under traditional categories for developing countries .
There is a continuum of economies in transition between rich industrialized countries at one end , and really poor developing countries at the other . Economies in transition are progressing towards industrialization at their own pace and therefore present dual features , with prosperity and poverty existing side by side , state-of-the-art technology alongside underdevelopment , economic sectors and people on welfare , aggressive firms on the international market , demographic growth and economic expansion attracting foreign investment to high addedvalue businesses .
All this means cooperation on a basis of equality with our companies and research institutes is now possible . Amongst the emerging economies I naturally want to mention China , India , Brazil and the countries of south east Asia , sometimes called ' the tiger economies ' .
Describing a developing country as an ' emerging economy ' does not mean that country immediately moves into the category of industrialized country .
The best formula needs to be examined case by case .
Here I should mention that it is part of the remit of the Committee on External Economic Relations to discuss whether a specific protocol on research and technological cooperation detailing the sectors concerned , should be included in each new association agreement that the Union establishes with third countries .
The report from the Committee on Research concurs with the European Commission on the parallel use of different assistance and cooperation instruments when those countries present dual characteristics .
The motion for a resolution emphasizes the need for any cooperation in advanced sectors of science and technology with the emerging economies to be organized within a framework of equal rights and responsibilities so as to permit genuinely reciprocal benefits , taking account in particular of the protection of intellectual property and the safeguarding of employment .
One important point in the Pompidou report relates to setting up a research exchange programme with the emerging economies .
The European Union is host today to less than 10 % of the population of young researchers from Asia active in western research laboratories , the great majority being concentrated in the United States .
As well as making their intellectual ability available to their host countries , these young researchers often return to their countries of origin , where they become part of the management class , formers of opinion and culture , and they bring with them the baggage of personal relationships developed in the countries that hosted them .
Given the imbalance as regards presence of Asian researchers in the Union , there is a real risk that the European Union will lack visibility and that could translate into commercial difficulties .
The student and researcher exchange initiatives with the emerging economies must be strengthened in the Fifth framework programme , keeping them on as reciprocal a level as possible .
This criterion of reciprocity should be geared to stimulating collaboration in areas where the emerging economies have already shown a high level of competence and competitiveness , and in the final analysis that is the core of the Pompidou report , which I naturally recommend to the approval of Parliament .
Thank you , Mr Malerba , for your words and for so efficiently standing in for Mr Pompidou .
We are aware of your excellent knowledge of this subject .
Mr President , the Socialist Group warmly welcomes the communication from the Commission on the emerging economies and the need for closer cooperation in the research and development area , and very much welcomes the report by Mr Pompidou .
We are sorry he is not here this morning but we congratulate the rapporteur nonetheless and also thank Mr Malerba for the very considerable attention he has given to this very important issue .
These economies are developing very rapidly .
We know that the Japanese and the United States are already very firmly established in these areas , so there is a need to act decisively and quickly .
The biggest difficulty we have , though , is to put it into some sort of picture .
I received in my mail this morning some interesting figures showing world energy demand .
If you look at the per capita use of electricity , for instance , the countries we are talking about use at the very most only one third of what we are using .
Some of them you can hardly see on the chart .
If you look at the density of vehicles we are up at 500 per 100 , 000 population and when you look at the countries that we are talking about in this report you need a magnifying glass to try and work out what the vehicle density is .
A tremendous explosion is going to take place in the not-too-distant future in the scientific and technical area .
The subjects that have been highlighted by the Commission for attention in the agro-industry area , in health , in communications technology , non-nuclear energy and biotechnology are all very relevant to this explosion and we very warmly welcome the way in which the Commission has put this together .
There are going to be specific workshops in some of the countries and some specific studies on space technology , engineering , seismology and advanced materials .
It is obvious from the communication that a great deal of work has been put into it .
We hope that this will also build on the bilateral arrangements that are already well in place between Member States and these emerging economies .
It is important that the Community should be involved in this .
It should not just be a question of bilateral help .
We very much need the Community dimension as well .
The specific measures that the Commission has highlighted are a necessary part of the approach to ensure that the programme is not one that just looks at short-term industrial gain at the expense of long-term effective and beneficial cooperation .
The Commission has got the ideas pretty well right as far as that is concerned .
We also have to recognize that these economies are not all the same : some are advancing faster than others and some are advancing in different sectors , so that it needs a very wide approach , but nonetheless a very specific approach as far as each of the countries is concerned .
The social and environmental issues that affect each country also have to be taken into account .
I was able to attend the symposium that the Commission held last November and I would like to draw the attention of the House to two very important issues which emerged from that symposium .
There was not a consensus and I hope these questions will be resolved by the operation of this programme .
The first is whether we should be concentrating on the scientific end of cooperation or on the technology development part of it .
You can argue it both ways .
I must confess that very often my personal preference is to look more at the technology end rather than the scientific end .
But I do not believe that you can completely separate them .
The other interesting question was whether technical cooperation leads to business cooperation or whether it is business cooperation that leads to technical cooperation .
Probably the answer is , as in most of these types of question , that it is a mixture of the two .
I hope that the programme the Commission has put forward will help us to have a better understanding of these areas , because the contribution this has to make in the Fifth Framework Programme is what we must really focus on .
Mr President , I must begin by making it quite clear that we support this motion for a resolution to foster RTD co-operation with emerging economies .
However , it is very important to be cautious when qualifying a given country as an ' emerging economy ' , since the combination of macro-economic criteria is not always applicable in given cases .
You will have to , advisably , resort to a case-by-case examination , dealing with each agreement on its merits , and ensuring that prosperity is simultaneous with its development .
We mean that , in developing agreements , we should put the most possible emphasis first of all on mutual benefits , ensuring social and economic results of European interest and social prospects which are favourable for the European Union as a whole , as could be the results of job creation ; secondly , in the legal protection of the results and thirdly in seeking a fair joint funding set-up .
On the other hand , we believe - given the dual character of these economies - that an undeniable consequence has been that of improving human rights in emerging economy countries , since we believe sincerely that , with the right type of project , this improvement in human rights situations will come about normally , since it is known that human rights nearly always evolve alongside the improvement in social , economic and cultural levels .
This circumstance , together with that in paragraph 7 , calls for a fair social and economic development , while paragraph 11 calls for conduct based on solidarity and paragraphs 4 and 9 are perfectly in keeping with application of bilateral agreements , which means that it is unnecessary to have any amendment on these matters .
We also think that , generally speaking , the guidelines contained in the Commission communication are the right ones , as well as the emphasis on this particular aspect contained in the motion for a resolution which means that the PPE Group wishes to congratulate Mr Pompidou and also the Commission for its communication .
Mr President , our Group is in full agreement with the Pompidou report , which has made a worthy contribution and far-reaching improvements to the Commission 's communication on RTD cooperation with emerging economies .
However , we have tabled an amendment aimed at improving trade union rights in these countries , calling for the proper establishment of cooperation relations in the field of research .
We feel that the process of globalizing the world economy has led to other things , benefits of the European Union , and capital being invested in these countries , motivated by the high profits which can be reaped despite meagre salaries and the lack of trade union rights .
We also feel that in the process of improving the profitability of these economic structures the introduction of research as an extra component should be added to that of low salaries .
This overview means that any cooperation and undertakings by the European Union in terms of research programmes should be turned into yet another opportunity to fight one of the most dramatic consequences of globalisation : mass unemployment and the miserable exploitation of the working masses .
Therefore we advise that , in addition to all of the conditions and precautions which have been properly introduced by Mr Pompidou and the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , we should add a clause for the respect of trade union rights , since we have seen young children working , we have seen a lack of trade union freedom , we have seen hazardous work and an increase in working accidents in these countries as well as the use of violence - the epidemiologist Jaime Breihl pointed out that one of the most dangerous epidemics in these countries is violence .
Therefore I think that we should back this motion , but as long as the amendment which we have tabled is passed as well .
Mr President , in principle , cooperation with the world 's emerging economies is to be recommended .
It has already been pointed out that these countries differ widely from one another , but even within the countries themselves , the differences in the distribution of poverty and wealth are very great .
It is therefore difficult to draw up a report that is relevant to every situation , and that is evident from this report .
The basic needs and living conditions of the whole population are to be taken into consideration .
That is one positive feature of this report .
In this context , however , I wonder why there should be no partial financing .
This means that only large-scale research projects will be supported , and that leads to centralization , so that it is then questionable whether there will be any narrowing of the gap between rich and poor .
I take the view that specific projects for the poorer sections of the population , and technologies for the prevention of famine situations , e.g. in the areas identified , could also bring about synergistic effects .
The encouragement of regional cooperation is also approved by us , as are programmes for exchanges of scientists , researchers and engineers .
Improving the agricultural situation is a very important issue , and we discussed this at the FAO Conference .
However , there is no mention here of the fact that this situation is often the result of the property-ownership conditions in these countries .
Often there is no famine situation , but famine occurs because of the unfair distribution of property , and population growth , which is mentioned in this report , is not the cause .
The BSE scandal shows that the encouragement of agricultural production on an industrial scale is the wrong approach for the world 's emerging economies and developing countries .
Someone has just pointed out that the human rights situation has to be taken into consideration .
I believe that this should be included in agreements of this kind .
If we conclude an agreement with China , then of course we must not forget about human rights .
If this is not possible - and at the moment we have a disagreement with Mexico here - then these agreements should not be signed .
Finally , on the report as a whole , I believe that it is a blank cheque for the Commission .
The question is , what will the Commission do with it ?
I hope , Mr Bangemann , that you will do your best , so that we shall not , at some subsequent date , have to set up a committee of inquiry on this report !
It is extremely important , for the future position of the European Union in a global world market , that the Commission and the European Parliament should recognize the special position of the so-called emerging economies of the world , in other words , those countries that can no longer be classed as developing countries , but at the same time cannot be regarded as real industrial countries .
These countries harbour an enormous , in some cases unexploited , technological talent potential , they attract considerable foreign investment , and in some areas of state-of-the-art technology they have long been our competitors .
These countries have already developed remarkable economic power in some sectors , and it is no coincidence that more than a few well-known European companies use Indian software , for example .
Japan and the USA already have strong positions in these markets .
The same applies , to a lesser extent , in the case of some Member States of the European Union .
However , it is high time that the Commission , too , aimed its policy in these countries more towards those sectors that are already developed , and sought to achieve European participation in the state-of-the-art technology markets in these countries .
The current action plan is an initial step in the right direction .
It reveals the need for the European Union to take definite steps in order to ensure that it does not lag even further behind Japan and the USA in these countries , but starts to catch up with them .
It is clear from this that countries which in some fields already occupy a very strong position can no longer be treated on the basis of development-aid criteria alone .
On the contrary , our efforts must lie in the direction of effective cooperation in our mutual interest , cooperation in the sense of partnership , with the same rights and obligations , and in the sense of reciprocity , as the Commission puts it in its report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's communication must be examined in conjunction with the European Union 's strategy in the context of the Fourth FRDP .
One of the specific objectives of that framework programme is cooperation with non-member countries and international organizations in the field of research and technological development within the so-called INCO Programme .
On behalf of the PPE Group I welcome Mr Pompidou 's report .
I too believe that future cooperation between the European Union and the world 's emerging economies should not be based exclusively on the purely economics-based definition of this concept that has prevailed up to now .
In recent decades , each of the countries concerned has had to cope with emerging industrialization against a background of very different starting conditions , and this has influenced their continued development .
This has been my experience , particularly in the context of our work in the Latin America delegation .
For this reason , I believe that every cooperation agreement between the European Union and the so-called emerging economies should be examined individually .
I agree with the guidelines proposed by the Commission , and I believe , especially , that an initial exchange programme for scientists , researchers and engineers should be submitted soon , in order to encourage future cooperation in the field of research .
In addition , I should like to emphasise that it would be desirable for a final report , containing an evaluation of this programme , to be produced by the end of 1998 , which is when the Fourth FRDP comes to an end .
We must not underestimate the strong position that some of these emerging economies already occupy in the world market .
Moreover , we must expect some of the countries that are at present emerging economies to become industrialized countries within the next ten or twenty years .
Others , which need more time to develop , have a population situation that will lead to their becoming major sales markets , regardless of their stage of development .
The European Union must have a common , strong and positive strategy in the field of cooperation in research and development , because cooperation that is pursued intensively now will bear fruit in the future .
Mr President , I am pleased that we agree with Parliament on almost all the major issues relating to cooperation with the world 's emerging economies in our research and development policy projects .
This is probably due , amongst other things , to the fact that we began our dialogue with Parliament some time ago , with a statement of principle .
It has been proved again and again that if such a dialogue is opened at an early stage , then a whole range of difficulties will already have been removed by the time it comes to implementing what has been planned .
This is good news , not least because , as all the speakers have quite rightly said , it is absolutely essential that we should undertake new initiatives in this area , for several reasons , including , of course , the fact that these emerging economies constitute what one might call a mixed bunch .
Because the countries concerned are slowly emerging from the developing stage , however , we should not pick up on all the major difficulties that this implies , and all the development-policy considerations involved .
This is a very clearly defined and specific programme , and so I think that we can allow ourselves not to try to solve all the problems that arise from development policy . Somebody mentioned human rights .
This is a general problem that concerns our cooperation policy , and we have no intention of treating it here any differently from the way we treat it in other areas .
Mr Adam has pointed out that we may have to decide between technology development projects on the one hand and scientific research projects on the other .
We want our Fifth Framework Programme - and this is a sort of preparation for the Fifth Framework Programme - to concentrate more on the technology issues , one of the reasons being that here we can share the responsibilities between the Union , on the one hand , which should be concentrating on these matters , and the Member States , on the other , which are in a position to be much more active in basic research at university level .
This will probably also mean that what Mr Adam said will become increasingly the case , in other words , that in this type of cooperation too , the accent will be placed more on technology development programmes .
There is one point that has been the subject of a somewhat controversial debate between Parliament and the Commission , and I should just like to add here that the Commission 's position may possibly develop further , and that is the question of how research programmes should be funded when those programmes involve cooperation between undertakings which will later become involved as competitors .
Should such a research programme be funded in its entirety , or should it be financed only for the European participants , because the other participants will turn up as competitors later ?
The traditional approach that the Commission has opted for here , following , I might add , a proposal from Parliament , is that in such cases only the European participants should be funded .
I say that this approach is traditional because , as you know , in our thinking on industrial-policy we no longer see such a big contrast between cooperation and competition .
One can cooperate and yet at the same time be a competitor , and there are many companies that do this , when they combine their resources for a limited purpose and for very clearly defined reasons , and then later compete against one another when the product is on the market , because such a product is , after all , only one part of the overall supply .
This might also be a conceivable solution , but it is clear that these more modern considerations require time , and perhaps they may also require some convincing examples .
I should also like to thank the rapporteur and his deputy again for their excellent cooperation .
A lot of Parliament 's work has gone into the report and , as I have already said , if we start work in good time , then , Mr Telkämper , we shall certainly have no need for any committees of inquiry .
You seem to regard a committee of inquiry as a sort of threat , but I can assure you that the Commission regards a committee of inquiry as a normal element of democracy .
I would not go so far as to say that we look forward to committees of inquiry , but naturally we accept them .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution ) I call on Mr Malerba to congratulate Mr Pompidou on our behalf .

Mr President , on a point of order .
I wonder whether you would accept a genuine mistake .
You have just called a roll call vote and I automatically pressed the button .
This is not my seat - this is Mr Lomas ' seat .
I pressed the button with Mr Lomas ' card in it .
I hope you will accept that as a genuine mistake , and the record can be amended accordingly .
This will be checked and , if it is the case , your remark will be taken into account and the necessary rectification carried out .
The demographic situation
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0042 / 97 ) by Mrs Boogerd-Quaak , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission 's report on the demographic situation in the European Union ( 1995 ) ( COM ( 96 ) 0060 - C4-0143 / 96 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are to discuss the report on the demographic situation in Europe , but before I go into this in detail , I should like to thank the Commission and my colleagues for all their help in producing a report which we have managed to keep fairly concise , whilst still saying everything we wished to say .

The demographic situation is changing , so we can no longer base our policy on the presumption that it will remain static , which it sometimes has , especially since the changes are expected to be more drastic and more rapid than they have been for decades .
What is happening ?
The population pyramid is being turned upside down .
Population growth is likely to be minimal , but the composition of the population is set to change dramatically .
The under-20 age group will decline , while the number of people aged over 65 will increase considerably .
These developments will have a major impact on policies such as social security and pensions , employment , health care , regional policy and agriculture .
An ever-decreasing active population will have to care for an increasingly large number of people who are not working .
The pensions and health care costs in some Member States could even affect their chances of meeting the EMU convergence criteria , unless we do something to prevent it .
So demographic changes can happen very quickly .
I shall not quote any statistics here , since you can look at these for yourselves .
The question now is what to do about it .
Can we in the European Parliament , or more broadly in the European Union , have any influence over demographic change ?
I think we should not deceive ourselves on this point .
Having a baby for Europe , as one of my colleagues said , is hardly realistic , and it is an area in which we politicians should not become involved .
The idea that the growing numbers of immigrants will replace the decline in the population is also not really an answer , although we should adopt a more humanitarian approach and stop worrying so much about them .
We therefore have little scope for influencing demographic statistics , but what we can do as politicians is respond to changing circumstances .
We need to focus our labour market policy on encouraging maximum participation among the potential workforce , and this means that people who are currently excluded from the labour market will have to be reintegrated into the employment process .
If we are to do this , a great deal of attention will have to be given to education and training , since many of the excluded groups do not currently have the knowledge and skills that the labour market needs .
We must put aside the idea that it is not worth training people over 40 , particularly with an ageing workforce and in an increasingly computerized society where lifelong learning is a key factor in determining competitive positions in Europe .
This has already been mentioned in the reports this week by Mrs Waddington and Mr van Velzen .
Participation levels can also be increased by eliminating legal , fiscal and practical obstacles , for example by shifting employment taxes onto other bases such as production or energy .
We shall , of course , have to create the right conditions for childcare and care for the elderly and the disabled , so that men and women can participate in the labour market on an equal footing .
I have included an amendment from the PPE Group on this point , and I would draw your attention once again to the report by the Committee on Women 's Rights .
Demographic change also presents a major challenge when it comes to social security and pensions , in my opinion .
Given the increasing individualization and flexibility on the labour market , the time seems ripe for a complete overhaul of the social security systems in the Member States .
The solution to the problem lies in a whole raft of measures such as making the pensionable age more flexible , making greater use of capital investment systems - a point on which I hope Commissioner Bangemann agrees - and premium differentiation .
But in addition to these measures , I think we need to go even further by working towards an integral approach to social security and health care .
I think that Europe as a whole needs to start moving towards more flexible and individualized systems , as I am sure you will be glad to hear , Mr Bangemann , while at the same time respecting the principle of solidarity which forms the basis of our European social model .
Part of the solution lies in modernizing social security , which some countries have already started doing , including my own .
More competition in the insurance and retirement pension markets and more fiscal and legal freedom for private provision will also lead to greater efficiency and lower costs .
So it is not that we are lacking in new ideas , but the rigidity of the existing systems in some Member States means that it is difficult to put these ideas into practice .
I therefore urge that the Member States ' demographic statistics should be produced in a comparable form .
Europe must try to promote an integrated policy in order to cope with the changing circumstances as efficiently as possible , and this will mean that the Member States will be forced to take measures which will fundamentally change their existing systems and will be difficult in the short term .
However , the Council does not yet seem to have grasped the seriousness of the demographic sea-change we are experiencing : it is happy to publish the figures , but it does not act on them .
I would therefore urge that demographic trends should also be included in the annual employment report , or the Essen procedure as it is known .
It may sound trite to say so , but the time bomb is still ticking away before our very eyes .
If we are to live with the consequences that this time bomb will undoubtedly bring , we need to think long and hard about our labour market policy and our social model very soon .
The sooner the better , in fact .
Society will not wait patiently for us to wake up .
If Europe wishes to maintain its position on the world market and its social model , then we must stop running away from reality .
We must not be frightened to enter the twenty-first century , we must have the courage and enthusiasm to seize the opportunities at hand .
Mr President , I should like to thank and congratulate , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and also my political group , Mrs Boogerd-Quaak for the excellent work carried out on this 2nd yearly report on the demographic situation of the European Union .
We should like to send our thanks for her sensitivity in incorporating virtually all the content of the Opinion issued by the Committee on Women 's Rights .
I regret that , as is usual in the European Parliament , when there are subjects related very directly to women 's issues , the family and in the case with older people , there are always put at the end of the agenda .
Because , ladies and gentlemen , this report is a snapshot of developments in Europe and ways in which those developments affect the success or failure of a project which , day by day , is based on an economy of productive and technological processes which are increasingly directed at competitiveness and effectiveness rather than human resources .
The effects of the drop in the birth rate and the drastic ageing of our population have considerably altered the reality of a social Europe for the 21st century .
Old Europe will be full of old people .
To the so-called third age we will have to add a fourth category , the fourth generation , whose needs will have important effects on social , health and pension matters .
There will be two generations of non-productive sectors and the productive generation will go on decreasing in ratio .
Obviously , in this debate we will have to look at central subjects such as the cost of employment , the possible increase in retirement age , the conditions for early retirement , private pension systems and the cost of social security in general .
On these aspects , the rapporteur would like the Commission to launch a debate on the future of old age pensions in Europe and to draw up a list of creative solutions and new methods for funding systems . I should like to congratulate it on its suggestion because we must also show imagination and properly manage all existing resources in order to renovate social and health services so that they are properly tailored to the needs of our peoples .
We should also be happy at the fact that life expectancy has increased but we should not forget that this life expectancy in some cases will be independent while in others it will be dependent .
The loss of autonomy creates the need for aid and this should be dealt with quantitatively and qualitatively without the expenditure by states on welfare policies growing excessively .
As far as social matters are concerned we have to emphasise the fact that in the last twenty years we have seen significant changes to family structures , which have led to the diminution of the number of people in family units and a redefining of the role of women .
This makes it more difficult for elderly disabled people to count on the traditional support of their families which they used to be able to in times gone by .
This problem is getting worse in urban areas , where houses are small , there are architectural barriers , as well as economic problems and a lack of alternative resources .
There has been an increase in the number of elderly people living alone , something which is acknowledged as a factor of social risk .
That is why it is so necessary to develop social health projects which are innovative and which , incorporated into existing welfare policies , can ensure an increase in the living standards of young people and elderly people alike : crèches for young children and day centres for elderly people , home help and , above all , an assessment of the findings of the application of these measures which , bringing together the private and public sectors , have forced people and the authorities to set viable priorities in terms of existing economic resources available at a given time .
We have to boost measures for reconciling family and working life , generally reducing working hours , granting parental leave for men and women alike .
We must families with children , especially single parent families and disabled families .
Enabling women to take part in working life will actually contribute to economic growth , but I would not like to conclude without recalling the great service which women do to their families and all of those women who help their working spouses despite the fact that they do not figure in the statistics and that the European Union has only been dealing with their situation since 1986 .
If the European Union really wants a good working population it will have to count on the potential of women .
Yes , to the tertiary sector , but new forms of part time working , atypical working and temporary work should be shared with men without giving up on progress before the arrival of the Euro , and in the Intergovernmental Conference we should locate human dignity in its proper place .
Mr President , I would like to thank rapporteur Boogerd-Quaak for an exceptional report and for the excellent co-operation while drawing up the same .
We are in the middle of an enormous transformation in society .
In Sweden , my native country , we do not quite have such a dramatic future in front of us as the past we have just left behind .
We are at different stages in this development , and it is important not to become pessimistic over this .
We see the costs piling up , but there are also opportunities with such a development .
Progress is dramatic and will affect all strata of society .
The number of older people will increase drastically , and the most elderly people in particular will need substantial medical care , etc .
At the same time both the active working population and the number of children and young people will decrease .
As mentioned , this will affect all areas of society such as for example the pension system .
I believe that the pension system must be altered in all of the EU countries .
It is important to have a flexible system that gradually allows for working life to give way to an albeit active life which can still play a useful role in society .
We are also talking about equal pension systems .
This is not the case with the current private systems which are calculated purely on a financial basis and with women often living longer than men and therefore having to pay more for their pension .
The state systems should therefore equal with a good basic pension both for men and women .
We need to expand health care and medical services , particularly for older people .
New types of housing are required .
We must change society , public transport , accessibility and convert our houses to make them accessible for all people .
This is another area of society that is being affected .
Education has already been mentioned .
If we look at the changes in the active working population , the number of young working people is decreasing while the older group of working people aged between 40 and 65 is increasing .
At the same time , society is constantly undergoing changes as a result of advances in technology .
This tells us that a basic education is no longer sufficient for our young people .
In order to compete , we must continually educate the people throughout their working life .
This is where most of the population is found and these are the people who will need to take part in the development of new technology .
We must of course increase the birth-rate .
If we look at the labour market , the problem cannot be solved through immigration .
Immigration would have to be enormous .
The problem can only really be solved by women entering the labour market .
In this area , different countries are at different stages and development will continue .
However , as result of this it can no longer be left to women to care for the elderly and children , but all of us , men and women , will have to share this responsibility .
Society must also play a part .
Child care must be expanded and an insurance system created making it possible to combine parenthood with a working life .
Finally , I would like to say this : let us not just see the problems but also the opportunities .
The opportunities exist , not least when it comes to the third age and the fact that older people should be considered as a resource .
Mr President , Europe is increasing as far as the age of its people is concerned .
Europe is decreasing as far as the number of its people is concerned .
Is our position in danger ?
Are the data on which these developments are based even meaningful ?
Can they be used to develop strategies ?
In the Commission 's second annual Report on the Demographic Situation it is clear that , in addition to the three generations that we have been familiar with up to now - young people in eduction , people of working age , and pensioners - a new generation is emerging , that of the over seventy-fives .
Their numbers are growing considerably .
It is a good thing that people are remaining active longer , thanks to medical progress and better health care provision .
On the other hand , however , there is a shortage of care , integration and solidarity .
This increase in age has serious consequences for our social security systems .
There are considerable differences of opinion between Member States , as well as considerable differences in distribution .
Matters at issue include the level of pensions , in one country basic protection , in another the essential performance-related element , here the lengthening of people 's working lives , there the forced early retirement scheme , which operates at great cost to the tax-payer but which has led to hardly any additional jobs for young people .
As ever , women get less than their fair share when it comes to calculating pensions .
Of course measures have to be fundable , and so we have to say yes to the reform of social policy , but at the same time we must say no to the dismantling of social policy .
Mrs Boogerd-Quaak is to be congratulated on her report , which sets out specific priorities .
We agree with her about greater differentiation in the light of the vital regional differences between densely populated towns and isolated villages .
The effects on traffic planning , regional planning , housing policy and social policy are very grave , as are the effects on our European structural funds .
The amendments proposed by my group , the Group of the European People 's Party , have been included almost without exception , and relate to the world of work .
Fewer and fewer people are employed here , though those that are employed are highly productive .
Bigger companies , in particular , are unfortunately sacrificing the experience factor .
Experience is becoming a handicap .
People are excluded or dismissed , instead of taking advantage of their knowledge , their meticulous work , and their reliability , and it is quite likely that their innovative potential is being totally underestimated .
Participation in the labour market must be extended .
This applies to younger people , the proportion of whom , in the total population , is declining drastically , though this is no excuse for ' running down ' educational measures .
On the contrary , future opportunities are increased by a more broadly based basic education system , with many different qualifications and language skills .
The same applies to women , who are still just as disadvantaged as ever , in everything from pay to working hours .
What are we actually doing , in policy terms , to achieve a more child-friendly society , again in the light of the demographic data that have been described to us ?
This is a broad field for European ' added value ' , which could be used to coordinate national policies , to supplement them and - to stay with the metaphor - to fertilize them .
Mr President , I too , on behalf of my group , would like warmly to congratulate the rapporteur on this exceptionally interesting report .
The fact that Europe 's population is ageing is not new , we all know it .
The dramatic reduction of the birth rate on our continent and the parallel increase of average life expectancy , together with headlong economic development and the increase in population shown by some other parts of the planet , make the situation here particularly disadvantageous .
In the report by Mrs Boogerd-Quaak , not only is a clear picture presented of what is happening , but in addition , we are given a specific warning .
This is the second report on the demographic situation in the European Union with 1995 as its reference year .
This time the report is selective , because it aims to present a first general picture at the Community level of the predominant factor of our democratic future , in other words the extent and acceleration of the ageing process among our population .
I would like to dwell on three points which the rapporteur considers to be basic areas that will suffer serious consequences from the ageing of the population , because they are very interesting : the labour market , social welfare systems , and health care .
She would like to see increased proportions of participation in the labour market , especially among groups in which these proportions are below average .
We are speaking about women , young people , immigrants and the aged . The report also points out the consequences in the area of social welfare , concerning the type of risks insured , the obligations to provide finance , and the distribution .
In addition , a phenomenon is examined in depth which the Commission mentions only rather marginally . That is , the inequalities created by demographic developments , on the one hand between different regions , and on the other hand between urban and rural areas .
It is also worth noting that demographic development has an important effect on the Union 's economic and social conditions .
For all those reasons , our group supports the report and will vote in favour of it .
Mr President , demography is and must be the basis of all representations of society .
Because man is , and must be , both the end of society and the means which constructs it .
Demographyy cannot be looked upon as an expression or statistical representation of isolated man , each one , each number , one woman or one man .
Demography reflects social evolutions and dynamics .
In the apparent innocuousness of numbers , all of this represents a real and well clarified story of people living in society .
The concerns brought to us by this report - and I must very warmly congratulate Mrs Boogerd-Quaak on her excellent work - on the basis of the Commission document , are very relevant , they are some of the most essential concerns and they deserve a different degree of attention and another position on our agenda .
Demographic evolution is , within safe limits , something which is predictable .
Demographic structures alter according to rules which we can minimally know and minimally influence .
Participation in the labour market , social security and pension , health care and regional asymmetries are , it almost seems needless to say , indelibly marked by a predictable demographic evolution .
To ignore this and pretend to be surprised , to overlook something that can be predicted and prevented only shows that people have not been placed at the centre of our attention .
Problems such as reducing working hours , in the framework of a determined organisation of time according to certain structures , and that of funding social security would not exist , or would have a totally different dimension , if society were not blinded by the objectives of profit making and the accumulation of capital .
We , Europe , are a continent which is losing in terms of demographic weight .
This is a certain fact in quantitative terms but it can be debated if we take quality which we could have in terms of elderly people , life experience , experience of work , a truly human capital .
This is a debate which leaves us frustrated because it is not at the basis of all other debates . In any case , let us know how to make the most of the little that we have achieved .
Let us use this report as a means of promoting a continued debate on this subject .
Mr President , I think that Mrs Boogerd-Quaak has produced a very good report , but my group feels there is still something missing .
I will come straight to the point .
I have no intention of joining in with everyone else in saying how terrible these demographic trends are , because to tell the truth , with the natural resources at our disposal , it is probably not such a bad idea for there to be a few less of us in future .
In fact , I think it can only be a good thing for the environment and the planet .
Of course , it will be a challenge to find a solution to the problems we shall face in the short term , as I am sure we would all agree .
Quite honestly , I do not think it is sensible to pay ' breeding bonuses ' as a means of tackling these problems .
I do not think that expecting people to lie back and think of Europe is the right way to go about things , even if it worked .
What we need to do is to ensure that we have a child-friendly environment in which both men and women are responsible for bringing up their children , and in which they can have enough parental leave and childcare facilities to make it less complicated for them to have children and easier for them to bring up their children in a normal way .
Things are made extremely complicated for them at the moment , and it is not without good reason that women are delaying having children longer and longer .
Mrs Boogerd-Quaak 's report calls for more privatization , particularly in the pensions market , but I am not convinced that this is a good idea .
More privatization also means that women will have to pay more premiums into private pension schemes if they live longer , and I wonder whether this will actually be the case .
Looking at taxation , we can see that more care will be needed , and that taxes will have to go up if the burden of care is to be a collective responsibility , rather than being left to women .
So taxes will certainly have to be increased .
But what is tending to happen in the European Union ?
The Member States are using taxes to compete with each other and are cutting collective provisions to the bone .
Finally , the Dutch presidency has insisted on deleting age from the non-discrimination article .
How could they think of doing this , when we are going to have to rely more and more on older people to be active in future , not just among their friends and families , but also at work ?
Mr President , the sole merit of this report is that it calls attention to the disastrous demographic situation in the European Union .
But it is strangely silent regarding the causes of the falling birth rate , of which the rapporteur pretends to be unaware , and the measures proposed seem to me to be contrary to the most elementary common sense .
If European couples are having fewer children , the reason , quite obviously , is that they regard the future as very uncertain , and that the Member States of the European Union grant no financial incentive , or not enough , to those planning large families .
The possibility of parental leave associated with a reduction in working hours is a proposal which would be ineffective in practice .
Only the introduction of a parental wage , enabling women - or those men who wish to do so - to devote themselves fully to the education of their children can improve the birth rate .
This measure , which has recently been applied in France although timidly and inadequately , has already produced positive effects .
In any case , it is impossible to consider the problem of the falling birth rate without mentioning the infanticide laws adopted by the European Union countries . Those laws have allowed , with absolute impunity , a form of genocide which is unprecedented throughout history , literally a crime against the peoples of Europe .
In this context , we cannot escape the fact that the masonic lodges which plotted this massacre of the innocents are the same who are now preparing to campaign in favour of euthanasia .
First the unborn children , then the old .
Already I , as a physician and a humanist , have long been faced by the agonizing question : where are they going to stop ?
Among the solutions suggested by the rapporteur , there is one , the one that recurs most insistently , which is disquieting .
It aims to increase the influx of immigration from the Third World , endorsing what has just been said with a straight face by a Belgian government minister , a socialist , who is not yet in prison , who said , ' Immigration is a blessing for our country , ' heedless of the inexorably lengthening queues of unemployed people of every nonEuropean nationality , political pseudo-refugees , coming to Belgium because they can earn more there without working than they can in their home countries by working , while in ten years the proportion of non-European foreigners among Belgium 's prison population has increased from 15.4 to 28.7 % - proof , if proof were needed , that the cumbersome policies for immigrant integration are ineffective .
I am equally surprised to see this report proposing a new European development policy for rural areas .
If this means a U-turn away from the suicidal measures regularly adopted by this Parliament on matters such as the setaside of farmland , the fixing of quotas and the grubbing-up of vines , I need hardly say that it has my enthusiastic support .
Also , Mr President , on reading this report I was struck by the phrase - a socialist invention - ' the inalienable right to health ' .
No doctor , however qualified , can guarantee his patients ' health .
Only God can give health .
It would be better to talk about the right to receive care , the best care , for everybody .
This is an elementary precaution - otherwise , why not take the principle further and talk about an inalienable right to intelligence ?
Talking about health , this report again echoes the unending liberal chorus : let 's privatize social security .
How can anyone imagine for a moment that insurance companies , whose sole ambition is to make money , would do better than systems based on national solidarity at financing the cost of medicine - an ever-increasing cost because of technical advances and increasing life expectancy .
Of course , there are reforms that are needed , and they will be painful for some .
In particular , there is the need to depoliticize the mutual insurance associations in Belgium .
And in conclusion , Mr President , I must say , and say again , that it will be impossible to create employment in Europe while we continue to let ourselves be overrun by every conceivable product manufactured outside our borders , in countries where the cost of labour is 40 or 50 times less than it is here .
We must free our enterprises from the social burdens they bear , replacing those burdens with a social VAT from which our products will be exempt on export , though it will be applied to imported products .
We must turn our backs on global free trade , on unbridled , stateless liberalism , which will eventually reduce our populations to starvation .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mrs Boogerd-Quaak on her excellent report , but I would also like to thank the Commission for its Report on the Demographic Situation in the European Union .
With this report , the Commission has given us a document that shows everyone - Parliament , the Commission , and above all the Council - that there is an urgent need for action .
The figures themselves are nothing new ; they come as no surprise .
We all examined these problems intensively in 1993 , the European Year of the Elderly and of solidarity between generations .
At the time , the Commission published many different , helpful studies , and Parliament unanimously approved the Fayot-Chanterie report , which incorporated the recommendations of the Senior Citizens ' Parliament .
So what has happened in the meantime ?
Although no one doubts the urgent need for action as a result of the alarming demographic developments , so far nothing has happened .
Or has it ?
Although the foreseeable changes in demographic structure will affect mainly the labour market , and it is urgently necessary to promote education and training measures , and above all women in employment , with accompanying measures such as child care , in the Member States secure jobs are being changed into casual jobs with no social security , training measures are being cut short or omitted , and the financing of child-care facilities is being reduced .
Unemployment in the EU is becoming an increasingly pressing problem .
Yet so far the Council has been unable to decide , when revising the Treaty , whether to include a chapter on combatting unemployment .
Now we come to pensions .
It is mainly elderly women who receive inadequate old-age pensions .
The demand for a minimum pension , which would guarantee everyone a decent standard of living in their old age , has been up for discussion for several years now .
Those Member States which ought to have taken action , however , have so far not made a move .
Guaranteeing health protection , medical treatment and health care is becoming increasingly more complicated because of the rapid rise in the number of older and elderly people .
So what are the Member States doing ?
Almost everywhere they are cutting back on health protection and , as far as guaranteeing health care is concerned , they are making practically no effort to make the necessary provision or to train health-care personnel .
So what has been happening at EU level since 1993 ?
The action programme for the elderly expired in 1996 .
The Council , in other words my country , Germany - and I am ashamed to have to say it - and the United Kingdom , have blocked a new programme for the exchange of information and the encouragement of innovative projects .
Parliament and the Commission had asked for the revision of the Treaty to include a non-discrimination clause , and the Irish Presidency , thankfully , included it in the Council draft .
Last week , however , we learned that the prohibition on discrimination on grounds of age and disability has been scrapped , and so I am appealing to the fifteen Member States to reinstate , in the draft treaty , the prohibition on discrimination on grounds of age and disability .
Mr President , we are conducting a very important debate on the implications of population change inside the European Union . It is astonishing that , while demography is a science where forecasts can be reasonably accurate , little account is taken of the implications of those forecasts in policies for dealing with relevant problems at national level , and to a certain extent at Union level as well .
Very important issues have been touched on here : the implications of the new equilibria which are going to emerge for the labour market , for immigration policy - an issue we must certainly return to - and for reform of the welfare state and the pensions system . In all this it is still possible to discern the continued illusion that state intervention can respond to every problem .
State intervention can certainly provide some solutions to the new problems : it can provide a better legal context , for example for the labour market . But there is no doubt that we must enhance the role of the family and the voluntary sector to find answers to these problems .
The family must be at the centre of our concerns and our actions .
In fact the family has the answer to the rise in the birth rate and to better demographic balance , and to problems like welfare in an ageing society .
The voluntary sector can also play a major role .
We talk a great deal about subsidiarity , but we must reestablish the fundamental importance of responses from citizens , from families , and from the voluntary sector , and reduce the illusion that state and public intervention can produce a satisfactory answer to these problems .
Mr President , our Group as has already been pointed out , is fully behind the report drafted by Mrs Boogerd-Quaak , as well as the major amendments and improvements tabled and introduced by the Committee on Women 's Rights , as already pointed out by Mrs Benassar Tous .
However , I should like to point out that demography , the demographic phenomenon , is not a phenomenon which is autonomous of society or without a consequence of economic models ; that has always been the case , from prehistory until today .
The growth in human population in prehistory is the consequence of changes which took place in the palaeolithic age ; growth during the Middle Ages is also a consequence of changes which took place , and the same is true of the beginning of the industrial revolution .
At this moment in time if the population is actually diminishing in Europe and having problems , then this is due to our economic model and should send out a clear message to our people : there are too many people and too many young people and at the same time there is no possibility for demography to advance .
Therefore , I think that we have to be responsible and we have to ask questions about the economic model which at present is throwing young people off the work market and suggest changes to our economic model .
If we carry on this way we are going to go over the precipice and the proposals which we would like to put forward are the following : first of all , an urgent reduction in working hours , because to do the opposite will not create jobs for everyone ; secondly , we must maintain the welfare state because that is the only way , with increases in employment , that we can maintain pensions and offer appropriate conditions for health , social services , etc ; thirdly , we must fully incorporate women into the labour market , and respect all of their rights .
This is the only way in which we can head towards the fully employed society which is the only guarantee for European demography to be a favourable and positive perspective .
Otherwise we are saying one thing and doing another .
Mr President , we all have a vested interest in this report , because none of us is getting any younger .
I , too , want to congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent report on the Commission 's second annual report on the demographic situation in the European Union .
I come from a country , Ireland , which in some ways is out of step with the major demographic trends evident in other EU Member States .
Recent figures show that the population could increase by up to 10 % over the next 10-15 years .
Of course , our birth rate has fallen remarkably since about 1980 , but we still have one of the highest proportions of young people in our population .
The current healthy state of the Irish economy , including a labour market which has increased by 10 % over the last 5 years , has meant that our dependency ratio is actually improving .
The rapporteur correctly identifies the major demographic challenges that we face here in the European Union and that we will have to meet in the future .
Firstly - and many people have mentioned this - is the whole question of the number of women at work , and this will obviously now be increased .
This , in turn , means that we will have to have employment policies that are much more female-friendly than in the past : we need shorter working hours , more job-sharing and improved maternity laws .
Secondly , we should encourage older people to remain at work longer if they so wish .
There is a significant step which the Commission could take with regard to this and that would be to abandon its ridiculous age-discrimination policies .
Thirdly , the Member States will have to redesign their pension scheme policies - and this has been mentioned too by many speakers - so that the principle of solidarity between the generations can be maintained .
Of course the Commission must now immediately initiate the debate on the future of old age pensions in Europe and work out new ways of financing these systems .
People cannot go on working until they are in their nineties ; we have to provide some equitable way of paying those pensions in the future , and now is the responsibility and the time to do that .
Finally , the European Union 's and the Member States ' policies must give greater attention to maintaining a healthy democratic division between urban and rural areas .
The Commission , in the review of the structural funds , must give consideration to the various regional imbalances .
Mr President , first of all I should just like to say how very much I congratulate Mrs Boogerd-Quaak on her report , and of course I also welcome the Commission report .
I believe that it is very important for us to keep on tackling this subject because , quite simply , we have a responsibility towards future generations .
It is therefore important that we should concern ourselves with this subject .
I should like to take up one point that is frequently mentioned but seldom really discussed , and that is the role played by healthy families in the context of population development .
In those regions of Europe where the traditional family still plays an important role , the changes in the national economy resulting from the shift in the population age structure are much less noticeable and more easily coped with than in those regions , and above all in large conurbations , in which the destruction of the family has already reached an advanced stage .
A functioning family is simply in a better position to absorb difficulties , because the parts of the family are less dependent on state institutions .
However , I should also like to make it quite clear that when I talk about the family I mean a father , mother and children living together and , if possible , another generation as well , and I do not mean an informal arrangement in which partners of the same sex live together , or a relationship that simulates a marriage , of the kind that is , I regret to say , mistakenly promoted in the Lindholm report .
Unfortunately , our tax legislation in most cases punishes families who have children , whilst at the same time it gives material advantages to childless couples and couples of the same sex , thereby making an enormous contribution to the negative development of the population age structure and the distribution of wealth .
In this sense , I see the report as a clear appeal for families to be given more support in future , and for less support to be constantly given to small , vociferous minorities .
Mr President , the excellent report by Mrs Boogerd-Quaak deserves our applause because demography is an extremely serious problem .
Our age-pyramid already seems to have a very weak base , which means that it is bound to collapse .
We must stop Old Europe being converted into a decrepit and regressive Europe and that is the role of the European Parliament .
The excellent report which we are debating today insists greatly on means of attacking the effects of the demographic crisis .
However , I think we should try to look at the causes .
Demographic movements only change in that they correct the causes in the medium term .
Therefore , I think that this report , which is a very good approach from the point of view of social assistance , should also have a couple more viewpoints added to it .
First of all , the cultural one .
We really must favour family life .
In the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy we are spending money on favouring the Euro ; it should also favour the family and family values , parenthood ; we should eliminate a certain hedonistic and materialist life style which is latent in the substratum of modern society .
We really must favour family life , parenthood , respect for elderly people ; all of this has to be the object of cultural promotion , just as women 's rights and just as the future single currency will also have to be promoted .
Finally , in terms of direct taxation , we really must make sure that family expenditure is not taxed , as happens in some of our member countries .
Mrs Banotti wishes to speak .
I would ask Mr Bangemann to be patient .
You have the floor , Mrs Banotti .
Mr President , you and I have many happy encounters here on the floor .
We can meet outside too , if you so wish .
We are coming to the end of a long week .
Thank you very much for the invitation .
Mr President , There are many things on which Mr von Habsburg and I would not agree .
Unfortunately , for feminist women , the family has become sort of battleground .
Notwithstanding by feminist credentials , I have to say that I still believe that the family is the most satisfactory and effective social union for the care both of the young and the old .
That does not mean that the women become the primary carers and the rest of the activities in those units is carried out by the men .
I see the family as having a very real relevance both at the beginning and end of life .
Mrs Malone is quite correct when she says that our birth rate is rising but , unfortunately , it is rising in areas where the children do not have the best possible advantages for the future .
My mother died a month ago .
She was the mother of six children and we were all able to give her the care and love she needed at the end of her life .
I have one child , as do many people in this Chamber .
Who is going to take care of us when the time comes - not just financially but also with the love and attention that the elderly need at that stage in their lives .
We have to think about this .
We have to put a real value on those who care at both the beginning and end of people 's lives .
This applies to both men and women .
I am happy to see that in the caring provisions men are increasingly becoming , for example , state-registered nurses , giving wonderful care and cheering up the old ladies .
I hope there will be plenty of men around when I need care at the end of my life .
It would make life a lot happier for me - and also for you Mr Bangemann .
Mr President , I have just one question for Mr Bangemann .
Following his lyrical observations on the state of the world in general , I would very much like to know whether he is really of the opinion that the various contributions that Members have made to the debate were all reactionary and ideologically tainted , and only his remarks were modern and ideology-free .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for his comments , but I did not hear him say that the report contains a number of excellent recommendations across a broad spectrum , which he intends to adopt .
I should like to hear him say that .
The Commission is able to accept the proposals .
That was apparent from what I said , but I can confirm it again now .
To Mrs Schmidbauer , I should like to say that what I actually said here was that some of the speakers - and I did not name any names , nor did I list them all - expressed a certain traditional , or , if you prefer , conservative and reactionary approach , and I was trying to illustrate a different approach .
That shows that we need a political debate here , so that we can arrive at a result that will be acceptable to as many people as possible .
However , you cannot assume - though I think that is what you sometimes appear to be trying to do - that a Commissioner speaking here is simply reading out what his staff have written down for him and what is , as it were , a bureaucratic confirmation of certain points .
When a Commissioner gets down to specific political opinions , and argues them here , then you ought to be able to tolerate it if they do not coincide with your own .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
The Commission 's report on the demographic situation in the European Union and the European Parliament 's report presented by Mrs Boogerd-Quaak , are somewhat discouraging documents . They highlight the scale and increasing speed of the aging process in our population , which they regard as ' the factor that will dominate our demographic future ' , but fail to offer any analysis of the causes or propose any ideas that might remedy the situation .
Indeed , Parliament 's report merely offers partial suggestions for adapting the labour market , the social systems and healthcare to the supposedly inevitable presence of an increasing proportion of elderly people in the future .
But these adjustments will not take us very far .
The Commission , moreover , explains in its own report that in order to compensate for the global financial burdens caused by aging it will be necessary to achieve an increase in productivity far beyond anything that has been achieved in the past - an improbable hypothesis , since aging itself , by increasing the average age of the working population , is liable to reduce productivity .
This situation seems all the more worrying in that the excess social burdens caused by the older population are going to have a little more impact , in the medium term , on the competitiveness of European nations against the young populations of South-East Asia .
In this world of runaway free trade , which the European Union has so irresponsibly helped to bring about , the burden of aging is going to be yet another handicap for us , accelerating unemployment which itself , as we all know , generates additional social burdens and handicaps .
To limit the damage , we should have secured acceptance , during the GATT negotiations , of the legitimacy in international trade of certain forms of duty to compensate for excess social costs .
Sadly , we are now farther away from that than ever .
Probably , then , we are laying the foundations here for social disasters that none of our political leaders will have had the courage to oppose or even the foresight to predict .
At any rate , the two reports under consideration today say nothing about such disasters , which we regard as an additional cause for regret .
Nor do they say anything about the only radical solution - the possibility of a family policy to boost the birth rate .
Such a policy has , in fact , reached a total dead end in many European countries , and certainly in France , for shortsighted budgetary reasons but also for other reasons that we hear less about , perhaps because they illustrate too graphically the vicious circle in which we are locked .
Today , according to statistics recently published in France , 70 % of families with more than six children are foreign , as are 50 % of families with five children .
Furthermore , the incentive effect of an improved family policy must logically be stronger among foreign parents who have come from poor countries .
Finally , two-thirds of births in all large families in France are of African or Maghreb origin , which is soon liable to cause far greater problems of integration than those we face today .
Overall , then , in these circumstances , no government dares give a fresh boost to family policy , for fear that the easing of the burden of aging that would result might not be overcompensated by an increase in the burden of integration ( which itself , I may note in passing , may be a handicap in internation