Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 2 March 2000 .
Madam President , this is actually about an event which has taken place since the last sitting , a hearing held by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities .
There was a grave danger of this House 's reputation being damaged .
You see , it emerged that during the plenary part-sessions there is a significant rise in prostitution in the area , in Strasbourg .
I would cordially request that you look into this matter with the Strasbourg authorities and investigate whether criminal activity is at work here , and whether it is linked to trafficking in women and forced prostitution .
I think that we need , as a matter of urgency , to send out a clear message to public opinion that we are doing something about this and I believe that the European Parliament cannot be indifferent to what is reported in public about what goes on on the fringes of plenary part-sessions .
Thank you , Mrs Gröner .
I would like to say that I was , like yourself , extremely shocked to hear this and immediately wrote to the Mayor of Strasbourg in order to get to the bottom of this issue .
I fully agree with your remarks and have even been proactive in responding to your wishes .
I will , of course , keep you updated on the reply that Mr Ries is bound to send me .
We get bad news in these points of order very often , but I have very good news for our Dutch colleagues .
They now have two television channels .
( Applause and laughter ) The Quaestors are working hard on their behalf and we are waiting for the Finnish television channel .
We have two German channels as well , so happy viewing everybody .
I hope you enjoy it .
I am absolutely delighted , Mrs Banotti , and think that the Members concerned should thank our Quaestors wholeheartedly .
Madam President , I would simply like to add to what Mrs Gröner has said .
We have indeed learned that during the plenary sessions in Brussels and Strasbourg - Strasbourg is not the only place this happens - there was a massive influx of prostitutes , and in particular young women from Eastern Europe .
You will be aware that terrible things happen to these women , that they are tortured and their families threatened .
It is not only in Strasbourg that this happens .
I believe that we should all sit down and discuss this , that this Parliament should denounce this state of affairs and above all that it should play a full part in eradicating such modern-day slavery .
Thank you , Mrs Roure , for this additional information .
We will assess the situation when in Brussels too , and then see what should be done .
Madam President , on behalf of the entire Dutch contingent , I would like to extend warm thanks to Mrs Banotti for all the efforts she has made to ensure that we now have two Dutch television channels .
Madam President , I would like to talk about a quite different matter , which concerns Iran .
There has been a dialogue between the various political groups , both at the Conference of Presidents and elsewhere , and would like , during the plenary part-session , to urge you to write to the President of the Republic of Iran , Mr Khatami , regarding the fate of five students who were arrested in July 1999 and who are still in prison , one of whom has been sentenced to death .
I feel that it would be an appropriate gesture on your part , as the President of this Parliament , to appeal to President Khatami to , at the very least , suspend the death sentence passed on this Iranian student .
Thank you , Mr Jonckheer .
I will happily comply with your request .
Madam President , I do not think that Mrs Banotti should be cock-a-hoop today because she has laid on two Dutch TV channels .
It would have been better if she had obtained channels in all languages .
I hope we shall be getting a Danish channel next time .
Thank you , Mr Blak .
As you can see , Mrs Banotti , you still have your work cut out for you .
Madam President , I have learnt a new code of conduct here in the European Parliament , where one always has to express one ' s thanks .
I too would like to say thank you for the fact that here we can watch a Finnish television channel .
I would like to say thank you for the fact that there was sound the last time I tried it , and I would like to say thank you for the fact that today too there is sound , but back home we also have a picture .
I hope that we will also be getting a picture on the Finnish language television channel and not just the sound .
Then I would like to say thank you for the fact that we have got cold water in the taps .
Back home we also have hot water , but at least it is good to have some water .
Thank you , Mr Seppänen .
Special European Council ( 23-24 March 2000 in Lisbon )
The next items are the Council and Commission statements on the Special European Council in Lisbon , which is to be held on 23 and 24 March .
It is my great pleasure to give the floor to the Prime Minster , António Guterres .

I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Antonio Guterres , and immediately give the floor to Mr Romano Prodi , President of the Commission .
Madam President , I would first of all like to extend my warmest congratulations to Prime Minister Guterres for his initiative for the Lisbon Summit , and congratulate him on the quality of the preparatory work .
We fully approve of the breakdown he presented to us , which received such an ovation , and we support his initiative .
Together , we can make the Lisbon Summit a success .
I will restrict myself in this speech to presenting the Commission ' s contribution to Lisbon - our long-term strategy and our vision for this Summit .
In Lisbon , very simply , we will have to decide whether Europe will be able to regain its leading role in the economic and technological worlds , relinquished long ago .
This will depend on us , on whether we are able to boost the economic growth of the European system sufficiently , on the extent to which we are able to generate employment , on the level of education of our citizens and on the training we give our workers .
These are familiar topics , as Prime Minister Guterres has said , but this summit is not going to be another Luxembourg , Cardiff or Cologne : we want to take a completely new approach to these issues , which we have already tackled in the past , and , rather than taking each one in isolation , deal with them collectively and , at last , create an intervention system .
Now is the time to do this because there is currently a good chance of succeeding .
In fact , this is a unique opportunity , and it is the result of the recent , successful implementation of a wise policy : inflation is low , the balance of payments is in a generally healthy state , public finances are in order and there is , at last , a unanimous forecast of strong economic growth , although , as the Portuguese Prime Minister stressed , this does not mean that economic growth is guaranteed .
Never has this generation witnessed such a consensus of all the economic experts in Europe in forecasting strong and sustained growth .
Even the rise in oil prices did not cause an increase in inflation or halt this economic expansion , as might have been expected .
There are , nevertheless , a number of warning signs , but these are not of a nature to stop us proceeding with a development policy as we had intended and planned to do .
The challenges awaiting us in Lisbon are therefore very simple : we must meet the challenge of technology by regaining lost ground in the areas of knowledge and technical skills , especially retraining technologies .
This will put us back in the lead , and this is why we adopted the e-Europe initiative , which prompted the Commission to set a practical example in its administrative reform .
We committed ourselves , and I confirm this commitment before this House , to creating a Commission , or perhaps I should say an e-Commission , in which all correspondence regarding supplies , research etc. relating to this institution will no longer be dealt with on paper but will all be carried out directly by e-mail .
This is an extremely complicated undertaking , but we will succeed because our mission is very clear , we are a relatively small institution and we have a very high level of culture .
By doing so , we want to set a clear example to all the European governments and all the administrations with which we will have to communicate by e-mail instead of on paper .
In addition to this , we are facing a social challenge : the need to fight unemployment and social exclusion .
President Guterres ' address revealed a systemic approach based both on introducing modern technology and also ensuring that this does not lead to new forms of social exclusion . This was the serious risk of the development which took place during the eighties and also of more recent development .
I have to say that I am extremely concerned by the fact that the income discrepancies in European society are constantly widening instead of diminishing : this aspect of the social divide is of fundamental importance and must be taken into due consideration if we want to avoid the complete disintegration of society in the near future .
Our summit will therefore be on sustainable development and employment . As we have already done , not without some opposition from certain quarters , we can and must set full employment as a possible goal .
We have been through a tough period , but I can assure you that there is nothing unrealistic in this goal .
It is well within our reach because we have a solid macroeconomic basis , to which we must now add the Lisbon Summit , in terms of human resources and new ideas regarding the market and the harnessing of technical skills and research .
Human resources mean education , training and reform of the Welfare State in order to deal , in particular , with the problem of an ageing society .
We have not always managed to find an adequate solution to this problem , which is affecting all our countries and becoming more serious every day .
And it is not going to go away .
I am confident that in Lisbon we will be able to take a step forwards , pooling benchmarking experiments and proposals on this major issue .
It is not true that we have achieved a perfect single market : there is still a great deal to do in this area .
We need further structural reform ; in particular , we need to resolve the situation in the services , electronic commerce , transport and energy sections , for there are still a large number of public services which are underperforming in terms of competitiveness and efficiency .
If we want to halt inflation by raising oil prices , we must take action at both European and national levels to improve these services , and the same applies to financial and banking services .
We therefore need - and I am saying this because the slump has lasted quite a while now - a European company statute , a Community patent , a more liquid capital market and better procurement rules .
These are operational points which cannot be dismissed .
We at the Commission will do our part and , I repeat , we will introduce all these new technologies within the institution in all our procedures and relations with the outside world .
However , since it is our desire to be a model of efficient administration , we must endeavour to operate in such a way that this takes place all over the continent and we are able to be instrumental in expanding technical skills and technology .
We must mobilise individual citizens , local authorities , national governments , businesses and trade unions .
As President Guterres said , the main goal of Lisbon will be to set up this network . To achieve results , we need a new method , and , as the Portuguese Prime Minister said in his speech , clear macroeconomic parameters for this activity .
We are not introducing a new process : we are not adding anything new , but for the first time we are combining the existing processes and there is a chance this may bring success .
However , we do have to introduce something different : we have to find a way of assessing our progress and providing public opinion with tangible facts , and we therefore have to use a benchmarking system . By the term benchmarking , which was relatively unknown up until a few years ago , I mean a completely institutional means of comparing and assessing our progress .
We must be constantly , fully aware of the areas in which we have lost ground , and there are many of them .
One example is biotechnology , in which we have been relatively unsuccessful in recent years .
We must disseminate best practice in all fields and endeavour to advance it at European level .
In Lisbon , we will find the fruit of our preparations , on which we have worked together , with the cooperation , for which I am extremely grateful , of the Portuguese Presidency . We will find specific , operational undertakings , clear objectives and a limited number of tangible , but assessable measures which will enable us to speed up change and make progress , because leadership in the next century is being decided now .
We will achieve a great , strong , common Europe only if we are able , once again , to offer our citizens the joy of regaining our lost primacy .
I would like to thank the President of the Commission , and immediately give the floor to Mr Suominen , who will speak on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Prime Minister Guterres , President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats , I have to say that we are mainly in agreement with those ideas which Mr Guterres and Mr Prodi have put forward here .
On behalf of my group , I would like to congratulate Portugal , as the country holding the presidency , on organising the European Council in Lisbon , and we obviously wish you every success in your endeavours .
I would like to raise a few issues from our perspective .
As far as the prosperity of the citizens of the Union is concerned the most important task is to try to maintain sustainable economic growth in the area , all the time seeing to it that there is an increase in regional equality with respect to prosperity and that more and more people are able to earn a satisfactory income from their work without having to resort to social benefits .
The processes which have been put in place , by common agreement , to improve levels of employment , boost economic renewal and increase social cohesion within the territory of the Union are extremely important .
It is only right that the meeting in Lisbon at the end of the month should stop to consider where we are exactly .
Despite the diverse nature of these processes , they must have one common purpose : to improve people ' s quality of life in the Union .
We do not need new organisations , new working parties or new fora to achieve this objective , however .
The tools are surely known to all .
Often , however , national considerations , and sometimes ideological resistance also , mean that these tools do not get used .
The most important task now is to remove the barriers to creating a real European home market as quickly as possible , instead of continuing to manoeuvre , in many sectors , within a framework of fifteen separate home markets .
When the idea of the single market was launched with some vigour in the 1980s , we could still move towards our destination at the speed of a local steam locomotive , figuratively speaking .
Now , with the rapid advent of electronic commerce , and with the speed at which we process and utilise transfers of data reaching new levels , we need to move at Mika Häkkinen Formula 1 speed at the very least .
We must , however , be sure that the engine does not give out before the decision makers get to the finishing line .
How can we imagine being able to create the world ' s most competitive economic area unless we venture to free up competition within the area ?
The opening up of competition that has already been agreed for the telecommunications industry , as with the energy sector also , will create new , much-needed jobs and bring down prices for both industry and consumers .
Similarly , removing restrictions for small and middle-sized industries - whether they have to do with complex bureaucratic procedures , the acquisition of venture capital or questions of taxation - is a vital step on the path to improved competitiveness and prosperity .
Global competitiveness also includes the notion of a reasonable level of tax harmonisation and the modernisation of our social system so that at least the countries in the Union with high rates of taxation can reduce those rates , which restrict employment .
A basis for all this is created through education and training , and research , however .
It is quite right to strive to create an information infrastructure quickly , which private individuals , schools and businesses can all as easily be a part of at reasonable or even no expense .
We have to consider in particular the future creation and maintenance of resources in promising sectors in terms of employment .
These are obviously information technology , electronic commerce , tourism , and , for example , services for the elderly , as our populations are undeniably ageing all the time .
There are two issues that must be emphasised both by us and the Commission and the Council , and we must always draw attention to them .
These tasks are still mainly the responsibility of the Member States - whether it is the issue of education and training , and research , increased competition or removing barriers to entrepreneurship .
Coordination is natural in many sectors - within the framework of the tasks of the Union also - to avoid overlapping , but healthy , honest competition is still more important than coordination , including in many non-commercial sectors .
Benchmarking and best practice , which the Commission recommends , calls for a large measure of Europe-wide transparency in those fields where industrial secrecy does not apply .
The Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats would like to emphasise that its ambition is to develop a social , or , as they say these days , an eco-social market economy , which takes account of the welfare of all sections of society , as well as the environment .
In the achievement of our goal we wish to stress the importance of the European model of society , and , at the same time , the notion that it cannot be a rigid , stagnant system , one based on advantages gained in society , but it must be one that develops as society changes .
The modernisation of the European social model and its increased effectiveness are as important for our competitiveness as the corresponding modernisation of the economy .
Work must be the most sensible way of improving the welfare of families , but if it really is not possible , we have in place society ' s safety net to prevent exclusion .
A certain change in working methods is in danger of becoming a social problem for the positive development of human relations : telecommunications , the Internet , the terminals at which we work , and television , which already seems like a venerable , ancient medium , are threatening to give the relationship between man and machine a key role in society .
The most important issue , however , is developing mature interpersonal relationships in the family , at work , in society and in international relations .
As the importance of education is being stressed we have to make our youth aware of that early on in their development .
The Commission refers , appropriately in my opinion , to deficits that hinder the growth of employment in the Union .
We might mention the skills deficit as one example .
In a Union that has fifteen million unemployed there is now a shortage of labour to the tune of around one million workers in industries that are suffering from a skills deficit .
Some are suggesting importing a trained elite into the Union area .
I would ask whether this would be fair to countries less developed than ours , as this would create a brain drain for them .
The UN , on the other hand , has referred to the fact that in a few years ' time there will be a shortfall of 40 million workers as a result of demographic change .
It will be difficult to conduct a sober policy , one that produces results only very slowly , which must be implemented here and now , if we are presenting the citizens of Europe with such a picture of the future as this , while they themselves fear for their jobs .
Madam President , today 's debate is welcome , necessary and timely .
We all recognise that the European Union , in spite of economic recovery , is still working well below par for too many people ; specifically for 15 million of our fellow citizens the EU is simply not working at all .
This is an affront to individual and collective dignity and it gives us at least 15 million reasons why we should carry on with the project that you have highlighted here today , Mr Prime Minister .
I too would like to welcome the fact that you have come to this House to dialogue with us before you go to your summit meeting .
The potential is clear : if the European Union , today , in its Member States , were to attain the best practice already achieved by its existing states and by its competitors we would have 30 million more jobs , twice as many as are currently unemployed .
That is a practical measure of the potential if we can get the policies and methods right .
The task of Lisbon has been correctly identified by you , Prime Minister , and by President Prodi as no less than shifting European policy towards a new practice , towards a new paradigm .
We in the ELDR Group believe that the Union 's job at this stage is to develop this new paradigm so that there is a sense of an enabling Europe : enabling our citizens to achieve their full potential .
Through greater coherence in terms of bench-marking , sharing best practice and improving strategic cooperation and coordination , the EU can be an important factor in releasing a new economic dynamic .
Too many of our European markets are still too fragmented .
Not enough European small and medium-sized enterprises grow into world-beaters .
There are too few entrepreneurs in Europe .
There is too little enterprise in Europe .
You have remarked yourself , Prime Minister , that there is too little risk capital available on European capital markets .
We undertake too little research and development , individually as states and collectively as Europe .
Where we do , too little of it is converted into market product and services .
The Lisbon challenge is to delineate policy and methods for redressing these deficiencies and to release this potential dynamic .
This truly would be an enabling exercise .
If we can give people jobs this will prove to be the greatest weapon in the fight against social exclusion .
The new paradigm must also necessarily be people-based , reflecting the concept of lifelong learning , investing in adaptability through education and training and investing in self-development and individual opportunity .
Mr Barón Crespo has described it as a Social Democrat project .
I am moved to describe it myself rather as an enlightened Liberal project .
Within the constraints of the budget and of sound macro-economic policy - I underline those as President Prodi has already done - strictly speaking our European social models offer a welfare safety net .
But for too many of the excluded and the long-term unemployed , the young , women and other marginalised groups , passive welfare dependency is not enough .
It is a trap .
What we have to do is release this new dynamic at individual level by saying the resources are there , even within the framework of sound finance .
But they are used in a passive way .
They have to be reconverted into active models of welfare focused on encouraging all those people who can , to do , and those who cannot , to continue to be protected .
We can best guarantee the fight against unemployment and encourage social cohesion in Europe through having an employment-rich economy and through having sustainable models of welfare .
Finally , on the knowledge society , it is very clear that we need to convert our thinking , not just at a technological but also at a social level .
It is very clear that we need to convert old social spending methods into new economic and social opportunity .
We need to shake off the policies and methods that have condemned a generation of Europeans to be second-best on the world stage .
We can do that by enabling Europe and its peoples to achieve our full potential .
If Lisbon can meet the targets spoken of here today , it will be an important step on that road to releasing the dynamic to which I have referred .
Mr Prime Minister , we would like to believe , along with you and the Portuguese Presidency , that Europe should be built as a civilisation whose economic and social prosperity is founded on the cultivation of knowledge , cultural diversity and cohesion , and which plays an active role in promoting a world order that is more balanced , more peaceful , and less fragmented .
We would also like to believe , along with yourselves , that there is generally a clear awareness that the scale of the changes that must be envisaged in terms of the qualifications needed to address the new technological challenges facing companies itself brings with it the inherent risk of creating new mechanisms for social exclusion , to cite you once more .
We would like to believe this , but we cannot .
Why ?
Because we know that the new economy will , of course , foster the emergence of new jobs for creative staff , for IT staff .
We can see the feverish way in which the potential for investors has snowballed and the phenomenon of ' start-ups ' has developed , but we are also aware of the staff turnover that typifies call centres due to the dreadful working conditions that reign in these new temples of Taylorism , which employ hundreds of thousands of people .
We know that over half the jobs currently being created in the European Union are precarious , temporary or perforce part-time , and as a result provide the employee with neither the conditions for self-reliance nor , very often , an income that offers them a decent standard of living .
We know that new technologies do not , in themselves , generate greater democracy , but simply greater collective and personal autonomy for those citizens who are better integrated into mainstream society .
We know that the privatisation of public services poses a threat to social , regional and local cohesion , and we also know that the Commission is proposing to accelerate this process .
We know that UNICE has , on behalf of the employers , publicly shown its colours in the preparatory documents for the European business summit to be held in Brussels in June : the public authorities are requested to remove all social , regulatory and fiscal barriers to the development of business and to invest massively in shoring up demand .
Lastly , we know that anyone who claims to meet the needs of the citizens must first ensure their total involvement in public policy decisions .
We know all of this .
But we have read and heard nothing as regards the incorporation of the recommendation of the high-level group of experts , whose opinion it is that the unqualified economic success of the information society depends on this society being fuelled by the real needs of its citizens , rather than by the demands of market forces in the hi-tech sector .
We have heard nothing about support being provided to all practical trials involving the public-minded use of new information technologies by the general public , nor about the role of associations for learning and information being promoted for all sectors of society .
We have heard nothing about the possibility of public funds being freed up to promote innovation in the field of products and services liable to improve the quality of life for all .
We have heard nothing about the universal telecommunications service being redefined in order to make it possible for everyone to access the Internet under the best possible technical conditions and at affordable rates .
In short , we have heard nothing to suggest that the citizen will be anything more than a customer .
We have heard nothing to suggest that , over and above the positive and clearly-stated objective of eradicating child poverty , personal autonomy would be enhanced , in each Member State , by the setting of decent minimum wages , which are an integral part of a genuine strategy to end social exclusion .
We have heard nothing to suggest that the objective of full employment would cover support for local and regional initiatives , the underground sector of the mutually-supportive economy , the practical and coordinated reduction of working times , or that this objective would tally with strict requirements as regards the quality and durability of these jobs .
We have heard nothing to suggest that opting for sustainable development would be a guiding factor in long-awaited growth .
We can find nothing in the document from the Portuguese Presidency , nor in the Commission ' s strategic guidelines for 2000 , that reveals the slightest trace of a legislative programme in the field of social policy , be this to bolster the rights of employees threatened with redundancy or to prevent social dumping .
We can but share the concern of the Council and the Commission to see the European Union , after the single market and after the euro , finally equipping itself with a political project that is accessible to all its citizens , but the new governance of which you are - in my opinion unfairly - priding yourselves lacks the democratic and participatory ambition to which nascent European civil society aspires .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office and Prime Minister of Portugal , the current situation in the Union and in most of the Member States is bound to raise legitimate concerns , in spite of the overall economic recovery . The rate of unemployment has stayed relatively high , long-term unemployment is growing steadily worse and levels of employment are extremely low .
To add to this , there is an increasing lack of job security which makes matters even worse . All this reflects a social situation in which women and young people are being particularly badly hit , and which is dramatically highlighted by the approximately 50 million people excluded from society .

On the eve of the Special Council dedicated to this problem , the basic question being asked is whether there is the political will to change this situation or whether , on the other hand , what we have is merely another ineffective initiative to add to the list of plans , strategies and summits in the past that have already been devoted to this issue and none of which has resulted in real change .
It is our opinion that it is not only necessary to change this state of affairs , but that it is also possible to do so .
It is necessary because employment , and I mean quality employment with employee rights , is a fundamental right of every human being .
It is possible if we attack the real causes , which we feel are inseparable from the drift towards neo-liberalism , which has been shaping underlying trends , specifically in the macroeconomic field . This theory , whose exponents have given priority to the Stability Pact and to the nominal convergence criteria , and who have consequently sidelined social cohesion , generally goes hand in hand with a complete deregulation of employment , with incentives for privatisation , mergers and delocalisation , which as a rule , create unemployment , and with highly restrictive budgetary policies at Community and national level .
We are therefore now witnessing a clear consolidation of the basic core of Thatcherite tendencies , even if they are attenuated by aid measures . Today , they are no longer so much being promoted in line with much vaunted conservative principles , as on the grounds of so-called globalising pragmatism and in the name of competitiveness , which has been elevated to godlike status .
An appeal for the coordination of social policies or an insistence on a society based on innovation and knowledge or on information technology will therefore not be enough , however important they may be .
It is crucial for us to abandon this monetarist and anti-social approach and put humans at the heart of our priorities and policies .
My Group , which attaches particular importance to social issues , met in Lisbon last week in view of the forthcoming Special Council , precisely in order to examine and discuss this issue .
We had an opportunity to listen to and hold discussions with workers ' representatives and with union leaders from Portugal and other parts of Europe . In particular , we met representatives from ABB , from Michelin and also the organisers of job marches .
We reached joint conclusions on 14 points , of which we will officially inform the Presidency .
Basically , as far as we are concerned , we need to adopt macroeconomic political measures which are based on stimulating demand , on public investment and on respect for improved public services . These measures should be geared towards full employment and guarantee a rate of employment of around 75 % by 2010 .

We must ensure a redistribution of profit towards labour , ensure that speculative movements of capital are taxed , we must combat tax evasion and fraud , and curb mergers and delocalisation , particularly when they involve redundancies . We must move ahead with reductions in working hours without reducing wages and without downgrading the quality of jobs , and we must reconsider the EU ' s Financial Perspectives , give clear support to small and medium-sized enterprises , firmly commit ourselves to an improved education system and more and better professional training and end the discrimination that mainly affects women and young people .
We will examine and judge the results of the Lisbon Summit in the light of these factors and in the light of our ability to establish concrete , properly quantified and timetabled objectives in this key area .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission. no one could possibly obejct to re-establishing the conditions for full employment , triggering a dynamic for growth , or pushing the nations of Europe to the forefront of the world economy .
But we must surely oppose some of your policies , some of your principles , and a certain economic fundamentalism .
The treaties have already awarded you far too many powers and far too much scope for action in the field of trade and the economy , with the disastrous consequences which are evident in all areas , and can be ascribed to your ultra-liberal and internationalist policies .
You declare yourselves to be concerned at the fate of the millions of poor and unemployed whose situation your policies have in fact done much to create .
Unfortunately , nothing is changing and nothing is going to change .
You intend to pour oil on the fire and apply the same ill-advised methods and the same economic principles to areas which have , until now , escaped your grasp : education , wage policy , direct taxation , employment law , social protection , social assistance .
The most extraordinary thing in all this is that this socially regressive policy has in the main been implemented by left wing governments of varying hues - pink , red , green - who advocate social justice during electoral campaigns , but orchestrate widespread social decline once in power .
I must at this point stress our conviction that there can be no social policy nor full employment policy without national and European preferences , and without protecting our markets from fierce international competition .
It is our obligation to put Europeans first when it comes to employment , social protection , policies relating to the family , and retirement policy .
Your globalisation of the economy is neither necessary nor inevitable .
This globalisation has been forcibly imposed by the only superpower to have survived the cold war and by multinational companies which are becoming economic superpowers in their own right and who can subjugate to their economic will states , nations and peoples who are quite unable to protect themselves .
You are thus acting as accomplices in this process .
You are facilitating it , collaborating with it , and are in fact orchestrating , despite your declared intentions , the disintegration of our social welfare systems , precariousness , and social decline .
The European social model runs the risk of not being able to cater for this globalisation of the economy , especially in its current form which operates with no regard for specific social issues nor the specific national characteristics of individual States .
Your ultra-liberal headlong rush is thus surely not the solution to social problems , precariousness or employment problems faced by tens of millions of European citizens .
Mr President , the Lisbon Summit will produce a further string of fine words to dazzle us with .
The words will be welcome , but the basic problem is that we have an Economic and Monetary Union which attaches more importance to fighting inflation than to promoting employment .
The Central Bank has said that price rises should always be kept below 2 % .
The Stability Pact says that the budget deficit must be no more than 1 % in ordinary years .
There is no requirement that unemployment should be below 5 % or - better still - below 2 or 1 % .
It is public consumption and the price of money which definitely must not rise .
You might think that a country would wish to limit unemployment by means of public investment , but that is prohibited .
It is more important to stick to the holy cow of monetary policy than to find jobs for the unemployed .
I , on the other hand , think it is more important to take account of families ' finances and to ensure that dad comes home with a wage packet instead of a redundancy notice . So too did the Danish Government which came to power in 1993 .
In 1992 we had 9.2 % unemployment , both in Denmark and in the eleven countries of the good old EU .
Between 1992 and 1998 , unemployment in Denmark fell to 5.1 % .
In the EU , it increased to 10.9 % .
In Denmark , we have had combined growth of 20 % , compared with 10 % in the EU .
If the Danish Government had acted in the same way under the present dispensation , it would have been downright illegal and unconstitutional because the budget deficit was 3.9 % at that time .
Now , Denmark also has an actual budget surplus because those who exchanged their redundancy notices for wage packets also began to pay tax instead of drawing benefit .
I believe that the EU ' s prime ministers ought to study the Danish example when they meet for their tête-à-tête on the economy in Lisbon .
We need a change to the EMU Treaty instead of a further string of fine words directed at the unemployed .
My group hopes that Danish voters will decide to keep the Danish krone when they take part in the referendum on membership of EMU on 28 September of this year .
Mr President-in-Office , I listened to your speech with great interest and it is obvious that in overall terms , no one here today could fail to agree with what you have said . You have made statements of intent , which correspond to the vision we all share of the problems of jobs and of Europe in general .
From this point of view , we must also think about one of the objectives for the Lisbon Summit that you mentioned , namely combating the political deficit in Europe .
It is precisely because I think that if we continue to do nothing but make broad statements of this kind , we will find it hard to overcome this political deficit , that I would like to ask you a few specific questions in order to try to understand what policy will be implemented under your presidency after the Lisbon Summit .
My first question , which is a very direct one , is about an institutional issue which we now have the opportunity to discuss with you for the first time as President-in-Office of the European Council .
This concerns the most serious political problem we have had to face in recent times - the problem of Austria .
The question that I would like to ask very clearly is this : are you representing 14 EU countries here or 15 ?
This is a perfectly sensible question because as President-in-Office of the European Union , you have worked and acted as the spokesperson for bilateral decisions between states .
From this point of view , this question is perfectly sensible and requires the clearest possible answer .
I think that in institutional terms , it is an extremely serious matter that we are moving towards replacing collegiate decisions , which the European Union is bound to observe under the Treaty , by means of bilateral decisions between governments . I am not talking about the causes of the Austrian issue .
I am talking about the serious precedent that we might be setting if today we replace the collegiate procedure stipulated in the Treaties by means of bilateral decisions , in this case aimed at one particular country , because tomorrow we might adopt the same approach towards a different country or countries .
That is my first question .
My second question is about the Employment Summit .
I firmly believed , particularly because I attended the discussions on including the employment problem on the Council agenda , and on the European Union agenda , that the original idea of the Employment Summit was to combat the problems , not of the new knowledge-based economy , but of the old European economy , the problems of unemployment in factories , dockyards , iron and steelworks , and that these were the employment problems which were originally due to be on the Employment Summit agenda .
It is therefore perfectly reasonable to raise the question of whether , when we talk about the problems of the new knowledge-based economy and of the new digital economy , which , as far as I know have created unemployment rather than employment in Europe , we are not replacing an inability to deal with the problems of unemployment in the present by what has largely been - and still is today - empty rhetoric about the problems of employment in the future ...
No one understands better than us the crucial role that the Internet , the digital economy and the knowledge-based economy have to play , but these issues were not what the Employment Summit was originally intended for .
Mr President-in-Office , you concluded on a vaguely ideological note , which is fair enough .
If this is the Social Democrats ' policy for the economy of the future , then I would like to remind you that one of the most serious problems of the Internet economy and Europe ' s lagging behind is the lack of entrepreneurial spirit in the education system , in the behaviour of governments and in the way the institutions function .
This is what we must counter if we are to guarantee the knowledge-based economy of the future .
Mr President-in-Office , first of all , I would like to welcome you to the European Parliament , particularly as your presence here symbolises what the Chairman of the Group of the Party of European Socialists has already referred to . By that I mean the political symbolism of the fact that during your tour of the capitals , you have also come to listen to the European Parliament .
This is not the first time during the Portuguese Presidency that there has been a different and politically stimulating relationship between the Council and Parliament , but this is a significant gesture which , as my friend and colleague Mr Barón Crespo noted , we were delighted to note .
Our position is clear : we support the Portuguese Government ' s initiative .
We support it because it is a serious initiative and because of its substance , both in terms of strategic objectives and in terms of other objectives with which we agree .
Furthermore , the way in which this European Council is being prepared is a good illustration of this . Firstly , there is the seriousness and depth of the document presented in January .
Then , there are the various preparatory conferences and the contributions that both business and union leaders are making towards this summit . In particular , there is the latest contribution to research that was made at the recent meeting which brought together Nobel Prize winners and Ministers for Science and Technology .
This shows that the Portuguese Government is preparing for this Summit seriously and is paying a great deal of attention to its substance .
However , we also support the initiative relating to the summit ' s main objective , which has already been mentioned . We do so because for the first time , it is not only putting the issue of employment and social issues at the centre of the European debate but is once again suggesting that " achieving the objective of full employment " is in the realm of the possible .
For years , many people have said this was impossible , that in modern society it would never again be possible .
My congratulations , Mr President-in-Office , for making this issue topical once again without rejecting social cohesion and values which we hold to be fundamental , because they are not only at the heart of the founding project of the EU , but they are at the heart of our civilisation and , above all , of our understanding of the need for solidarity between all Europeans .
Something that we said here in January and that I would like to repeat is that we must not be satisfied with this strategic objective being the priority of one presidency , a priority for just six months . We challenge the Council and the Commission once again to include it , not as a priority for six months , but as a goal for the EU , as important as the goal of enlarging or deepening the European Union .
Only in this way will it be able to match the degree of seriousness with which the presidency is preparing this Special Summit .
I congratulate you , Mr President-in-Office .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I should like to express my delight at the fact that a bullish agenda has been set for the issues of employment and economic development at the Lisbon Summit .
It is an agenda which emphasises that it is a strong and dynamic economy and increased competitiveness which will secure the objective of higher employment in the EU .
The fact that the EU lags so far behind the United States with regard to research , job creation and the development of new technology gives pause for thought .
A joint effort is needed to strengthen research and development , including research in connection with information technology , and there is a need to strengthen the internal market and to create the necessary conditions for receiving the full benefits from the new technology and for developing trade via the Internet .
It is right to focus upon access to , and use of , the Internet by public officials and by the education system and to create what has been called " the learning society " . It is also only right to concentrate upon access to venture capital and otherwise to reinforce the position of small and medium-sized businesses .
In its discussion paper for the Summit , the Commission set quantified objectives for developments in the field of employment , including women ' s employment , and for the fight against unemployment . In the same paper , the Commission also set the objective of mitigating the problems connected with poverty in Europe over the next ten years .
I think it is only right to place the emphasis on common objectives , for countries ' actual policies in this area will , and should , be different from one another .
Some EU countries - mentioning no names - are struggling with high youth unemployment . In other countries - for example , in my own country , Denmark - youth unemployment is very low .
Indeed , there is an outright struggle between employers and educational institutions to attract young people . There are differences between the countries when it comes to problems , systems , culture and tradition , and there should therefore be differences in the methods chosen in order to achieve the common goals of increased employment and reduced social exclusion .
With the exchange of experiences and ideas as part of the Luxembourg process , employment policy is designed in such a way as to ensure that this will , in fact , be the case .
Even if the problems we are facing over the next few years regarding both employment and social policy have a long list of features in common and therefore also constitute common challenges , it is as individual nations that we must solve some of these problems . However , it is also very important that countries should not work at cross purposes when solving the social problems in question but , on the contrary , that they should cooperate and provide each other with inspiration .
I would say that it is important that we should aim to achieve common objectives , but that it is also important that individual countries should retain their responsibility for , and sovereignty in , establishing social and employment policy and that we should have a certain degree of competition between systems so as to ensure that social and employment policy is shaped in a progressive and dynamic way .
Mr President , as representative of Flanders and on behalf of - what I would call - the nation regions , embodied in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I was touched by your appeal for a powerful European approach , where the fifteen Member States do not try to gain power but where the power of cooperation increases .
You pointed out that there are fifteen different public opinions , but , in fact , there are many more than that .
There are , after all , huge differences within the Member States .
Coming from Belgium , I do not need to point out that there is a difference of opinion between Flanders and Wallonia , or between former East and West Germany ?
Furthermore , our public opinion threatens to become polarised as a result of globalisation .
Where there used to be a discrepancy between the haves and the have-nots , there are now those who can keep up as opposed to those who cannot or those who drop out of society .
This is a very serious risk .
In Europe , everyone should be able to keep up .
Every region should be able to keep up and everyone must be able to take part in the knowledge-based society .
More so than in the past , Europe will need to be able to draw on the realities of these regions so that their strengths can be applied in the best possible way for creative purposes and for a more realistic employment policy .
We have had to establish that , despite the many investments being made in structural funds , the unemployment figures still vary greatly .
I would therefore advocate networking regions , more so than a Europe in which each Member State stands on its own dignity .

Mr President , Mr Guterres , Mr Prodi , ladies and gentlemen , it is pleasing to hear the Commission and the Portuguese Presidency declaring full employment to be an aim of European policy .
I agree that this should be so , but to be successful in the future a model of full employment requires , above all , professional and socially secure jobs .
We need to structure the economy and the world of work in such a way that gainful employment becomes worthwhile .
You are relying mainly on further deregulation in the internal market , on the Internet revolution and on e-commerce and e-business to be job machines .
This policy will not allow you to keep your promise of full employment .
Economic reforms such as the liberalisation of the internal energy market have led to stiff competition and numerous mergers .
This has cost jobs and the trend is continuing .
As early as the mid-nineties , Mr Bangemann promised a huge increase in jobs due to the information society .
The result is sobering .
The growth in media , mobile radio communication and software was not able to compensate for the job losses in the telecommunications sector and in the electronics industry , and for the rationalisation resulting from the introduction of information technology in other sectors of the economy .
When I see that many companies engaged in e-commerce admittedly have huge market capitalisation , but that their actual business is constantly making losses , this does not necessarily make me feel any more optimistic .
E-commerce and e-business certainly have a great future .
But their contribution to employment growth is overstated almost religiously by their proponents .
That is why I believe that we need a different policy mix for a new policy of full employment .
That means , firstly , greater easing of monetary policy , a budgetary policy designed to strengthen investment in expansion and in the future , and a wages policy geared to productivity , so as to stimulate internal European demand and generate more jobs .
Secondly , it means a strategy to make drastic cuts in working time and redistribute work between men and women .
Thirdly , it means more state support for employment in ecologically sound sectors of the economy and a suitably future-oriented innovation policy linked in particular to boosting small and medium-sized enterprises .
Fourthly , this is about an emancipatory labour market policy .
This entails rejecting low-wage-sector strategies and work requirement models for unskilled jobs , because only a broad-based training initiative will allow us to produce a sufficient pool of qualified workers for the knowledge society , and to deliver environmentally efficient , social and cultural services .
If we do not go down this path then we will undermine our future prosperity , our competitiveness , our economic productivity and the social cohesion of society .
Mr President , the European leaders will be primarily addressing three key issues when they meet in Portugal later this month .
Firstly , they will examine how best the European Union should equip itself to accommodate the broader effects of trade globalisation .
Secondly , a closer examination will take place as to what initiatives should be implemented to avoid and combat social exclusion in our society .
Thirdly , the leaders will bring forward new programmes to guarantee that the European Union is a leader across all elements of the changing and evolving information technology markets .
The world is becoming a smaller place in terms of market access and the term " global village " is not out of place .
However , the arrival of globalisation will not and must not mean absolute and free market access for all products and services operating at this time .
It is clear that each country has different priorities in terms of the different economic sectors it wishes to protect .
That is clear from the completed Uruguay Round of GATT negotiations and will be evident in the World Trade Organisation talks which will be taking place over the next three years .
From the perspective of the European Union it is important that the deal secured by our leaders in Berlin last year , and endorsed by Parliament in terms of the future administration of the CAP for the period 2000-2006 , is not reopened in any shape or form .
Moreover , initiatives to promote cultural and linguistic diversity in Europe must continue to receive support .
We must not build a Europe of the haves and the have-nots .
The European Union as an economic entity is very strong but there are still large-scale social problems which need to be addressed in a structured manner .
We must continue to put in place comprehensive training programmes for the youth and long-term unemployed in both urban and rural areas within Europe .
The European Social Fund and national governments must continue to finance drug rehabilitation programmes , to promote higher standards of adult literacy and to work against early school-leaving .
Mr President , a well-functioning labour market which strikes a sustainable balance between supply and demand is a widely cherished desire .
It is therefore understandable that long-term , high unemployment within the European Union is high on the agenda of the European Summit in Lisbon .
But it is questionable whether it is justified to elevate employment policy to European policy in this way .
Despite satisfactory economic growth , the drop in unemployment is stagnating .
A number of Member States with high economic growth are facing an overstrained labour market and rising inflation .
Other Member States are experiencing limited growth , widespread unemployment and fixed prices .
Specific instruments , such as interest rates and the exchange rate , are no longer at our disposal .
The fact that Member States are at different stages within the economic cycle nonetheless requires measures specific to each Member State .
Is the Council acting upon this ?
And if so , what measures does the Council Presidency have in mind ?
No one is expecting labour-intensive industries to flourish within an overstrained labour market .
But is this reflected in the policy ?
Has a decision been made in favour of selective growth in such policy ?
And are people prepared to allow the areas suffering high unemployment to benefit from this growth in labour-intensive industries ?
If the Lisbon Summit is serious about fighting unemployment , then we will need more than generic measures .
It is important to take the work where unemployment is at its highest .
It is a gamble to expect that the unemployed will go where the work is , especially in the case of cross-border labour migration .
This may result in the further depopulation of certain disadvantaged areas .
Mr President , with the launch of the common currency , we have not made life any easier for ourselves by abandoning monetary , economic instruments specific to Member States in order to control the economic cycle .
I can imagine that Great Britain , Sweden and Denmark will think twice before embarking on the euro adventure .
It is therefore essential to reach sound , sustainable agreements at the employment summit in order to stamp out the evil of unemployment , obviously taking into account the principle of subsidiarity , because at the end of the day , it is in the individual Member States that the problems need to be tackled .
Mr President , I would like to extend warm thanks to Prime Minister Guterres for his account and the clarity of this account .
My main question relating to this is , what is actually new ?
Of course , we have in place macro-economic cooperation , the so-called Cologne process , and we have a process for employment , the Luxembourg process .
What will this Summit actually add to this ?
What is new , of course , is social protection .
This , in fact , has hardly been dealt with at Summit level and is , in my opinion , a very important topic of discussion .
I think that it is easy to identify the lessons which can be drawn from the Luxembourg process and to declare them applicable to social protection .
I do wonder why public health cannot be mentioned in this respect .
It is , after all , a key element of social protection which is rather in crisis and which , in fact , costs a great deal of money and is essential to a great number of people . However , apparently , the Council is not ready to discuss it at this stage .
Mr Barón has caused me some concern by saying that the programme which your are presenting , Mr President , is in fact a socio-democratic programme .
I went over your speech again in my mind and I think , in actual fact , that it contained one point which had a strong socio-economic bias .
It was the point in which the macro-economy is arranged such that it will lead to employment .
It is , of course , a fact that a sound macro-economic policy will automatically result in an improvement in the employment situation .
We have experienced this .
But on the other hand , the sound rule of macro-economics should not be misused by pinning it down too much .
Indeed , you will then end up in a situation which a great many economies under socio-economic and socio-democratic rule have experienced - and are still experiencing - where eventually , employment becomes the victim of bad macro-economic policy .
This should not happen .
I do hope , therefore , that the Prime Minister does not suggest abolishing the macro-economic policy which we have pursued over the past couple of years and which has been very successful - or at least changing it such that it is no longer effective .
Finally , Mr President , I have a problem with the Portuguese Presidency ' s documents and also to some extent , but less so , with the Commission ' s documents .
It is their defensive nature .
We have a few countries in Europe , including Denmark , the Netherlands and Ireland , which rivalled the United States in terms of sound performance in the field of employment .
So it is possible for Europeans to match this .
There are other countries which appeared far less capable of doing this .
It is then far more sensible to find out why some countries or regions are doing so very badly , rather than saying that we are underperforming compared to the United States .
I think that , overall , this is not the case at all , especially if we take into account the fact that the internal market has only been in operation since 1 January 1993 , which is a relatively short time .
Mr President , Prime Minister Guterres has been most convincing .
The proposals made by the presidency mark a clean break from the usual Community jargon .
The citizens of Europe do not want a theological debate , they want to see tangible action .
According to Professor Fitousi , the most serious deficit currently threatening European society is the deficit of the future .
Many of our fellow citizens are fearful of a future that been starkly portrayed to them for the past two decades .
The most minor of accidents is depicted as an irreparable ecological disaster .
Science is often demonised , with the result that fewer and fewer young people choose to study science .
People are asked to be flexible , and to embark on the breakneck quest for productivity .
Europe has indeed become highly productive , and would not otherwise be the world ' s leading exporter .
Nevertheless , the predominant rhetoric always centres on wage restraint .
According to current dogma , salary increases must remain well below increases in productivity , or inflation will rise again .
It would seem that the exorbitant profits made in the casino that is the international finance market have no impact on inflation .
I am not making the case against stability policies nor against necessary structural reforms .
The completion of the internal market , and the surplus of transparency , and thus of competition , stimulated by the euro mean that a good many adjustments will have to be made .
New technologies will change the shape of a good many professions .
Electronic commerce will cut out many middlemen .
Most people would be willing to accept these changes were it not for the fact that the only prospects they are being offered are ever increased precariousness and ever reduced social protection .
Europe currently has everything it needs to re-establish sustainable growth , which is yet another reason for associating a more ambitious social goal to our economic and monetary objectives .
The Union has always succeeded when it has set itself hard and fast objectives .
The internal market , Economic and Monetary Union and the criteria relating to this , and the action plans which emerged from the Luxembourg summit have yielded tangible results .
The idea is to go one step further , to set joint growth objectives that lead towards full employment and the creation of a code of European social law ....
( The President cut the speaker off ) I still have many points I would like to make .
Mr President , we place our trust in you .
Mr President , I should like to thank Prime Minister Guterres for his very committed speech .
I too regard globalisation and the rapid changes that are under way as the major challenges , and I also think that they will only succeed if the people of the countries concerned are involved .
I was therefore very pleased with the Commission ' s document for the Lisbon Summit with its two main messages .
The first of these - I am tempted to say - is the usual stuff about the economy , but the second , and rather more important , is that we should reinforce the European social model by investing in people .
The main message is that the individual should be at the centre of the EU ' s policies .
I completely agree with this main message and I also agree with what was said about social cohesion , but I should like to warn against the idea that cohesion of that kind can be created by riding roughshod over the individual countries in an attempt to create uniformity .
We have our own approach in Denmark , as Jens-Peter Bonde emphasised , and other countries have theirs , as has also been mentioned .
What is crucial is that the individual Member States and the EU should respect the fact that there can be different methods of solving the problems concerned .
I therefore hope that , in future , matters will not be negotiated in such a way that Denmark will be forced to use its veto in connection with the intergovernmental conference and discussion of the social systems . I hope , rather , that we shall have negotiations in which each country is accorded equal status and thus arrive at results we call all support .
Another reason why I am saying this is that we ought to have something on the agenda in addition to comparisons with the United States .
We must never for a moment forget that our greatest task in Europe is a healing one . By that I mean we must not lose sight of the development perspective .
I want to end by saying that social cohesion is to be created both in the individual countries and in Europe as a whole , but that this will not be achieved if the individual countries do not continue to be cohesive within themselves for many years to come .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am particularly concerned about the information and knowledge society which is supposed to be promoted during the Portuguese Presidency .
Anyone who , at a time of mergers and rationalisation , wheels out the jobs argument to legitimise new technology needs above all to be clear about one thing : a just distribution of all the forms of work necessary to society can never be brought about by new technology alone .
To achieve that , we first need an initiative to redistribute work by radically cutting working time and sharing out the work of reproduction differently .
These proposals are not new but they are becoming more topical .
Why ?
Because so far the debate on the information society has completely ignored the fact that only an elite with good technical training benefits from it !
To prevent a repeat of the promise of prosperity for all thanks to technology , but without any change to social structures , we need a debate on power and the distribution of resources .
Or have industrialisation , nuclear power and biotechnology led to greater justice in the past ?
One important point is unfortunately missing completely from the debate , despite the fact that this House is otherwise so fond of consumer protection and mentions it so often .
The right to data protection does not appear in the Euro Paper nor is it part of the current debate on e-commerce .
I wonder what has happened to it !
Or has the evidence recently supplied of the ' Echelon ' global bugging system already been forgotten ?
If we wish to remain credible in developing a European Charter of Fundamental Rights then the fundamental right to privacy must of course be included in each of our individual programmes , in particular where new technologies are concerned .
Mr President , I think it is extremely commendable that the Portuguese programme places such emphasis upon combating unemployment and that the objective is to banish all unemployment .
Nonetheless , there remains an imbalance in the programme about which I am concerned and which I want to talk about .
The emphasis upon the knowledge - or information - society in this programme , as in the different national programmes of which we are aware , does in fact lead to a concentration upon innovators , entrepreneurs , new companies and new industries .
Education is to be put in order , a fiscal policy devised and venture capital arranged . In fact , everything possible is to be done to provide the innovators with everything on a plate .
My own experience of these industries , however , is that they are managing really rather well .
In many cases , they have far too much capital , and in many cases they are spoiled .
I have seen IT companies which are unbelievably spoiled .
I think that resources should instead be invested in trying to prevent a split in society , a division of society into two sectors : the new economy and the old .
Above all , integration mechanisms should be created .
Perhaps what is most important of all is to create an infrastructure of such a kind that the industries which are not undergoing expansion have the chance to keep up and that population groups on the periphery can be involved .
I therefore think there should be investment in computers for primary schools , broadband communications for sparsely populated areas , technology libraries for the public and a public sector which should not be impoverished but , rather , reinforced .
Mr President , the agenda for the Lisbon Council , which is to be held on 23 and 24 Match , is liable to induce dizziness .
One sees references , albeit only in chapter headings , to the Europe of innovation and knowledge , structural reforms , competitiveness , the European social model , employment , social cohesion , macroeconomic policies and sustainable growth .
It is not surprising , given all this , that the numerous contributions made by the presidency of the Commission and by the Member States tend , for the moment , to be spread too thin .
This exercise could end in one of two quite different ways - either enabling the vast exchange of stimulating ideas , which each party would then attempt to apply at national level , with the possibility of joint initiatives in the new field of electronic trade - and this would not , at the end of the day , be such a bad scenario - or with the Council setting its heart on parading results in terms of the transfer of skills to Europe , which would entail increased centralisation and bureaucracy , which is to say exactly the opposite of what is required .
Reading the preparatory documents gives rise to certain fears in this regard .
These documents state that - please excuse the jargon , but it is not of my own making - there must be greater convergence between the Cologne process on the coordination of macroeconomic policies , the Cardiff process on structural reforms and the Luxembourg process on the coordination of employment policies , and a collateral enrichment of the content of the employment pact and of the multilateral monitoring of budgetary policies .
But how can we guarantee greater convergence of all these vastly different processes ?
The conclusion of the document issued by the presidency on 12 January holds the key .
We must revise the broad guidelines of our economic policies - which at present only have the status of an annual recommendation from the Council to the Member States - with a view to amplifying their scope and above all , consolidating their status as a ' framework document ' .
It would appear that here one should take the word ' framework ' as having the dual meaning of ' synthesis ' and ' obligation ' .
Mr President , are we not , with these blanket documents , going down the path of reinventing the broad strategic guidelines ?
One may well wonder , particularly after reading the French contribution , which crowns them with interventionism , proposing that a whole range of national policies be coordinated in Brussels , such as those on employment , social protection and SMEs , and accompanying them with a vast array of statistical indicators , for which monitoring will have to be arranged .
Centralised guidance of this nature would result in further infringements of subsidiarity , increased standardisation of details , and a more restrictive coordination imposed on countries whose circumstances differ , which is to say , eventually , in new inflexibilities which would exacerbate the inelasticity of the single currency .
In our opinion , the aim of the Lisbon Council should in fact be to iron out these inflexibilities , to promote flexibility and the ability to adjust , and to exchange positive national experiences with a view to fostering the creativity that can only flourish when peoples are given freedom of choice .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , in the speeches which we have heard a noble aim has been mentioned , that of we Europeans becoming competitive with the United States , of developing ourselves into equal partners with the United States .
If we consider our gross national product , that ought actually to be possible .
If , on the other hand , we look , for example , at the issue of filling top posts - when it is a question of finding a new Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund - and see how the Europeans behave towards the Americans , then without a doubt we are still a very long way from this equal partnership .
We now need to ask ourselves why this is the case .
Of course there are sectors of the business world , including the new media , in which we occupy leading positions .
Here I need only mention mobile telephones .
We have banned them here in the Chamber , rightly , because they are instruments of torment .
At the same time , however , they also make life much easier for many people because they create jobs .
And in Europe we are world leaders in this field .
Why ?
We are world leaders because we managed to adopt a common set of European rules ; early on we decided on a common European standard which today has become a world standard .
This means that if we in Europe get our act together in good time then we will also be competitive in this field of new technologies .
Where then do Europe 's shortcomings actually lie ?
I believe , Mr President-in-Office , that we cannot eliminate the shortcomings by setting up more observatories as is planned at present .
I believe that these observatories create a handful of jobs for officials , but that they do not create any jobs in small and medium-sized enterprises .
We in Europe are deficient where training is concerned .
This is shown by the fact that where the new media are concerned we are having to import from countries outside Europe .
Europe lacks , as has already been stated , entrepreneurs and entrepreneurial spirit .
There are too few young people who are willing to take the risk of being self-employed .
The way in which we structure our work and the way in which work is organised is not flexible enough .
Establishing additional rigid rules - such as , for example , introducing a rigid 35-hour week in France - can , I admit , create jobs in the short term , but I am convinced that in the long term it damages our competitiveness and thus destroys jobs .
In Europe we are also still a long way from a common domestic market .
We have 15 domestic markets and a common European internal market .
For electronic commerce we need common , clear , European rules .
We need a European patent at a reasonable price ; we do not have that yet either .
This European patent is so expensive that it is not competitive with other patents .
We need the European company legislation , and not least we need to adapt our social security systems to the new reality of a common Europe , because this too forms the basis of what we call the social model , namely a social market economy for Europe .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Gutíerrez for his speech tonight and also for his Lisbon initiative , which is very important to us .
If we are honest , we must admit that it has been a very long road from Luxembourg to Lisbon , and that really now we are looking for concrete achievements , for something to genuinely come out of this Lisbon Summit .
We have a lot of Europeans in the gallery here with us this evening and I wonder what they make of our discussion here this evening .
I would like them to take away with them this evening the idea that the institutions of the European Union are now embarked upon a genuine process , which will lead to full employment once again in the European Union .
There are many challenges involved with creating that full employment .
Some of those challenges will be very difficult to overcome , but the important thing is that we have to turn the rhetoric of what we have been saying for many , many years - about full employment , about a socially inclusive society , about a society that is based on innovation and knowledge - into reality .
This is the great challenge , the great importance of Lisbon .
I just want to dwell on one or two key aspects that will help us realise that goal of turning rhetoric into reality .
Firstly , there is the commitment to having genuine benchmarks , a genuine process of peer review , to the setting of targets , of genuine targets that we can achieve , to governments agreeing to embark upon what is quite a brave process of saying : ' yes , we will allow ourselves to be marked against each other , we will allow ourselves to be marked against the rest of the world ' .
That really is a brave decision , because some Member States will clearly find themselves towards the bottom of the league table , which is something nobody likes .
But this is important if we are to have a genuine achievable outcome from this Lisbon Summit rather than perhaps setting off down another road - a road which I know Prime Minister Gutíerrez does not want to embark on , because he actually wants to see something achieved in the process of the Lisbon Summit .
There are other areas that we must look at .
One of these is the challenge of creating an e-Europe which involves all its citizens and does not leave anybody on the wayside .
Another is the process of actually having a genuine single market - which we still do not yet have - and skills training that will be the key to delivering that innovative and knowledge-driven society .
There are tough choices , but once again in the gallery here tonight , I would like those people listening to this debate to take away with them the belief that we are going to actually have a society based on full employment , that the road to Lisbon will be the end of our journey , and that some concrete results will actually come out of it .
I welcome the new strategic goal of making Europe the most dynamic and competitive area .
Who could challenge such an ambition ?
I have to say , however , that dynamism and entrepreneurship as well as social cohesion are a very ambitious target , not to mention the creative tension between those two objectives .
I hope that we will achieve them , but I sound a warning note .
I note another ambitious objective of playing a proactive role in organising cyberspace .
I cannot help thinking this is more a case of closing the stable door after the horse has bolted !
I welcome the emphasis on bolstering research and development in Europe , on developing content industries and on speeding up broad-band networks with all that is involved as part of working towards a knowledge society .
Actually , I would prefer to call it an information economy because it is the economy aspect which is the most important .
We live in the time of IDEA - the Internet digital electronic age .
That sums up what we are trying to achieve on the e-side , the electronic side , of life .
But I welcome the fact that this summit is aiming also at a wider emphasis on reforms of our economies in Europe to improve competitiveness and innovation .
That must be right .
We cannot just focus on the new economy .
We must pay attention to the old .
I look forward to hearing more detail about the European Charter for micro-enterprises - that should be very interesting when it comes forward .
One of the priorities which has been identified under the Cardiff process is to improve the sensitivity of the financial markets to the value of intangible investments and investments in knowledge .
That has been achieved possibly beyond the wildest dreams of people a few months ago .
It can be seen in the phenomenal growth in the stock markets of Europe in the value of dot.com companies and just recently in the major changes in the composition of the FTSE 100 index in London .
I cannot help thinking however that although these values have gone sky high and we may expect the bubble to burst , nevertheless the underlying structural change in our economies is here to stay .
Mr President-in-Office , you have made us in the European Parliament eager to leave for Lisbon already .
All of us can only hope that the Special Summit is able to live up to the high expectations which people have of it .
Because , as you have already stressed , we do not need one more process after another , one procedure after another ; rather we need action by which the people of the European Union can measure the benefits and added value of what the European Union does .
That is also why you have rightly drawn together employment , economic reform , growth and social cohesion and made them issues for top-level action .
It is important for all players in the governments and in the Commission to be pulling in the same direction towards full employment .
Then it will also be possible to convince all economic policy-makers of the need to conform to agreed behaviour , which so far they unfortunately still have not yet done .
Europe need lament neither over the success of the US economy nor over the strong dollar if it does not learn any lessons for itself from it .
Reforms of financial services , services capital and labour markets are certainly useful and necessary .
But they alone will not give growth the stimulus it needs to enable long-lasting growth , effectively generating jobs , to be organised at a high level .
We were forced to experience this several times in the nineties .
An average productivity increase of 2 % requires a growth rate of 3.5 % for full employment to be able to be achieved within ten years .
This scenario has moved into the foreseeable future .
That is why full employment actually needs to be right at the top of the agenda .
We need to set a growth target of at least 3 % .
The aim of full employment cannot be achieved by economic policy alone .
The Europe of innovation and the information society also need to be commandeered to reach this target .
We are a long way from it today .
We must also recognise that we need another type of economic and financial policy .
It is simply unacceptable for shareholders or directors of plcs to be the only ones who decide on jobs , the economy and share prices .
When 13-year-old school children play on the computer after school at restructuring their parents ' share portfolios , then this has more to do with toy casinos than with responsibility .
I think that the Special Summit in Lisbon will herald responsible economic planning in the European Union .
Mr President , Prime Minister , President of the Commission , the Portuguese Presidency has presented an ambitious programme for the Special Summit .
Congratulations !
I also welcome the support which Portugal is receiving from the Commission , not least through the communication which seeks to develop the Community into an information society for everyone .
The comment made by the Christian Democrat Prime Minister , Jean Claude Juncker , at the employment summit in Luxembourg in 1997 also applies to the Lisbon Summit . He said that it must not be a literary convention , referring to the numerous non-binding declarations made at many summits .
In adopting the Luxembourg Process the Heads of State and Government achieved tangible successes .
Since 1997 , however , the really significant results have failed to materialise .
So far , the Cologne Employment Pact has not been able to be invested with sufficient content .
In addition , the macroeconomic dialogue lacks the participation of the European Parliament as an equal partner .
Yes , some aspects of the Luxembourg employment policy guidelines have not been applied rigorously enough by the Member States , in particular , for example , in the field of lifelong learning , as the 1999 Joint Employment Report noted .
In information technology , in particular , some European countries lack qualified workers , as Mr Suominen emphasised .
Rather than ' importing ' them from third countries , it is better to invest accordingly in vocational training and further education , to invest in human capital .
This is the most effective way of reducing unemployment .
The most important objective of the Summit must be achieved as quickly as possible , and that is to improve the competitiveness of the European economy .
In this context the Ciampi Group also mentions the European company statute .
It puts the loss to the economy of not having a statute of this kind at EUR 30 billion a year .
We do not want the basic unrefined European company model .
We need this European company to come supplied with minimum standards of worker participation .
Our social policy goal is not of course the basic unrefined model of the market economy either , but a social market economy built on the European model .
We should also judge the success of the Lisbon Summit on the contribution it makes to achieving this goal .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , do you know how Archimedes expounded his theory of the lever ?
He would say , ' Give me a fulcrum and I will lift the world . '
In Lisbon you will clearly be trying to lift the world or , in any case , our world , the world of Europe .
As for the lever , you have described all the appropriate mechanisms in your exhilarating proposal , which is exciting in so many respects .
That simply leaves the fulcrum .
The fulcrum is provided by resources .
You find yourself before a House some of whose Members can still remember what I will refer to as the ' White Paper ' syndrome , which is to say the remarkable initiative instigated by Jacques Delors that was torn to shreds by the ' accountants ' at ECOFIN .
We would not want the same misfortune to befall you now , as the programme that you have presented to us is so exhilarating that it could energise Europe and provide it with the future alluded to by Mr Goebbels .
Nevertheless , you will have to have the means at your disposal , means which , I fear , you are somewhat lacking at present .
It is thus up to you to create them .
The straitjacket of Agenda 2000 will not provide you with the requisite means .
You will thus have to encourage your colleagues to see to it that the proposals you make to us are going to be financed .
Just one example - and it is one of the mechanisms central to your proposals - is that of the information and knowledge society .
It is clear - and you explained this very well - that the social divide is a fundamental problem that we must eradicate .
There is no need to add to this what I will call the digital divide .
Indeed , to whom will you offer this information and knowledge society ?
To an increasingly aged or ageing population , to a population which , despite everything , is still poor , and to a population which is becoming , alas , less and less well educated .
You will thus have to adopt a bottom-up approach if you do not want this knowledge society to amount to little more than the pursuit of profits by a number of successful and necessary new firms .
This is not your objective .
Unfortunately , there is one component missing from the mechanism that you have envisaged .
I refer to the public services . The public services have played a key role throughout the entire existence of our European social model .
It is true that the era of monopolies is past and that the Commission has initiated a process of liberalisation , of introducing competition into some public sectors in order to modernise them and improve their efficiency .
But we cannot stop there .
We must now define more clearly , within the context of competition and the information society , the principal public service roles of tomorrow as applicable to public undertakings and to private companies in this sector .
What is needed , in this regard , are stronger measures , which do not yet feature in the Commission ' s work programme , but to which you could give some impetus .
This , it seems to me , would send out an extremely important signal .
Lastly , this knowledge society hinges on research and development and I would like to applaud , at this juncture , the Commission initiative that aims to create a European research area .
Mr President , the Commission and Parliament will nevertheless have need of the Council in order to secure the requisite resources to create this European research area .
The framework programme will not suffice , it will have to be boosted , and its broad guidelines modified .
This is a major task , but we are relying on you to see it through .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , you have spoken , Mr President , of a political deficit .
I believe that the proposals you will put forward in Lisbon , which should help to merge these infamous broad economic policy guidelines , these ' Employment ' guidelines , to form guidelines for the European policy on growth and employment , mark a step in the right direction .
They are a tool for political decision making .
And yet they incorporate institutional measures whose influence we will be able to assess in the medium term .
They will bolster the role of the European Council in the decision-making process .
What we are doing here has certain implications .
Let us assess its impact on the set of decisions that we will take when we have to discuss the reform of the General Affairs Council .
And then , underlying this decision-making process at European level , there is another crusade to be fought , and one which each of us must embark upon within our own Member States , since it is pointless laying down fine policy guidelines if the budgetary discussions that we enter into within our Member States fail to accommodate these guidelines .
It is up to each and every one of us to work on this .
One can but welcome the ambitious objective which you have set , within the ten-year strategy you propose , of lifting the taboo on the notion of full employment in the European Union , and of providing us with the means to do so by setting a quantified target of 3 % growth .
But over and above that , as regards your objective of a knowledge economy , Claude Desama has just spoken of the contribution that public services can make to attaining this objective , although I myself would stress the importance of a strategy for lifelong learning .
This calls for hard and fast objectives , but we are aware that these will not be attainable unless we base our proposals on genuine social dialogue , and I feel that we must also move forward in this respect .
Lastly , a final word on social cohesion .
I am pleased to hear you stress this , since we do not want a society which swaps innovation for social cohesion .
But we do not feel that social exclusion can be eradicated in a piecemeal fashion .
It is a global project , and while the notion of target groups may constitute a staging point , it cannot provide a solution to all our problems in terms of poverty and social exclusion .
We know that this requires a proactive approach and that we can count on your determination .
We will offer you our support in Lisbon in laying down new guidelines for the European Union ' s economic policy .
Mr President , along with my colleagues , I would like to welcome the very clear document that the Portuguese Presidency has given us today .
I want to emphasise what I believe is the real challenge which will face you and your colleagues when you sit down at the end of this month to discuss the presidency 's proposal : namely how to change our whole attitude and thinking about entrepreneurship , about encouraging people to go out and start the new businesses that we now acknowledge are the engines of the new economy .
It is sad for Europe that it has actually needed the stimulus of the " knowledge economy " to realise what has been clear for the last decade or more , that our economy is not adequately geared towards encouraging those small entrepreneurs to come into the market , to take the risk to set up new businesses .
But it is not just the risk-takers who need to be encouraged .
It is everybody who is in a job working in an organisation .
In the new economy we want to give those people the opportunities to start businesses themselves ; to go and work for the new growing businesses ; to have more control over their working lives ; to truly achieve their potential .
Think how many people are working in large companies , not using all their skills , trapped in large organisations , worried about moving because they cannot take their pensions with them , concerned not least about unemployment .
One of the keys to mobilising this type of risk-taking is to move towards such full employment that people feel they can take that personal risk .
However , I would conclude by asking : which is going to come first ?
Can we really achieve that full employment without unleashing that entrepreneurial talent ?
If we wait for that to happen , I fear the great objectives you have set before us will not be achieved .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , it is , I think , thanks to your and the Commission ' s commitment that the Lisbon Summit can finally prove to be an ambitious and social summit where the European social model is at long last seen as a new driving force behind European integration and where full employment can become a concrete goal .
But if Lisbon wants to become the summit of these political ambitions , it must also take on board methodology .
I would like to draw your attention to three points , in particular , which seem essential to me if this summit wants to succeed as a major social summit .
Firstly , the method should be such that the employment strategy and the new coordination procedure for social security do not become subservient to a macro-economic policy whose only aim is stability .
To me , Mr President-in-Office , this is a clear message that the Social Affairs Council must have as much clout as the ECOFIN Council and that political power must remain in the hands of the European Council itself .
Secondly , I would very much like to second your commitment to lay down clear objectives , regarding both economic growth and the level of employment .
But I would like to add that , if Lisbon wants to become a real social summit , we must also be able to spell out our plans to modernise and reinforce social security .
Here , too , we need standards of excellence and a Luxembourg process .
Finally , I support the European Commission ' s intent to formulate an ambitious European poverty standard and to drastically reduce poverty within a ten-year period .
I think it is important to formulate an objective in this respect , Mr President-in-Office , that is to say to challenge all Member States to stamp out social exclusion of all citizens in our society , not only children , but also their parents and the elderly .
I wish the President-in-Office all the best in the pursuit of his ambitions .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , the Special European Council in Lisbon on employment , economic reform and social cohesion is to pursue , as you have told us , an objective which is ambitious , very ambitious , at the risk of disappointing our fellow citizens , conscious as they are that decreeing full employment and the eradication of poverty in Europe cannot , in itself , ensure that this objective is attained .
But , when all is said and done , this summit will have a major benefit - that of outlining , in the wake of Cardiff and Luxembourg , a political desire for greater social cohesion , particularly as regards the 57 million people who are living in a state of poverty within the Union , including single mothers , large families and children , and whose numbers will in the future be swelled by other outcasts from society , specifically those people who will not have access to new areas of knowledge , since this will engender new social imbalances .
It would thus be appropriate to implement an economic and social policy which is firmly geared towards the future , in order to prevent the emergence of a digital gulf between the ' info-rich ' and the ' info-poor ' , which is to say , as one speaker has just put it , a digital divide .
It is for this reason that , while I feel that new technologies constitute a tremendous vector for socially-inclusive growth , they will only be so if they are taught from an early age , in that by 2010 fifty per cent of all jobs will be in sectors directly linked to information technologies .


I recommend that Lisbon Summit take three decisions in this regard : firstly , on a strategy for lifelong learning , with the establishing of an agenda for eradicating child poverty , both financial and intellectual impoverishment ; secondly , on preparing European society for the European research area ; thirdly , on implementing a working methodology and coordination procedure which is open and based on our social and economic policies , and is accompanied by concerted assessment of our national plans .
Mr President , there is an idea in the Portuguese Presidency 's statement which I like very much .
This idea is the notion that the strength of our European economy is rooted in the capabilities , imagination and creativity - quite simply in the knowledge - of the people in the European economic process .
If we are to take this seriously , however , if the intention is for this really to become a political programme , then no additional justification is required for a policy of social inclusion , because participation in society would in itself be the strongest productive force in our shared economy .
If that is the case , Mr President-in-Office , then we urgently need common objectives .
We need firm targets , the attainment of which it is possible to measure , in terms of both quality and quantity , for increasing employment rates , as for example was also recently proposed by the Commission .
We need firm , joint , realistic targets for reducing the unemployment rate , as for example was also recently proposed by the Commission , to 4 % in 2010 .
No longer must it be acceptable for the ECOFIN ministers to allow each other to celebrate consolidation successes at home while responsibility for the massive unemployment in Europe remains shrouded in mystery .
I wish you much strength , pledge Parliament 's support and assure you that this Parliament will have more to say on the issues of economic and employment policy in the future , as the people of Europe also expect .
That would give you another ally for your policy .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , it is gratifying and encouraging to hear this House speak of a new strategic objective for the next decade . This objective consists of creating a European Union which , on the world stage , forms a more dynamic and competitive economic and social area , based on new technologies , innovation and knowledge , so that we are capable of increasing levels of economic growth , with more , and better , jobs and greater social cohesion .
It is clear that we must redefine the role of Europe in the world economy , creating a competitive Europe , opening the way to new and better jobs and organising this process with an appropriate strategy for social cohesion .
The central role of employment and social policy , in the creation of this new society , is based on two factors .
On the one hand we have economic efficiency , since , in this new technological context , the quality of human resources is essential .
On the other hand , we have social equality , because , despite the economic upturn which we are witnessing , we still have an enormous degree of social inequality .
Unemployment , social exclusion and the danger of future imbalance in the social security systems , are problems which are exacerbated by the unavoidable challenges of globalisation , an ageing population , technological changes , demographic slowdown and the increasing incorporation of women in the workplace .
Europe needs to achieve full employment .
This full employment should be adapted to the society taking shape , with greater possibilities for its men and women .
European citizens must believe in this project and this state of affairs .
They must not see it as something abstract which we only speak about in Brussels or Strasbourg .
We are asking right now for a transition to a new society , to an economy based on innovation , and on the information and knowledge-based society .
We must learn quickly , create new practices more suited to the new society and invest in technological change , but we must never forget the people or the institutions .
Lisbon will be a step forward and we must achieve a renewal of the European social model because that is the only way we can achieve greater employment and , at the same time , greater social cohesion . To this end , we must concentrate on a series of priority issues .
We must improve the effectiveness of active employment policies .
We must strengthen the synergies between adaptability , education and lifelong training .
We must increase employment in the sector consisting of services which facilitate business initiative and reduce the administrative burden on small- and medium-sized enterprises , reducing non-wage costs . Lastly , we have to promote the integration of general equal opportunities policies for all men and women , with particular stress on aspects which help to reconcile professional life with family life .
All of this has to be done thinking of the European citizen .
It has to be done thinking of the men and women who live and work daily in our countries .
The Special Lisbon Summit must fundamentally reaffirm , for the European citizen , the notion that the European Union still believes in the idea of a society which favours inclusion and social cohesion .
Mr President , the Portuguese Presidency should be praised for focusing the debate on issues which although not new , are being addressed in an innovative way , with ambitious objectives , beginning with the urgent need to face up to the competition , which is marked by constant technological innovation and democratisation .
In doing this , we must be aware that the technological development of the United States has come about because of extremely dynamic private initiatives , as well as because of their arms industry and a certain degree of protectionism .
We must also look at the case of Japan because it holds lessons for Europe in terms of the organisation of work and the role of the state , of businesses and of the workers themselves in business objectives .
We must take what is useful from these two models , such as entrepreneurial skills and the organisation of work , whilst preserving the best of what Europe has to offer in the form of a social model appropriate for a post-industrial economy .
The fact is that Europe needs to have 32 million more people in work if it is to match the United States ' employment rate . It needs to increase employment amongst women , to integrate marginalised groups , to strengthen social cohesion , a problem that the Structural Funds have so far not been able to resolve , and to integrate 5 million very long-term unemployed , many of whom lost their jobs as a result of industrial restructuring .
We also need new qualifications , as we know that access to technology does not necessarily guarantee high-quality jobs and entrepreneurial initiative . We need a greater sense of responsibility and greater participation from our social partners - new actors , as the Pintassilgo report calls them - so that we can implement employment agreements and achieve competitiveness in business .
We need to solve the problems of poverty and we need a social model which is suited to these new conditions .
Mr President-in-Office , your proposal is a very ambitious one , although we know that its implementation does not depend on you , but on the 15 Member States .
If I may refer to the Austrian situation , I would very much like that country to be one of the states which will be putting your proposal into practice .
If Austria does this , however , it will be lying to and duping the very people who voted for one of the parties in its government .
I hope that it does just that !
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , we often hear it said by our neighbours , at all levels of expertise or debate , that we live in a globalised world .
However , it is not so common to hear people speak of what Europe ' s role should be in this context of the information society , globalisation and technology .
It seems to me , Mr President , that this is probably the case because we Europeans see Europe as somewhat removed from our more immediate concerns and interests .
The prime concern of the European citizens , after health , is probably employment .
Within this concern , employment is linked to competitiveness .
All of this will lead us to the need to define the role of Europe in the world economy , of Europe as a competitive platform - and I stress ' competitive ' - opening the way to new and better jobs , higher quality jobs from the point of view , of course , of guaranteeing social cohesion .
Social risks , social breakdown , unemployment , social exclusion , imbalances in the social security systems , are unavoidable challenges presented by globalisation , technological change and an ageing population .
We therefore have to re-establish conditions of full employment , employment adapted to the society which is taking shape , which we are all building .
This requires the creation of a dynamic of growth which guarantees , for the whole of the European Union , an average annual rate of growth of 3 % at least .
I therefore think it is necessary to stimulate a culture of dynamism and business initiative and a strengthening of social cohesion .
All of this is absolutely essential . We need technological change and institutional reform .
While it is necessary to learn more quickly from good practices , it is also necessary to create suitable new practices and be innovative in the field of political methodology .
Of course , today ' s Europe has organised institutional procedures for developing these policies , to create an economy , and above all a society , based on innovation and knowledge , by means of a European policy on the information and knowledge-based society , the construction of an educational society on a European scale and the development of a European area of science and technology open to the world .
Finally , Mr President , we have to guarantee a combination of policies which promote growth and employment , guarantee macroeconomic security and the consolidation of the euro ; which promote growth and the transition towards a society and economy of innovation and knowledge .
Through policies and structural reform , at the service of the citizens , we will create a Europe which is closer to us and , of course , a Europe which is stronger .
Mr President , I would like to endorse all compliments for the Portuguese Presidency ' s ambitions with this special summit .
The intention to achieve actual coordination of the socio-economic policy across the board appeals to me a great deal .
I would like to draw your attention to three specific points .
The first point concerns corporate governance .
The Portuguese Presidency has put the social dimension of innovation very firmly on the agenda , but I think that this dimension is still too far removed from the intentions to promote new activity .
In my opinion , this social dimension should , in fact , be brought into this new European company , whether this is a large multinational or a small booming ICT company .
In this light , I would like to reopen the debate on corporate governance to discuss the wider concept of the company as stakeholders society , including the role of both sides of industry and all parties involved .
On the last page of the president ' s document , I noticed the intention to set up an observatory for industrial change .
I can foresee a large role for such an observatory and I would , therefore , like to see a pro-active approach to dealing with it , and I would call on UNICE , the organisation of European employers , in particular , to show more commitment and some more enthusiasm .
It disturbed me that their documents for this summit mainly contain wish lists vis-à-vis the authorities but they do not emphasise their own commitment and their role at all .
In my opinion , you do not get something for nothing . Their cooperation in these activities should also be outlined .
Another point which I would like to touch upon briefly is tax coordination , as I do not think I have sufficient time for three points .
The presidency has mentioned the sensitive issue of company tax and has admitted that there is a considerable impasse in the Monti package regarding this issue .
I would like to make another appeal for a broad analysis of the developments in the field of company tax , especially vis-à-vis the Commission , and with regard to the Member States , I would like to suggest that such a Luxembourg process be considered because when I read the report , I can see examples of best practices which could be adopted .
So I would ask that this point be given due attention too .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , there has already been a great deal of discussion , and I hope that I will not repeat any of what has gone before .
I would , however , like to thank the Portuguese Presidency most heartily for the document presented and for the excellent address given by the President-in-Office of the Council .
As President Guterres reminded us , it is true that we do not intend to introduce new processes in Lisbon , but rather to combine those decided upon in Luxembourg , Cardiff and Cologne .
However , this is the first time in many years that a strategic objective has been put forward , and I feel that it is extremely important : to transform the Union into an economic area based on innovation and knowledge , in order to boost economic growth , achieve full employment in proper jobs and bring about social cohesion .
Last year , the Commission carried out a study which revealed that , if we do not make radical changes to the qualification and professional training systems , by the year 2010 , the skills of 80 % of those currently in employment will be outdated , and this will exacerbate existing inequalities and open up new gulfs .
The answer is lifelong learning and a large-scale investment in technical skills and knowledge .
The amount of research - another strategic sector - which is carried out in the Member States of Europe must also increase .
We must take a qualitative step forwards and move on from framework programmes to a European research area and a common research policy .
This is innovation , and not just structural , technological innovation but also innovation in the field of procedures and methods .
As Mr Van Lancker has already said , the " Social Affairs " Council must have the same status as the ECOFIN Council .
Social dialogue must then be consolidated as a fundamental means of reaching a consensus on the implementation of the necessary changes .
Lisbon must be remembered , not only for its excellent preparatory document , but as a Summit which , at the start of the new millennium , will mark a significant turnaround for economic growth , employment and social cohesion in Europe .
- ( PT ) Mr President-in-Office , I would like to congratulate you on having persuaded Europe that the modernisation of the economy and social cohesion are concepts that can be mutually compatible .
The preparations for the Lisbon Summit have demonstrated that people in Europe are not working hard enough and that if we want to be the most dynamic region in the world , we not only have to work harder , but we will have to do this with more information at our disposal , combined with an ability to use that information .
If we are to increase the rate of employment and fund our social security systems , we will have to have a longer working life and , above all , we will have to have more and better trained women in work .
We therefore hope that this Lisbon Summit will help to change the present model of female employment .
I would like to ask you , Mr President , if you envisage this summit yielding conclusions which will enable specific , timetabled measures to be adopted so that there are not only more women in the world of work , but above all , in the new knowledge economy ?
Ladies and gentlemen , I am extremely grateful for the excellent and highly pertinent contributions you have made during this debate on the preparation for our Lisbon Special Summit .
I think that we needed to have this debate and we also needed to involve Parliament , because in my opinion Europe still lacks strategic direction .
In order to achieve this strategic direction , there must be an institutional alliance which transcends the natural differences of political opinion .
This alliance has in fact been given form in the excellent contribution that Romano Prodi ' s Commission has just made to the preparations for the Lisbon Summit with their paper . The fact that Parliament has a crucial role to play in this is also important .
At the Lisbon Summit , in addition to agreeing on a strategy , I would like us to define a set of measures and an open form of coordination .
Let me give two examples which relate to everything that has been said here about the practical measures I would like to see adopted .
One is that by 2002 , all of Europe ' s schools and training centres should be connected to the Internet and that they should at the same time have appropriately trained staff to provide the training which young people leaving secondary education need . I also would also like to see everyone receiving professional training , whether they are unemployed or not , to be able to gain a kind of " driving licence " for the information society , which will enable them to operate computers and navigate the Internet .
If this happens , we will then be providing a framework under which information technology is not a cause of social division , that is to say of a widening in the gulf between those who succeed and those who fail . On the contrary , it will be a major vehicle for integration and for combating social exclusion .
My second example is this : a great deal has been said about the participation of women in the labour market and about equal opportunities for women and men in society in general .
Practical measures relating to what I spoke about earlier - a common goal for support services for families and particularly for children - are a key factor in creating jobs and at the same time creating equal opportunities and ensuring much greater participation by women in the labour market .
We need practical measures like this , but we also need a form of coordination that will enable us , as part of the various approaches that have been referred to here , to ensure that the European institutions and governments adopt joint action programmes and have quantifiable and verifiable instruments to facilitate this coordination .
Much has been said in today ' s debate about the fundamental concepts of modern life , such as globalisation , the knowledge society and the relationship between the old and new economies .
All these words and the ideas behind them can apply to both opportunities and threats .
The challenge before us is to turn threats into opportunities and particularly , to avoid at all costs turning opportunities into threats .
Obviously , in order to achieve this , there are two issues which are crucial in all areas .
Firstly , massive investment in people is needed . A key concept which many of you have mentioned here today is the fact that lifelong training and learning are an investment in people and a decisive factor in these trends becoming an opportunity for everyone .
But in addition to investing in people , public authorities , be they individual Member States , the European Union itself or international authorities , must be equipped with regulatory powers to ensure that business and personal initiatives are compatible with social justice and fairness .
This certainly holds true for globalisation , which permits greater growth in wealth , international trade and productivity .
However , unregulated globalisation , which is what we have today , or globalisation in which large sections of the world ' s population do not benefit from significant investment in people , is also a factor in exclusion , in division and in widening the gap between rich and poor .
This also applies to the knowledge society , which may give rise to a new equality of opportunity , but could also be a factor in the increasing gulf between those who have access to it and those who do not . This also applies to the relationship between the old and new economies .
This is in fact not the first time that a technological transition has changed the social model and the model of economic organisation .
At such times of profound change , problems , particularly those concerning employment in the old economy , have been resolved by turning to the new economy and its resources .
To give an example , in Europe we have a textile industry .
We must maintain a textile industry in Europe , but this will only happen if we are able to apply the technologies of the information and knowledge society .
It is quite extraordinary that at the moment , in the so-called " new economy " sectors , there is a shortfall of around 800 000 qualified people for existing posts at the same time that there are millions of people unemployed .
This means that we have not yet managed to use the resources of the new economy to resolve the problems of the old economy . We will never find solutions to those problems if we approach them with the mindset of that old economy .
Lastly , I would like to answer a question that I have been asked , which is whether I am speaking here on behalf of 15 or 14 countries .
The answer is simple : I am speaking on behalf of 15 countries .
One of the things that the Portuguese Presidency has guaranteed is Austria ' s full participation in the workings of all of the Union ' s institutions .
This does not prevent the Portuguese Government , and many other European governments , from being not so much in dispute with a particular country , as being engaged in a battle to preserve certain principles and values .
Strangely enough , these very principles and values existed even before political movements such as the Social Democrats and the Christian Democrats .
I am talking about principles and values which come from the Enlightenment and which affirm the supremacy of reason .
Because , if modern societies have one enemy today , it is irrationality in political behaviour .
We could call this irrationality political populism , or excessive nationalism , or religious fundamentalism , or racism or xenophobia .
This is a key issue : unless these values are respected , we may have a healthy economy , we may have jobs , but there will be no Europe .
, Commission .
( IT ) Mr President , Prime Minister , just a few quick comments to close this debate , which has been lengthy but extremely important and constructive .
Firstly , we are not starting from scratch .
Anybody who may think that we have been too optimistic in this debate must understand that we are not starting from scratch .
Europe has the advantages of the single currency and the single market to build on .
In Lisbon , we will build on these resources , and consolidate them in the areas in which there is a need , and there are many of them , for the single market is not the only subject which we want to discuss in Lisbon .
It is not yet single because of the delays in public and private services ; it is not single because of the delays in achieving transparency and in introducing the use of modern technologies to make the markets fully functional in terms of information technology and , therefore , in terms of efficiency .
Now then , we have to increase productivity in these areas sufficiently to sustain economic growth without inflation .
However , we must be careful .
We may be breaking this debate on Lisbon down into constituent parts , but we have a clear objective constantly in mind : we have to create the economic and social conditions needed for sustained growth .
We have already mentioned economic conditions - efficiency and productivity .
We must also create the social conditions needed to prevent the disintegration of society due to income discrepancies , which is one of the greatest dangers .
I stress this because it needs to be borne in mind : the income discrepancies in Europe have widened recently .
This is a problem which will become irresolvable in the future , if it is not already .
Therefore , our responsibility is both economic and social .
In Lisbon , we will have to take some practical decisions .
With regard to this , I would just like to mention a specific point , given that a great many references have been made to the United States .
In the United States , this new market , this innovation , this dissemination of innovation - and the great difference is that it is a telecommunications innovation which also extends knowledge to the peripheries - emphatically did not come about through private initiative .
There was a great deal of public investment at Federal , State and local levels .
These were huge investments , and they were in modern infrastructures .
I warn you that here our direct , and I stress , direct commitment at public and the other different levels is to build telecommunications highways , the roads for these new vehicles to run on .
The market , private individuals and companies will build the vehicles , but it is our responsibility to build the new highways .
With regard to what Mr Guterres has said about Internet access in every school , on the network connecting all the peripheral areas , this is not an obligation which can be left exclusively to the market because , quite simply , the market does not operate like this and , on the other hand , without this we will not attain the new and requisite targets for production development .
Our problem is therefore that of avoiding a crisis in peripheral economies , which does not mean centralisation , nor a centralised programme , but giving peripheral economies the same chances that we give centralised economies .
This , therefore , is why the programme must be directed at schools ; this is why we must take an entire year group and insist that in that year there is no-one who does not receive Internet training .
There is therefore a very clear strategy for Lisbon .
Basically , in Lisbon , we need to revitalise employment and growth , confident in our ability to succeed , and we must therefore move towards this model which is based on stable balance .
To return to today ' s debate , I would like to pick up on an expression which was used by one of the MEPs , Mr Goebbels , who , if I am not mistaken , said that Europe is suffering from a ' deficit of the future . '
The problem is simple .
We cried on each other ' s shoulders for such a long time , but during this time the seeds of what we had sown with such sacrifice in the early days of Europe were preparing to bear fruit .
Now , let us please endeavour to make good the deficit of the future and give the coming generations a sense of direction , in the knowledge that we are working together , slowly but surely , to achieve something which will last .
It is clear that , at this point , the three processes have to be combined .
Unfortunately , our terminology is nightmarish , but let us genuinely group macroeconomic issues and labour and structural problems together , right now , and we will then be able to achieve the results we desire through very simple , specific measures .
Remember the European company : we have not yet reached unanimity over the European company , but hundreds of thousands of companies are demanding it .
It must be accomplished at all costs , because , quite simply , the idea of operating in fifteen different countries which , at this stage , are in any case metamorphosing into one single country , with different rules governing basic business principles , is not viable : we will not be able to sell it because it does not make sense .
The same applies to the Community patent - for we will not be able to sell that either - to procurement rules and the capital market and to the beginnings of the coordination of social security , because there is no point in us dreaming up great expectations of mobility or developing such successful programmes as ERASMUS or SOCRATES to make people more mobile , if our social security rules do not then support this mobility .
You see , all the different pieces are coming together to give direction to Lisbon .
We are able to give it credibility precisely because the Portuguese Presidency has teased out the threads of unification and woven these together to form a tapestry .
We now have the resources , and I hope that in Lisbon we will be able to unite to put them into practice , for I feel there is a great need for this and that we may also achieve more than we expect .
Thank you very much , Mr President of the Commission , thank you very much , Mr President-in-Office , for your notable contributions to an interesting and important debate .
I have received six motions for resolutions , pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 8.15 p.m. and resumed at 9. p.m. )

Before we resume the sitting I should like to make a comment which I always make at night sittings , but since faces change there are many people here who are not yet familiar with this .
I should like to request that you contribute to the sitting 's reaching a speedy conclusion by keeping to the speaking times .
There are three reasons for this .
The first is the old party rule : the later the evening , the more rowdy the guests . That does not apply to the plenary .
The second is that the people sitting behind the glass screens - the interpreters - also want to go home .
The third reason is that , as well as the interpreters , there are many others behind the scenes who have to work until the end of the sitting to ensure that , for example , the Minutes are ready for tomorrow .
So please , keep to the speaking times and we will make good progress !
Environmental dimension in the development process
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0051 / 2000 ) by Mr Wijkman , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on measures to promote the full integration of the environmental dimension in the development process of developing countries ( 12485 / 1 / 1999 - C5-0013 / 2000 - 1999 / 0020 ( COD ) ) .
rapporteur .
( SV ) Mr President , ever since the Brundtland report of 1987 , it has been clear that a policy which emphasises only economic growth cannot be sustained in the longer term .
The challenge for us all consists in integrating social and environmental considerations .
This means , for instance , that environmental considerations cannot be seen as a sectoral issue but that the possible negative environmental impact of production , transport , construction , etc. must be clarified at the planning stage and minimised through a variety of measures .
The Rio Conference involved preparing an action programme which , on a sector-by-sector basis , points out the most important problem areas in this context and states how protection of the environment and of natural resources is to be ensured .
In spite of the fact that this is a document of several hundred pages , it is a programme which , in general , is well put together .
If further progress is to be made towards the necessary level of integration , an appropriate method has to be developed .
Indicators also need to be selected so as to be able to keep abreast of what is under way in terms of developing know-how , pilot projects etc .
This type of work has been going on for many years in many of the OECD countries .
It could be given higher priority , but it is in fact under way .
Matters are organised rather less well in the majority of developing countries .
There , there is a lack of both knowledge and resources to facilitate the integration of environmental considerations , together with the preventive approach which is the very essence of the decisions taken in Rio .
In this context , aid can play an important role .
As aid donors , we have , on the whole , a major responsibility for ensuring that we transfer knowledge and techniques that are sustainable , that is to say which do not entail severe damage to the environment and to natural resources .
The proposed regulation we are discussing today is aimed at ensuring that , in providing aid , the EU fully and completely integrates the environmental dimension into its activities .
In the longer term , the objective is , of course , for this type of integration , or mainstreaming as it is called , to take place quite automatically , that is to say without special budget appropriations or programmes .
So far , there remains , however , a lot to be done in terms of developing methods .
In particular , knowledge and skills within both the Commission and the recipient countries must be increased .
I was responsible for the preparations for this second reading .
My work has , of course , been very much based upon experiences from the first reading and upon the preparatory work for that reading .
On that occasion , Parliament tabled a large number of amendments , of which approximately a third have been accepted by the Council ahead of this second reading .
Analysing the situation , I identified three or four principal points where I think we in Parliament ought to try to amend the Council proposal .
The most important of these issues are firstly , the size of the budget , the way in which activities are directed and the way in which the rules are to be interpreted , that is to say they should relate not only to developing countries ' activities but also , of course , shape our own activities within the EU .
That does not mean that other questions raised at first reading are not important . What it does mean , however , is that we ought to concentrate on those which are most important .
We ought also , in the interests of reaching agreement with the Council , to see to it that we , as far as possible , relinquish what is of less importance .
I am delighted to note that , following the informal discussions which have taken place , it has been possible considerably to increase the amount of the budget , namely from the proposed figure of just over EUR 50 million to just over EUR 90 million .
This is something we ought to support , a fact which also emerges from Amendment No 11 .
Regarding the period of applicability of this regulation , I believe that there is no reason to commit ourselves now once and for all .
I think that the Council ' s proposal is acceptable because an evaluation will take place within four or five years .
This question will then , at all events , return to Parliament .
Finally , I want to mention a question on which there have been , and remain , a variety of views .
This concerns the committee procedure , that is to say how actual implementation of this regulation will look .
Where this is concerned , I take the view that we should try to get away from an arrangement whereby the Member States themselves are directly involved in determining the fine detail of implementation .
They should be involved , and determine the framework and rules , but leave it to the Commission to implement the actual project .
In this connection , we have proposed , in the course of the examination of this proposal , a so-called split comitology procedure , which could be used to excellent effect .
I hope that the vote will ensure that this will also become Parliament ' s proposal .
Might I just ask for one more thing ? The fact is , we shall need further consultations .
I would therefore propose without further ado that the vote could take place on Wednesday .
Mr President , this is a particularly important regulation given that it can no longer be said that ' we are destroying the environment ' - we have done this for long enough already - instead it is now almost true to say that ' the environment is destroying us ' !
It is now our task to counteract this .
In the industrialised countries , significant initiatives are being taken to preserve and protect the environment .
In the developing countries , however , intensive work still needs to be done on designing appropriate policies , strategies and projects to prevent further destruction and to care for the environment .
Measures need to be implemented which , for instance , take account of the consequences of developing countries being integrated into the global economy .
Nigeria can once again serve as an example here , as oil drilling there is causing commensurate environmental damage .
Here too , education and training measures need to be supported in order , in the end , to help people to help themselves .
The content of the regulation must therefore be supported in full , although the budget proposed by the Council is not sufficient by far .
That is why I should like to ask all colleagues to vote in favour , in particular , of Amendment No 11 , so that at least reasonable financial provision is made , even if this falls well below the amount for previous initiatives and is still only around EUR 13 million a year .
Even at this early stage a considerable increase needs to be considered for when the Treaty or the regulation is revised .
Mr President , while much progress remains to be made , it is true that the European Union has always pursued a policy of cooperation and development in respect of developing countries , and I believe that the environmental dimension must be incorporated into this policy and expanded upon .
Indeed , the notion of sustainable development takes on real meaning in such countries , and more particularly in the very poorest of them , since these are the countries which most often experience large-scale disasters , including the natural disasters which have recently become increasingly common .
Much has indeed been said of pollution and the effects of pollution , but this proliferation of natural disasters was evident in Central America and Venezuela at the end of last year , and can now be seen in Mozambique and Madagascar .
These disasters are in fact the result of extreme climatic changes with which we should be quite familiar , since they are precipitated by human activities , notably those of developed countries .
The greenhouse effect and deforestation also have a considerable impact .
As regards this regulation on the environmental dimension in the development process in developing countries , the Council has broadly taken up the amendments that we presented and voted upon at first reading .
From this perspective we cannot fail to be satisfied .
I would nevertheless like to stress one point that the Council has overlooked - inadvertently , I believe and hope - but which is absolutely fundamental : coordination between European operators and local partners , which is to say local NGOs , grass-roots communities and people with a time-honoured understanding of how to harness biological diversity .
No programme can be truly effective unless it is conducted in close collaboration with the communities concerned .
One last point : should we be successful in setting up steering committees , I believe it would be necessary to re-emphasise the importance of establishing a complaint procedure which is open to civil society in developing countries with regard to measures that run counter to legitimate concerns in the field of social welfare .
Mr President , the key to the development of the less developed countries is that they should have the chance themselves to participate in their own development programmes by identifying the problems themselves and seeking solutions to them .
Whenever I have been involved in development work I have observed that this approach has , thankfully , over the past few years been taking the place of the old paternalistic aid-oriented ideology , where the so-called developed countries thought development was a matter of transferring our way of life to the less developed countries .
The new paradigm for development cooperation stresses the notion of partnership , in which the so-called donor of aid is a consulting party .
It must allow scope for the countries concerned to determine for themselves what their problems are , and let them draw up a plan to improve the situation and find a solution themselves .
The most important task aid agencies have is to make themselves unnecessary , all the while ensuring that the work is leading to local action and prosperity .
My colleague , Mr Wijkman , has produced a good report in this respect , one that emphasises this paradigm that is the only successful and morally tenable one .
However , at present , this approach is being applied scandalously badly by the EU as far as scientific and technological projects are concerned .
The EU ' s framework programmes do not extend to developing countries .
In other words , our North African partners , for example , cannot become involved in scientific and technological projects concerning the environment .
Nothing is actually preventing them from doing research but there are simply no facilities for financing projects , as the developing countries do not have access to the consortia as a party applying for funds .
But why not ?
It has been made easier for Eastern Europe to participate .
The matter is even harder to appreciate , when we think of how much we are affected by the problems of desertification in North Africa and the problems that are associated with the Mediterranean area .
We must give more responsibility , by way of funding , to local researchers to be able to create development that will be of benefit to the local community and leave the job to them when the financiers have left .
We must ensure that no project can be established without input from local researchers .
Mr President , the regulation on the table gives the European Union an instrument and the legal - but also the political - responsibility to ensure that the environmental dimension is integrated into development policy .
To do this , sufficient financial support is of course necessary .
That is why I , like one previous speaker already , advocate voting in favour of the rapporteur 's Amendment No 11 .
Since integrating the environmental dimension is a long-term commitment , I am in principle against limiting the duration of this regulation .
However , the arguments that excessively lengthy negotiations with the Council are putting existing projects - projects which are already up and running - at risk have persuaded me otherwise .
I also believe that Amendment No 9 , which seeks to involve civil society in exchanging information and implementing this regulation , is of fundamental importance , because in my opinion the discussions about civil society and the discussions about good governance must not only be reflected on the political soapbox but also in active policy implementation .
In the same way I support the rapporteur 's proposal on split comitology , whereby decisions on the strategic guidelines would be decided under a management procedure and those on implementation under an advisory procedure .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
If the rapporteur wishes the vote to be postponed I would ask him to request this at voting time .
Our services say that it is possible to do so then .
Conservation and sustainable forest management
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0043 / 2000 ) by Mr Bouwman , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism ...
( Mr Bouwman interrupted the President . )
Bouwman .
( DE ) Mr President , I think you are mistaken !
There is another report first .
I would be happy to speak now , but there is another report first .
President .
Thank you very much , Mr Bouwman .
I knew right at the beginning of the debate that there was a reason why I was so pleased to see you here in the House .
Please forgive me . My files have got in rather a muddle .
That does happen from time to time in the hectic activity of the night sitting .
Forget what I have said so far .
We will start again .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0048 / 2000 ) by Mr Fernández Martín , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on measures to promote the conservation and sustainable management of tropical forests and other forests in developing countries ( 12487 / 1 / 1999 - C5-0014 / 2000 - 1999 / 0015 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , as Commissioner Nielson has already stated , this debate marks the inauguration of the new competences of the Committee on Development and Cooperation in the field of codecision .
The aim of the regulation under discussion today is to establish measures designed to promote the conservation and sustainable management of tropical forests in developing countries , in order to guarantee the funding necessary to maintain and make progress with the actions and projects which have been under way for this purpose since the adoption of Regulation 3062 , valid until December 1999 .
This is the financial instrument by means of which the Union can fulfil the obligations arising from the Agreement on biodiversity , the Framework Agreement on climate change and the Agreement on the fight against desertification .
All these agreements indicate that developing countries must be supported in the search for solutions to the problem of their forest resources .
Between 1990 and 1995 , over 56 million hectares of forest , distributed unevenly in various parts of the world , were lost but , without a doubt , this particularly affected developing countries as a result of the increased amount of land used for agricultural purposes , the construction of infrastructures , or due to natural disasters and fires .
We are therefore facing a problem of the first magnitude , not only for developing countries , but also for the whole planet and all the living beings that inhabit it , a problem that Parliament has already spoken about at first reading at the end of the previous legislature on 5 May 1999 .
Since then , a long , and sometimes difficult , negotiation process has been taking place within the Council , which did not reach a common position until December 1999 , and between the Council , the Commission and Parliament itself , in search of the necessary consensus . All this took place under the restrictions caused by the approval of a budget which imposed limitations in various respects , and in particular the need to allocate funding to implement the special plan for the reconstruction of Kosovo .
At first reading , Parliament approved a total of 34 amendments of which the Council , in its common position , has totally or partially taken up 18 .
Of the remaining 16 , some , and in particular Amendments Nos 5 and 6 , are no longer relevant following the interinstitutional agreement on the 2000 budget .
The debate and negotiations that we have held with the Council and the Commission have focused on three topics : the budget , dates and comitology .
The rapporteur particularly wishes to highlight the hard work and flexibility shown by all concerned in the search for a consensus on the budget , so that , from an initial figure of EUR 9 million from the B7-6201 line , which implied a total of EUR 73 million for the whole period , we have reached an agreement that implies the provision of EUR 249 million for the next seven years as a whole , starting with the EUR 30 million already stipulated in the budget for the year 2000 .
Based on this budgetary agreement , which includes an agreement on dates , the differences have focused on aspects of comitology derived from the historic positions of Parliament and the Council itself that , with a view to the future , in my opinion - and not to insist on the problems made manifest in Mr Wijkman 's intervention - I believe that they should be revised in an interinstitutional agreement in order to speed up the parliamentary legislative procedure and make it more efficient .
Finally , I wish to request the support of the House with regard to Amendments Nos 1 , 7 , 9 , 10 , 11 and 12 , and a negative vote for the others , which , if successful , would break the agreement reached during the discussions with the Commission and the Council , which would oblige the whole negotiating process to begin again , paralyse some of the actions and projects under way and undoubtedly cause serious problems in the policy of conservation and rehabilitation of the tropical forests that we are trying to develop .
Mr President , I should like to say that I agree with many of the points made in the report by the previous speaker and rapporteur , Mr Fernández Martín .
Above all , as with all budget lines , it is very important to discuss the funding these budget lines represent .
As with the previous report , I am not happy that the duration is limited , but the very many projects put at risk are a good reason to reach an agreement with the Council as quickly as possible .
Just as with Mr Wijkman 's report , I agree with the rapporteur on the split comitology , meaning that the strategic guidelines will be decided under a management procedure while there will be an advisory committee for project implementation .
One point which is of really fundamental importance to me is made in various amendments - for example , Amendments Nos 2 and 4 - which emphasise the active participation of forest peoples and the indigenous population .
I believe that this is an absolutely fundamental point , especially when we are talking about the sustainable management of tropical forests and other forests in developing countries .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Martín , you have certainly described very clearly what your report is all about .
Thank you for that .
But we also all know only too well that not all projects are as successful as we would like them to be .
This makes it all the more important , in our view , for both the people concerned on the spot and local groups to be involved , as early as the preliminary planning stage , in decisions such as how projects are to be organised , so as to ensure that these projects - which of course we wish to fund - are sustainable from an ecological and social , but also cultural , point of view .
It is not always the case - and we are aware of this too - that the interests of local people are respected ; instead they are often subordinated and sacrificed to the economic interests of particular groups , such as for example multinational logging companies .
There is a lot that I could say about Brazil in this context , about how interests of this kind are represented there , because one thing is clear : the issue of whether tropical forests can be used sustainably at all , without their being permanently damaged in the process , is still not satisfactorily settled .
It is precisely here that there should be no cut in the Commission and the Council 's contributions , because that would almost certainly be counterproductive .
This is because if the forests continue to be damaged to the same extent as they have been up until now , the local people will be the first to suffer and then we will all suffer throughout the whole world , because dramatic changes in climate can of course already be identified .
It is also very important for us now for the projects to be able to continue to run without interruption .
The demands we are making of the Council are not after all demands which we have plucked out of thin air , and I believe that it ought to be possible through skilful negotiation to secure something here , because the conditions are not after all impossible to meet .
Otherwise we can only endorse Mr Fernández Martín 's report ; the comments made by Mrs Scheele and others are also a perfect reflection of our own thoughts .
Thank you very much for this generous gift to my colleagues .
Mr President , the state of tropical forests is worrying on two counts , as the impoverishment of the forest is not only quantitative but also qualitative in nature .
The biodiversity of our planet is at stake .
The Commission has thus acted appropriately in proposing a new Council regulation on tropical forests and I fully subscribe to the thrust of the amendments proposed by the rapporteur , the pinpoint relevance of whose work I salute .
He has identified some valid points , certain aspects of which I would like to examine more closely .
It would seem to me absolutely essential to reflect on the scope of the regulation .
Firstly , programmes must be more closely targeted at the rehabilitation of tropical forests .
The Council regulation of 1995 perhaps focused in too exclusive a manner on the protection of tropical forests and not sufficiently closely on the harnessing of their productive potential .
Besides this , future Community actions must take into consideration every facet of sustainable forest management .
This implies respect for the indigenous peoples who depend on forest ecosystems .
One should never overlook the fact that there are major obstacles to the indispensable involvement of these vulnerable communities : the forest areas in question are often the scene of unrest and conflict or suffer from the adverse impact of tourism , which all too often is held up as a miracle cure , and of local laws on forests which are hardly ever enforced , even where they actually exist .
There are , of course , forests in which there are no production activities of any type , but there are also forests that continue to fulfil an economic function .
This is the case with our own forests within the European Union , and I would ask my fellow Members what Community aid was provided for European forests after they were decimated by the storm that raged last December ?
We must without doubt take up the challenges laid down in this report , but must also institute a genuine Community policy on conservation and sustainable management .
I hardly need to emphasise the importance of tropical forests at a global level given their influence on climate patterns , the large proportion of the world 's biodiversity that is contained within them and of course their importance to the livelihoods of millions in developing countries - fuel wood being an obvious example .
For these and other reasons , Europe 's citizens rightly expect the Community to support actions to conserve and sustainably manage tropical forests .
I say tropical forests , but in fact a new feature of this regulation compared to the previous one is that the scope of the regulation now covers all developing countries and hence now includes countries such as South Africa , China and the Mediterranean and Middle East regions .
The regulation also makes specific reference to the needs of indigenous and forest-dependent people and the need for gender considerations to be taken into account .
We have just discussed the environment regulation and the comments I made then on a number of horizontal issues are also largely applicable to the forest regulation .
For this reason , I will be brief .
With reference to the amendments listed in the Fernández Martín report , the Commission 's position on the main horizontal issues is as follows .
Financial reference account : the Commission accepts the compromise figure of EUR 249 million over seven years proposed in Amendment No 9 .
Comitology - the Commission supports in principle Amendment No 11 but prefers the wording of Amendments Nos 13 , 14 and 15 .
The amendments propose a split comitology arrangement with annual guidelines and priorities being subject to a management procedure while Council would examine projects over EUR 2 million under an advisory procedure .
Duration of the regulation : in order to avoid conciliation , the Commission 's position is not to support Amendment No 12 , which places an unlimited duration on the regulations .
In our view the seven-year duration proposed by Council represents an acceptable compromise .
Bank guarantees : the Commission does not support Amendment No 8 concerning bank guarantees for reasons outlined earlier .
We are against special provisions being made in specific budget lines as this goes against our common objective , namely , to simplify and unify administrative procedures .
Furthermore , following a Commission decision in 1999 , we consider that the issue has been largely resolved .
Concerning the other amendments , our position is as follows .
The Commission welcomes and supports Amendments Nos 7 and 10 .
Amendment No 4 is considered acceptable .
We do not support Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 6 as we consider that the concepts have been taken into account elsewhere in the regulation following the first reading .
Hence , in the interest of clear and concise legislation , we would prefer that these amendments be dropped .
Amendment No 1 is not supported as in our opinion it brings little added value .
Given the Council 's negative position on this amendment , the Commission would favour it also being dropped .
Finally , we do not support Amendment No 5 as the term ' serious doubts ' is considered to be too subjective , making it very difficult to implement the regulation .
Furthermore , the objective of this amendment , namely , to avoid projects with negative social , cultural or economic or environmental effects , is addressed in Article 4 ( 5 ) on impact assessments .
Thank you , Commissioner Nielson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Ship-generated waste and cargo residues
Now , Mr Jarzembowski , is the great moment !
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0043 / 2000 ) by Mr Bouwman , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council directive on port reception facilities for ship-generated waste and cargo residues .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are debating a directive which is extremely - I repeat extremely - rigorous .
We have been discussing the Erika disaster here for the past couple of weeks .
A whole ream of new measures on double hulls , inspection , the inspection of inspectorates , etc are being conceived in the short term .
Disasters of this kind account for no more than 3 % of oil pollution at sea .
Normal shipping operations account for double this amount .
Not only that .
If we consider our beaches , for example in the Netherlands - but also in other countries - 49 % of the rubbish washed up on the shore comes directly from the sea .
Only 15 % is due to tourism and a large proportion is even unaccountable for , although that , of course , must originate from somewhere .
In short , this directive is essential because the economic damage is significant and because the quality of the habitats for birds , fish , etc . , which is so vital , is deteriorating .
In other words , this affects our own habitat .
I do not need to say any more concerning the motives underlying this directive .
I will only have positive things to say to the Commission about the quality of the directive .
There was nonetheless a whole raft of amendments at first reading which has been completely endorsed by Parliament .
I believe there were eighteen in total , a large proportion of which have been adopted , with a number of less important ones having been rejected .
These will re-emerge in some shape or form . I would mainly like to home in on one very important point .
We all share the view throughout the Union that something needs to be done when the seas are polluted .
I would once again refer to the Erika , but there are also other examples .
We are also agreed that the polluter-pays principle must apply .
The present report contains an amendment which states that the full range of cost recovery systems should not be admitted within the European Union because some cost recovery systems for port reception facilities do not do justice to what is needed to keep our environment clean .
There is no financial incentive .
Let me illustrate this quite clearly .
In the southern Member States , to all intents and purposes , a direct costing principle applies , which means that the polluters who deliver their waste to port do pay whereas the polluters who do not deliver their waste to port , still pollute but do not pay .
Northern countries apply a system in which this financial element is handled in a different way .
Everyone pays , whether they dump their waste in the sea or dispose of it elsewhere .
In addition , there is some kind of financial incentive that contributes in some way or other to ensuring that this waste is disposed of .
Experience and scientific research has shown that this seems to work .
This is one of the reasons why Parliament is tenacious on this point . The Commission , too , on whose behalf I am talking , persists in applying a percentage of indirect costs which must be included in the port dues .
This is , in fact , what we are opting for .
If the percentage is 90 % , so be it .
It could also be 75 % , but there should at least be a minimum level , which should be quite inflexible .
Otherwise we will fall back into a variety of systems and it will be years - in a manner of speaking - before we learn from the lesson we have actually already been taught .
I would therefore like to assure everyone that this is why it is sensible to opt for a system in which indirect costs are somehow absorbed in port dues .
If you read the Commission ' s proposal , a country could fall to 0.01 % of indirect costs if it so wishes .
I fear that this will be opted for in practice .
This will also be the key point of discussion for the foreseeable future .
There is a whole raft of other factors involved and we have reached agreement on a great many of them .
I do believe that somehow we will make it .
But this is the crux of the matter and I wanted to draw everyone ' s attention to it .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to stress that we had a good debate at the two readings .
May I thank the rapporteur , Mr Bouwman , very much for taking on this dossier and for elucidating it so well .
We are after all at one with the Council on three points .
Firstly , proper port reception facilities for ship-generated waste have to be constructed at every European port unless it already has them .
They must therefore be provided .
Secondly , all ships , regardless of the flag they fly , have to dispose of their waste .
Thirdly , the costs must be borne by the ship .
We agree on these points .
In fact , together we want to put a system in place so as to avoid there being financial incentives to dump waste into the sea .
Firstly , we wish to protect flora and fauna and secondly , there are a large number of coastlines along which , on the one hand , tourists enjoy themselves and on the other jobs are to be created .
That means that we want to have an effective system .
So where do we differ from the Council , apart from on minor details such as the fact that we wish to exempt museum ships from the bureaucratic rules and that we are a little stricter where large fishing vessels and recreational craft are concerned ?
The really decisive difference is the issue of how the disposal costs are charged to the ship .
Mr Bouwman has , of course , already explained this .
There are two precedents . The first is in the Baltic Sea area , and this is not the experience of an individual state but the experience of the entire Baltic Sea area , and it says that if a large proportion of the disposal costs is covered by the general port dues then there is obviously no incentive to dispose of the ship-generated waste at sea .
Surely if people have already paid the disposal costs then they will actually dispose of the waste in port .
The other system is the pure polluter-pays principle : anyone who lands ship-generated waste has to pay extra for doing so .
This second system has proved to be ineffective , otherwise why would the Mediterranean Sea be so dirty ?
Why would the North Sea be so dirty ?
Because for lack of adequate controls the polluter-pays principle does not work !
That is why a broad majority of the committee - not a large majority ; the representatives of the minority view will be speaking shortly - said , as Parliament as a whole did in the first reading , without any dispute , that the ' no-special-fee ' system was the best system because it , as it were , offers ships a financial incentive not to dump their muck into the water when they are at sea but to dispose of it in proper port reception facilities .
That is the decisive issue .
We are prepared to reach an agreement with the Council .
But so far the Council has rejected any serious agreement with us .
That is why I call on the House to support our amendment whereby a significant proportion - up to 90 % - of the costs have to be covered by the general port dues .
This would give us the opportunity to reach an agreement with the Council in the conciliation procedure , whether it be on 75 % or whatever .
That is also why I would make the following request of the Commission : Madam Vice-President , think carefully about which side you stand on !
I believe that in the interests of protecting the environment and of a permanently thriving tourist industry in many countries of our Community it is better to have an effective system .
For these reasons support our ' no-special-fee ' system .
Perhaps then we will reach a reasonable compromise with the Council in the conciliation procedure .
Mr President , I am pleased that you are the one chairing this debate because I know that as a Bavarian you always offer a sympathetic ear where ports and maritime matters are concerned , and I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Bouwman , for the work which he has done and also for cooperating with us in the run-up to tomorrow 's vote .
There are a few points at stake tomorrow .
Firstly , we know that the ship is the most environmentally friendly mode of transport for carrying passengers and goods .
At the same time we know that ships make a hefty contribution to polluting the sea with rubbish , cargo residues and oily slime .
The fuel used by ships happens to be heavy oil and we know that this heavy oil leaves a residue of between 1 % and 3 % as oily slime , which is typically discharged into the sea .
I think that we agree that ships have to dispose of waste and residues in port .
It follows - and in fact there is no other logical conclusion - that the cardinal rule for clean seas is that it must no longer be worthwhile for waste to be disposed of illegally on the high seas .
This is what this is about , and a majority of us have said as much in debates here .
In January we had a very thorough debate with you , Commissioner , on the consequences of the Erika disaster .
On this occasion we once again drew together all the points on ship safety and clean seas .
And this directive on port reception facilities for cargo residues is , of course , also about the question of how to make our seas cleaner .
Just for information , we know that 70 000 m3 of detritus is illegally discharged into the North Sea alone every year and , conversely , we know that at present a maximum of 5 % to 10 % of ships obey the rules and dispose of their waste in port .
This scandal is not acceptable in the eyes of the Council either .
The Council is after all also saying that all ports must have appropriate port reception facilities available and must be equipped with them .
The conflict now is ultimately over the issue of how payments will be made .
In its first reading , Parliament said by a large majority that the ships must make a significant contribution , of at least 90 % .
And therein lies the difference with the Council , which is saying that a contribution has to be made .
But a contribution might also only mean half a euro and in this case God knows this would be too little .
Nothing would change .
There would be no financial pressure on ships to obey the rules .
What is needed is a standard waste disposal fee for all ships irrespective of how much they actually use the disposal facilities , meaning that the financial incentive to dispose of waste at sea has to be removed , which - as has already been explained here today - was possible in the Baltic Sea through the HELCOM Agreement and the ' no-special-fee ' system .
If it can be done there it must also be possible for it to work for the remaining European seas , because this is not only about the environment : it is about clean waters , it even has consequences for tourism and - the decisive point - alongside the environmental issue it is also about fair competition .
The same conditions must apply to all ships in port and only if Parliament , the Council and the Commission create these conditions together will this fair competition be restored for ports and ships .
I think that this is also about the credibility of the Union and , in particular , Parliament .
I think that people are tired of seeing the hypocrisy of Europe and of ministers each time that there is a catastrophe , as we saw of course with ' Erika ' .
Oil comes onto the beaches and then politicians and ministers appear and try to clear it up themselves with a tiny little bucket , but when a fortnight later a robust directive is up for debate they have forgotten yesterday 's fine words .
We will not be able to rule out accidents altogether , but we can take optimal precautions .
This consistent directive is an important step towards doing this .
I also hope that our liberal colleagues will perhaps reconsider before tomorrow whether they might not - including for reasons of parliamentary identity - join us once again as they did in the first and also in the second reading , because we will then be going into the conciliation procedure anyway and there we will have to see how much ground the Council can give .
I believe - for environmental and competition reasons as well as on the basis of the decisions made two months ago , in January - that we should adopt these amendments tomorrow , in the form in which we debated them in the committee , with a broad majority .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , congratulations on your report .
You have said so yourself just now : we desperately need this directive .
It is a sound directive .
Ports must be equipped with reception facilities .
Inspection is on its way , at long last .
Member States must also impose sanctions when these rules are broken .
This is very important .
This is good for the environment .
Investments are already being made , in anticipation of the directive .
For example , in Antwerp , very near to where I live , a huge installation is being built which was not there before .
As such , this directive is already coming into effect in a sense .
There is one point , as already highlighted by Mr Jarzembowski , where we do not see eye to eye .
How do we charge the fees ?
We are all agreed on the polluter pays principle .
But should he pay an automatic full amount or a huge amount in port dues , or do we opt for a flexible arrangement , as is being proposed by the Council .
Where is the best financial incentive , to use your words ?
I have sounded out a number of people on this subject .
The opinions are divided .
Habits , apparently , are also divided .
In fact , ports in one and the same region apply different standards and percentages .
There are also ports which change percentages at the last minute , if I may say so .
I believe that as such , it is probably better if we in Parliament do not pin ourselves down on a fixed percentage .
A flexible system under these conditions , as you said so yourself , should make up a substantial part of the costs .
0.01 is clearly not a substantial part .
It should also have an encouraging effect , as a flexible part is left open for people who operate on an environmentally-friendly basis , provided that the Commission keeps a close eye on this whole process and checks whether the system works .
If the objectives of the directive cannot be achieved , we would expect the Commission to intervene , act , suggest changes and ensure that the system does work .
Fellow MEPs , we must rescue this directive and keep it come what may .
I hope that we will not jeopardise the entire directive on account of a too principled stance on one point .
Mr President , it is not so long ago that many held the view that waste would disappear if you dumped it in the sea or shot it into space .
These days , we know that waste has a habit of reappearing , often in a more harmful form .
Large-scale pollution of the sea and the destruction of the animal life caused by shipwrecked tankers always attracts a great deal of attention .
Far less attention is given to the fact that seas are polluted on a daily basis by regular merchant navy ships and recreational yachts .
It is high time that we laid down a comprehensive regulation which is easy to monitor and which ensures that shipping waste is collected and processed at ports in an environmentally-friendly manner .
We can benefit from practical experience gained in ports such as my home town , Rotterdam .
The question is , of course , raised as to whether rules can have an adverse effect on smaller vessels .
Historic museum ships and ships which , proportionately , call at many ports over a short distance have to pay more often as a result .
I am under the impression that the rapporteur has sought the best possible solution and has listened carefully to the comments .
Other solutions would probably have a less favourable effect on environmental protection , and my group can assent to this report on that basis .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I too should like to thank Mr Bouwman for his efforts to broker a consensus of opinion within the committee .
No absolute consensus was found but that ' s politics for you .
Regardless of how matters stand or what the final version of the report will be , and whatever the agreement reached between the Council and Parliament , it is bound to be an improvement on the previous situation .
Waste management facilities are to be built in ports and I believe this directive will definitely help considerably in limiting marine pollution .
It is now evident , particularly from this debate , that there is a bone of contention here .
There are clearly two systems : one in the North Sea , the ' no special fee ' system , and the system in operation in all other ports , whereby ships are charged according to their use of port facilities .
I can understand my fellow Members ' concern that many unscrupulous masters will discharge waste at sea in order to avoid paying fees , but I would like to say that there is another side to the coin .
The other side to the coin is that ports in Member States in the Mediterranean area , such as my own country , Greece , will face particularly stiff competition from ports in neighbouring non-EU countries as , of course , nothing will prevent masters of ships sailing through the Mediterranean from docking at Turkish or North-African ports so as to avoid paying the objectively high fees which are to apply in Community ports , irrespective of use of facilities .
I would like to say that we have made some progress here .
Let us hold on to the progress which we have made with this directive , namely the provision for a charging system based on certain objective criteria .
I do not think that forcing the systems to converge , aside from problems with the principle of subsidiarity , will achieve the results we are hoping for , because there will always be ways of getting around the system , ways which are harmful to the environment .
Mr President , every day five million items of solid waste are thrown overboard from ships .
This rubbish drifts across the seas and ends up on beaches , severely damaging the environment and marine life .
As a result one million birds and a hundred thousand marine mammals and sea turtles are killed each year .
The MARPOL Convention aims to prevent pollution from ships but legislation is clearly necessary to ensure the convention is enforced .
That is why this directive is so important and why tonight I am pleased to welcome the progress that has been made in Council to reach a common position which will force ships to dispose of their waste at port reception facilities .
I also commend the work of the rapporteur , whose commitment reflects the strength of feeling within our committee to tackling this particular problem and a strong desire amongst parliamentarians of all parties to call a halt to this environmentally disastrous practice .
I particularly welcome his strong support for the proposal that , in the interests of improving pollution prevention and avoiding distortions of competition , the environmental requirements should apply to all ships irrespective of the flag they fly and adequate waste reception facilities be made available in all ports throughout the Community .
An area where British Labour Members take issue with the rapporteur is the way in which the polluter-pays principle is to be applied .
The principle is one we strongly support but we believe it can be more effectively enforced if Member States retain the power to establish their own charging systems appropriate to their own circumstances .
For example , in the UK the system by which a ship pays the waste collector each time it uses waste facilities , without the port getting involved , works well .
It is based on a consensus which has been forged by all the players , including the ports and environmental groups like RSPB and the World Wildlife Fund .
However , we share the rapporteur 's concern that different charging systems should not lead to greater risk of maritime pollution .
That is why we back the Council proposal to strengthen the review clause to ensure the impact of the directive is monitored regularly .
Mr President , anyone who has witnessed the environmental consequences of the Erika disaster cannot reasonably vote against a report , the aim of which is to ensure that ship-generated waste oil is taken care of .
This is an extraordinarily important report .
It should be emphasised , in this context , that it is not mainly legislation that is missing .
All EU countries have signed the so-called MARPOL Convention , and the Baltic countries have also signed the Helsinki Convention .
The aim of both is to prevent discharges into the sea .
It is a question , rather , of increasing access to port reception facilities and of creating the motivation also to use these .
The Baltic is affected every year by a great many oil spills of greatly varying sizes .
In Swedish waters alone , there are hundreds of these each year .
The Baltic is also more vulnerable from an environmental point of view than many other seas .
It is in this perspective that , with today ' s decision , we are seeing the beginnings of a solution to which , in the very end , all the countries around the Baltic will contribute , including the applicant States of Poland , Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania .
This is , as I see it , a sphere in which we have everything to gain by cooperating across national borders .
We can never in a million years solve Europe ' s environmental problems alone .
Finally , a word in the ear of those who , for financial reasons , are still hesitant : think what the alternative cost of cleaning up our seas would be .
There will come a time when we shall be able to meet imperatives of this kind .
We shall then be grateful if we have done everything in our power to prevent oil spills .
Mr President , I would like to state briefly that I do not believe that anyone doubts the need for a directive to tackle this problem , which is a serious problem not only for Europe , but for all seas world-wide , and that urgent and effective measures are therefore necessary .
I would like to make it clear that there is a series of principles which are universal , and with which we are therefore in complete agreement .
First , every port must be equipped with the necessary facilities for the treatment of waste .
Secondly , polluters must pay , naturally .
I agree that there may be discrepancies in exceptions regarding the type of ship or devices for measuring the length of ships .
However , what cannot happen is a battle leading to a distortion in competition between the different ports , where we find ourselves with a series of theoretically environmental measures on the protection of the coast or the sea , leading to a distortion in competition between the different ports .
It is therefore on this issue that effective measures must be adopted because , if we are unable to adopt a suitable solution , then this directive will end in outright failure .
And the only outcome will be that some ports are advantaged and others disadvantaged , all due to fine words on the environment leading to a competitive war between ports .
The logical solution , for example , would be to establish the principle of a single tariff for all European ports , a tariff that is exactly the same , that would not give rise to any type of distortion in competition , or similar measures .
Any decision that , for example , enables the Member States to grant subsidies to the different ports , would end up distorting competition and would ultimately be ineffective .
Mr President , I share your love of the sea , and your love of diving and sailing , and I sincerely believe that all those present are concerned about how we can guarantee clean seas for current and future generations .
I believe that the work we are discussing today is a great step forward .
In this respect , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Bouwman , and the whole of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism for their painstaking work throughout the discussion and throughout the negotiation of this initiative .
As you know , the Commission is extremely concerned about marine pollution .
I hope that I will shortly be able to provide you with a preliminary package of measures with the aim of monitoring the safety of oil tankers more effectively , measures that I hope we will be able to go on with , specifically making the most of the dramatic sinking of the Erika , a dramatic event which could mean that on this occasion we are able to overcome certain very specific interests that will undoubtedly be affected by the measures I shall be proposing in the near future .
However , while it is certain that accidents lead to tremendous problems and disasters , the reality is that most spillages result , not from accidents , but simply from the regular cleaning out of the holds of certain ships , which is obviously a totally reprehensible act .
In this respect , I believe that the legislation intended by this directive covers various aspects relating to the delivery of waste to ports .
It obliges all Community ports to be equipped with appropriate reception facilities for waste , and to guarantee the planning of their management , which will be supervised by the authorities of the Member States .
Furthermore , it obliges ships to deliver all ship-generated waste to the port , except where the ship has a sufficient storage capacity to enable it to arrive at the next stage , the next port .
It also obliges ships to notify the port that they are going to deliver waste prior to their arrival in the port , and to pay the cost of the reception facilities .
And this is where the problem lies .
As various speakers have already pointed out , this is where the positions of Parliament and the Commission differ fundamentally .
Ladies and Gentlemen , I would like to ask that in this matter , also taking into account the fact that the Commission is going to support Amendment No 16 by Mr Sterckx - I will refer to the rest of the amendments later - you accept the initial draft .
It is true that we are not specifying what percentage will have to be paid by the ships arriving at the port .
It is true that we are leaving a margin of flexibility for the Member States , but it is also certain that , theoretically , 0.01 , although it is a contribution , is not necessarily a significant contribution .
Perhaps we could incorporate the word " significant " into the text instead of setting a fixed percentage .
I would suggest a solution of this type , incorporating Amendment No 16 by Mr Sterckx , which means that there is a revision process which enables us , if necessary , to introduce a fixed percentage if we see that the Member States are not making any progress with regard to this distribution and that this excess of flexibility makes this directive ineffective .
But I would try , first of all , to take this step forward , making the position more flexible with the possibility of revising it .
Apart from this , I would like to state that we consider the suggestions being made to be very positive and that , therefore , we could incorporate into the text of the directive , with some rewording that would enable coherence with current Community and international texts to be guaranteed , as well as coherence with the rest of the directive , amendments such as 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 and 15 .
That is , we are talking about practically all of the amendments and , in fact , the one we cannot accept - and I regret it , but I have already explained the reasons - is Amendment No 6 .
I could go on , but the two reasons have already been stated .
We are all working towards the same goal .
The only difference of opinion is over how best to achieve this goal .
I would ask for support for a more positive position , supplemented - I insist - with Amendment No 16 by Mr Sterckx , which would provide us with the necessary guarantees .
In this respect , I would suggest that , instead of " by a percentage " , the word " significant " could be incorporated if necessary , to make it obvious that we are not talking about 1 % or 5 % or 10 % , but about a substantial figure .
Many thanks , Mr President .
I would like to reiterate my appreciation to the rapporteur and the rest of the Committee .
Thank you , Madam Vice-President .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Technical roadside inspection of commercial vehicles
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0040 / 2000 ) by Mr Piecyk , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the technical roadside inspection of the roadworthiness of commercial vehicles circulating in the Community .
Mr President , Commissioner , there comes a time when you have to - what a shame , she is not listening when people speak , that is not good !
A good Commissioner should listen !
Can that be deducted from the time ?
Commissioner , I actually wanted to address a minor comment to you , which applies both to this report and to the preceding one .
There comes a time when you have to come to a decision , because post-Amsterdam the conciliation procedure is the great good .
Parliament is obviously always pleased when the Commission fights at Parliament 's side as its partner and does not necessarily rush obediently to the Council 's cause .
I do not believe that this is necessary here .
I wanted actually to relate this comment to the report before us .
The President has read out a very laborious title .
Mr President , with your permission I will simply talk about lorry inspections ; that would be understood both in Regensburg and in Lübeck , and perhaps the Commission might also perhaps manage to use somewhat shorter titles .
I think that we simply cannot do enough for road traffic safety .
There is a consensus on that .
This directive on lorry inspections should quite simply make a contribution to this .
We are seeing a slight fall in the number of those killed and injured on the roads .
Nevertheless - and regrettably - where the accidents involve lorries the numbers of those both killed and injured are rising .
The causes are often precisely technical defects .
We must not sit back and accept this .
After all , a lorry does around 150 000 kilometres a year .
This is an inconceivably high number compared with a private car .
When it is under a strain of this kind , maximum technical roadworthiness is required in the interests of road safety , environmental protection and not least equitable competition .
Because a fleet of lorries in a poor state of technical repair should certainly not have a competitive advantage , and conversely no haulier should be punished if he keeps his lorries in optimal technical condition .
Now Europeans are obviously not so well behaved that they can manage without checks .
This directive tries to cater for this problem by introducing a graduated inspection procedure until the vehicle is taken out of service .
There has been a high measure of agreement between Parliament , the Council and the Commission , apart from on one problem and that is penalties .
In its common position , the Council makes no mention of any arrangements .
This is obviously nonsense because if I am going to carry out inspections there have to be penalties which I can use as a threat in borderline cases .
Then the Council said - and these might not be its exact words - that the penalties would be directed at the Member States .
No , penalties should be directed at hauliers , lorry-owners and drivers .
That is why - as discussed in the committee - I have now tabled an amendment to Amendment No 2 which contains no reference to the concept of ' harmonisation ' .
I have done this in the knowledge that the Council is going some way to accommodate us and that we in turn can also then accommodate the Council , because this directive , in my view , is a logical step forwards .
Nevertheless - and the Council has to be aware of this - it is of course sensible that the Member States should have to reach an agreement , sooner or later , amongst themselves in the Council about these controls and the penalties threatened , because it would be ridiculous if for example offences carried almost a prison sentence in Finland and only a small fine in a southern country , or vice versa .
That would not make any sense .
Neither is it very European .
That is why , on the procedure , I should like to say once more that Amendment No 3 replaces Amendment No 2 which was adopted by the committee .
It ought therefore to be put to the vote first tomorrow .
If the Bureau , which will be chairing the vote tomorrow , could be informed of this I would be very grateful .
Then we would not have any procedural problems with this .
So , put Amendment No 3 to the vote first .
It would then replace Amendment No 2 .
This is what was discussed in the committee , and then we could have this system very quickly and not work towards a costly conciliation procedure for the sake of a solution which is in principle sensible .
Mr President , everything has been said .
Allow me simply to offer the Vice-President a helping hand so that she might support Amendment No 3 - which replaces No 2 - after all .
In this room there are sometimes Members who say that of course it is sensible to standardise the vehicle inspections in terms of how rigorous and how comprehensive they are .
But when it comes to penalties and the word ' harmonisation ' a good many people in this room give a start - on the left and on the right of this House , both those higher up and those lower down .
That is why I think that this Amendment No 3 which Mr Piecyk has drafted as rapporteur is excellent .
He has completely avoided the word ' harmonisation ' .
But he has said what this is all about .
He has said that it cannot be right , if a commercial vehicle , a bus carrying passengers , is used when it does not comply with safety regulations - constituting danger to life and limb - for this to be regarded as a minor offence in one country while it meets with severe punishment in another .
Given the danger to the passengers and also other drivers this would , however , be necessary .
That is why this is not about the question of whether we are in favour of subsidiarity or centralism .
It is about the fact that it is unacceptable for us to have the common aim of road safety , but for some governments to say : well , from the point of view of penalties we regard road safety offences as being on a par with disobeying a sign to keep off the grass , while others give it the correct weighting .
The first principle , Madam Vice-President , is for us all to attach the same degree of importance to the need to improve road safety .
The second argument is that there must be no distortions of competition in the Community .
There are definitely examples of lorries from another Member State being subjected to particularly stringent controls , having tough penalties imposed , being detained , and so on in one country while in another country the authorities could not care less .
This lies at the heart of the difference between Parliament 's views and the common position .
We certainly believe that where the penalties - which will remain within national competence - are concerned , the Member States ought to try to reach an agreement by asking themselves the following questions : what degree of importance do I attach to danger caused by road traffic ? And how am I to ensure that there is fair competition within the Community in an internal market ?
That is why , Madam Vice-President , after a certain party 's election victory in a large federal state you would make my evening complete if you were to say : we can accept the rapporteur 's Amendment No 3 !
Could I begin by thanking the rapporteur for his work on this very important dossier , and by congratulating the Commissioner and the Commission for bringing forward this proposal .
We are all very aware that one of the priorities of the Portuguese Presidency , quite rightly , is to tackle the scandalous position regarding road safety in the European Union .
I know they are familiar figures , but 43 000 citizens are killed each and every year .
That is the equivalent to a medium-sized town being wiped off the face of the earth every year .
We therefore welcome this initiative as a means of at least trying to ensure the heavy goods vehicles are as safe as is possible and comply with Community legislation .
Lorry traffic on EU roads is growing both in numbers and in size and we think there are three reasons why this proposal is so important .
Firstly , the safety argument that we have already heard about .
Secondly , the fair competition argument that my colleague Mr Jarzembowski has already referred to - the need to create a level playing field throughout the Community .
Thirdly , there are also the environmental benefits - the possibility of ensuring quieter and less polluting vehicles .
There is clearly a need for EU-wide random checks , and the UK - my own Member State - has already been applying such a system with very positive results .
This proposal will inevitably be bad news for cowboy operators , but as well as being bad news for them , it is going to be good news for all other road users , particularly the vast majority of lorry drivers , owners and operators who are conscientious about the quality , safety and environmental standards of their vehicles .
I welcome this initiative and I hope it can be put into effect as soon as possible .
Mr President , Commissioner , reforming the directive on annual inspections of commercial vehicles is both urgent and vital .
The rapporteur has adopted a perfectly good position in this issue , in the final analysis .
Drivers of commercial vehicles run up thousands of kilometres every year , and the roadworthiness of the vehicles cannot be monitored adequately by means of mere annual inspections .
Roadside spot checks are also necessary because heavy goods vehicles from non-member countries often enter the area of the Union in bad condition , presenting a serious risk to safety .
The newly reviewed directive will do a lot to improve road safety if its provisions are complied with properly and penalties can be imposed for breaches , penalties that are effective , along the right lines and which will serve as a warning .
The directive will be more efficacious if the Member States can negotiate a harmonised system of penalties .
This should not , however , slow down the prompt implementation of the directive .
Justification for the prompt reform of the directive is provided by something that happened recently in Finland .
The police and the vehicle inspection authorities were conducting a spot check of sixty-two heavy goods vehicles in eastern Finland recently .
The drivers of thirty-three of them received fines , and sixteen received a warning .
Three vehicles were prohibited from continuing their journey .
Only thirteen were in fully acceptable condition .
A considerable number of the vehicles in bad condition were from non-member countries .
The worst case was a Polish truck with no brakes in the drawing vehicle , a poorly secured load , and a trailer whose brakes were badly leaking .
Everyone can imagine what sort of safety hazard such a lorry would be on roads covered in snow and ice .
Our group supports Amendment No 3 and hopes the new version of the directive will come into force promptly .
Mr President , Commissioners , many complimentary phrases have been used to describe this directive and I would like to thank Mr Piecyk , but because some developments are of an interim nature , I would like to add a few comments .

After the directive was discussed in the Commission , I recently asked the Commissioner about non-EU drivers driving within the EU and making use of the way people , drivers , in particular , are inspected during the technical inspections of cars .
What is happening in effect is the following : drivers who do not have an employment permit in an EU Member State and who do not have a work contract in the third country benefit from the situation in that they drive a car which is registered in a particular country and which subsequently passes all inspections without a hitch , but do so outside the country where they are registered and where they carry out their activities .
It is precisely in those countries that employment permits and work contracts are not checked up on .
In other words , I would like to argue against directly including this option in the directive , but I would at any rate recommend further exploration of this option as a secondary matter in order to find a solution to this problem .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , safety on our roads is of great concern to us all .
Given the ever increasing volume of traffic on Europe 's roads I am at pains to emphasise the need for vehicles to meet the highest possible technical roadworthiness standards , but also the need to take environmental aspects into account .
Although - and I should like to say this most emphatically - it is also necessary , if the directive is not only to pay lip service to these ideals , for it to be applied by the Member States and invested with appropriate penalties .
The best directive will be ineffective in everyday life if it does not provide any penalties for non-compliance or violations .
I therefore support the amendments providing for guilty parties to be punished , because the operation of motor vehicles , which in principle presents a risk and entails a potential danger to people , must be supervised properly and with the necessary care and expertise .
In any case we must prevent this from being dealt with thoughtlessly , precisely because this is about a directive which provides for rules not only for heavy goods vehicles but also for commercial vehicles carrying people .
Time and again we are all severely shaken when there are major accidents which are due purely to technical defects .
Because of this I am glad that the report is not actually controversial and that Parliament is once again proving to be the driving force in the debate about traffic safety on Europe 's roads .
My particular thanks go to all those who work with such dedication in this field in the committee , in the Commission and in the Council .
Mr President , Commissioner de Palacio , the purpose of the proposal the Commission made in 1998 is to replace the directive concerning annual inspections of commercial vehicles .
The motion proposes the introduction of spot checks , as vehicles have to be deemed roadworthy between tests too .
These spot tests may be carried out at the roadside , at ports and harbours or where trucks are parked .
This is , then , a matter of improving road safety in the EU , which is vital .
The damage caused by lorries in traffic accidents is , more often than not , considerable and the state of vehicles is very patchy in different parts of Europe , so pan-European legislation and strict compliance with it will be of benefit to each and every person on the road .
A major cause of concern in the European Union area is the poor state of the trucks coming from Eastern Europe . They need to be dealt with strictly .
Being from East Karelia , I know that even if they had one light and the wheel brakes on one side working , it would be something .
The Council ' s common position will improve road safety considerably , and the directive should enter into force as soon as possible .
In establishing penal systems , however , it is important to realise that penalties must on no account be targeted at the Member State , but the driver or company involved .
Enlightenment is a good thing , but , unfortunately , only proper penalties have an effect on hypocrites .
Road safety is a serious matter .
I recall a tragic accident in Helsinki a few weeks ago in which a wheel that had come off a lorry killed a small child .
We can never assume too much responsibility when it comes to human life .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , once again I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Piecyk , and the corresponding parliamentary committee for the work carried out .
It is certain that the rapporteur is entirely correct in saying that the title is very long .
The simplest thing is to talk about the inspection of lorries , which is what we are really discussing , and perhaps we should all think about not only putting the technical title in some of our regulations , but also , in brackets , the colloquial title or one that is more readily comprehensible to our citizens , a matter which I shall transmit to the services and which we shall consider with a view to the future .
However , on the subject of the proposal , it clearly concerns the roadside inspection of commercial vehicles , both passenger and goods vehicles , with the aim of increasing safety and protecting the environment with regard to road transport within the Community .
It is undoubtedly intended to create a structure for the quality of maintenance of commercial vehicles in circulation in the Community , and would discourage operators and managers who try to achieve a competitive advantage by using vehicles in an inadequate state of repair .
The proposal requires that the Member States supplement the annual technical inspection by carrying out spot checks in proportion to the fleet of commercial vehicles in circulation annually on their roads .
These inspections may be carried out by the roadside , in ports and in other places where vehicles park , or , as is more frequent in the case of public service vehicles , on the operator 's premises .
In fact , several States already apply this type of inspection , the so-called ' roadside inspections ' , in the manner laid down in the directive , that is , in a somewhat unexpected manner .
This may in fact be the best way to effectively monitor the state of the vehicles in circulation on our roads .
I would like to say that the Commission is aware that Parliament is concerned that this proposal might lead to discrimination against certain transport contractors , or lorries from certain countries or even certain makes of vehicle , and that the intention of the principal recommendation of the rapporteur is for the fines imposed on operators by the Member States to be harmonised as a condition of application of the directive .
We share this concern , but we consider that Amendment No 2 is too drastic and , in this respect , we would support Amendment No 3 which encompasses the spirit we are all aiming for , and which , at the same time , offers the necessary flexibility .
We also accept Amendment No 1 , and I would like to refer to what Mr Bouwman said .
In fact , we are tremendously concerned by the fact that vehicles are being driven in the Union by drivers from third countries , and in particular from candidate countries , who do not have work contracts that conform to Community standards , or the standards of any Community country , but simply obey the standards of these third countries , which are often candidates for accession , or sometimes do not even conform to these standards as the corresponding inspections are not carried out by the said third countries .
I have therefore written to all the Ministers for Transport of the fifteen countries of the Union to instigate a discussion on the subject , and also to ask for a report on what the situation is in their countries regarding this type of case , and what positive suggestions they can submit so that we can find a solution to this problem , which concerns us greatly , and which could have negative consequences for road safety , which has to be our main concern , and for fair competition , which is also important to us at the Commission .
To this end , I hope that we can deal with these matters at the next Transport Council at the end of this month , as well as , as Mr Watts has said , all aspects of road safety in general since the Portuguese Presidency proposes this as one of the key matters of its Presidency .
On the basis that great progress has been made in the past few years , I believe that a great deal still remains to be done , as the death of 42 000 - 43 000 European citizens on the roads is too high a figure and there is still an effort to be made .
But I would like to say that , with regard to the problem of drivers from third countries , I hope that before the end of the month we shall have a response , and we shall , in any case , handle this within the Council .
And , in response to some questions or initiatives , I shall be able to reply here in Parliament , either during the plenary session or in committee , and , if not , I hope in any case that we shall shortly be able to make a concrete proposal that enables us , truly and effectively , to combat this type of abuse .
Once again , I would like to reiterate my appreciation of the quality of work carried out , not only by the rapporteur , but by the committee as a whole .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Closing of the session
I declare the 1999-2000 session closed .
( The sitting was closed at 10.41 p.m. )
Opening of the session
I declare resumed the 2000-2001 session of the European Parliament .
Agenda
Mr President , we do not have anything against postponing the vote .
However , I insist on the other scheduled votes , particularly those on the Lisbon Summit , going ahead tomorrow .
We have nothing against postponement , with this proviso .
The competent services have informed me that tomorrow ' s list of subjects will be rather lengthy .
Mr President , like Mr Lannoye , late last night I too was faced with the fact that the vote on my report at second reading is planned for 12.00 p.m.

The groups have emphatically asked me to urge you not to let the vote take place at 12.00 p.m. but tomorrow instead , as they have not had the chance to apply for split and roll-call votes .
After all , it came as a complete surprise that the vote was planned for 12.00 p.m.
I would therefore ask , also on behalf of many others , to postpone the vote until tomorrow .
Mr Blokland , the officials of the competent services have informed me that your report will automatically be put to the vote tomorrow .
I now ask the House whether it agrees to postpone the vote on the Lannoye report until tomorrow .
If we are all in agreement , that is what the arrangement will be .
Annual legislative programme ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the European Commission ' s annual legislative programme for the year 2000 .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , if the citizens of Europe are looking for this kind of Europe , then Brussels , and especially the Commission , is where they will look .
Being a parliamentarian , that does not please me , but I have to accept the situation , for the moment at least , and until further notice .
But this also means that the Commission faces an immense challenge .
If you want to bring about the great turning point you mentioned , Mr President of the Commission , then you had better make a start on this damn quickly .
In the light of this responsibility , Mr President of the Commission , when you made your last speech here in this House , you proposed concentrating more heavily on core tasks .
This could also be described in terms of carrying out or implementing the subsidiarity principle .
However , at the same time , we must be clear about the fact that this must not amount to offloading tasks that are too complicated and difficult for the Commission .
We must also be under no illusions , Mr President of the Commission , as to the fact that we must get straight down to work on these criteria and the core tasks I mentioned .
We cannot wait for a White Paper , for the Commission already has far too much in the pipeline which might have to be looked at in this light , whilst other matters will have to be implemented more quickly and in a more comprehensible manner .
What distinguishes us Social Democrats from other groups in this House is not so much the multitude of tasks and the number of proposals that are to come , as the direction they are heading in .
We want to reinforce Europe ' s role on the international stage in a clear and unequivocal manner , just as we want to increase its competitiveness .
Above all , we must aim to make Europe more socially aware , to create a Europe of equal opportunities , and to increase security and quality of life within Europe .
That said , we do not want to bureaucratise Europe and neither do we want to centralise it .
That is not how we envisage Europe to be !
If you make these your goals , Mr President of the Commission , then we will be behind you every step of the way .
Moving onto another point : the Commission has passed a long list of its intentions to Parliament .
We decided , in our wisdom , to draft a resolution which may not be quite as long but which provides you with a whole host of proposals and some counter-proposals .
Exchanging lists in this way is not an ideal way to engage in dialogue .
Therefore , in future , we should think of something different .
I would ask you , Mr President of the Commission , to put an assessment of your successes and failures at the head of your next programme , and to comment on the extent to which you have actually achieved that which you set out to do , so that we can both engage in dialogue which is improved , constructive and ideally suited to the purpose .
That would seem to me to make a lot more sense than the course of action we are taking this week - not for the first time , but hopefully the last !
Mr President of the Commission , I would just like to pick up again on your expression " decisive year " .
We must all make it our business to follow the debates on Europe in the various individual Member States , and not just in those we happen to come from .
In fact , it is a constant source of alarm to me that so far we have failed in the course of this debate , to convince the general public of the need for this kind of Europe , and , in particular , we have failed to convey to them that the key to developing a global outlook is to make Europe strong , and this strong Europe must make provisions ; not for everything , but certainly for matters that lend added value to Europe .
It is not about preventing globalisation , we would not succeed there in any case .
The only way forward is to form this global outlook on the basis of our own values and diversity .
To this end , therefore , we must work together to bring about a significant improvement in communication , which is something you yourself mentioned .
You are in the process of drafting a communication strategy for the enlargement of the European Union .
But , Mr President of the Commission , we will not reach the real turning point until we manage to put our heads together on every single legislative proposal and work out how to convince the general public of the need for the proposal in question .
If we do not manage to upgrade our channels of communication in this way then our common goal , to wit , a higher turnout at the next European elections , will not be within our sights .
This would be a shame , not just for us MEPs - who may no longer be here in that case - but for Europe as well .
Mr President , my Group would like to welcome the annual legislative programme .
However , we have some concerns about the process .
I came to this procedure as a relatively new Member of this House .
It was with some incredulity that I found myself faced with these various draft resolutions from each of the groups , all of them very much resembling shopping lists of differing lengths and ingredients .
Indeed , to carry the metaphor further and using the English usage , if we were going to make a meal from these it would be rather long and rather indigestible .
I understand that it has been the normal tradition to obediently produce these lists .
Now , I am not particularly radical or revolutionary , but it seemed to my colleagues that this process lacked something , especially at a time when we are trying to reconnect Europe with its citizens , when we want them to be clear about what we are doing here .
There has been much talk about concentrating on core tasks and of achieving better quality of European legislation rather than more quantity .
All this sits rather uneasily with endless lists .
With this in mind , we produced a one-page resolution highlighting key areas .
However , this has not reached the compromise resolution , so we wish now to put down a clear marker for the future about how this process should be conducted .
We should like to suggest that , since this is a very important process and moment in our legislative cycle , and to enable the Commission and Parliament to approach it in a constructive way , the annual state of the Union address could be combined with a resolution from Parliament on key political priorities and then go to the committees for more detailed debate .
This would get away from the shopping-list approach and give more political focus .
It would allow Parliament to participate fully in the process , not just by swapping shopping lists with you .
It is because we want to give more purpose and prominence to this procedure that the ELDR intends not to sign the current eight-page list - not because we object to the contents , but because we think this is in danger of becoming an annual ritual performance without substance and real meaning .
What we would like to do is catch the imagination of Europe 's citizens .
Mr President , I shall not repeat the general criticism we expressed during the previous sitting of Parliament regarding the orientations of the European Commission ' s work .
The programme submitted to us for this year is generous , to say the least .
It contains some positive elements and some less positive elements .
I should like to draw attention to one area that I feel is rather deficient , the area of social policy .
This would not be too serious if significant progress had been made during the five previous years , but this is not the case .
Indeed , in terms of social policy , the Commission and Parliament have the opportunity to promote many things .
According to the terms of Chapter I of Title 11 of the Treaty , in particular , I am thinking specifically of problems to do with working conditions and improving the working environment .
Regarding , in particular , the health and safety of workers , we are now governed by the terms of a directive dating from 1989 .
In my opinion and in the opinion of my Group , this directive is due for re-evaluation , particularly in the light of a significant study published in 1997 by the Dublin Foundation .
This shows a general decline in working conditions in a number of important sectors .
This needs looking into and I would like to see the Commission investigate the matter thoroughly and assess what needs to be amended in this directive in order to improve the situation .
I shall not go into these in depth . I would now like to take a few moments to examine the process itself , in connection with the legislative programme , i.e. the tabling of the programme and the execution of the programme .
In this respect , I should like to make two firm requests on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance . I should have liked to present these as demands from Parliament but it is enough , today , for them to be firm requests .
Firstly , when a European Parliament resolution has been adopted , particularly within the framework of a Parliament initiative , it would seem to me to be democratic for the Commission to follow up this type of request properly within a reasonable time period .
For example , in the environmental field , we have a White Paper on civil liability in environmental matters .
This is an important step forwards , but let me remind you all the same that this White Paper is the follow-up to a Parliament resolution adopted in 1994 , that is to say , six years ago .
And after the White Paper we shall probably have to wait a long time before we have the directive .
This shows just how slow the procedure is and , in order to give reasons for this slowness , I feel it would be important to have an interim report .
My second point : when a legislative proposal is announced within the legislative programme and is not achieved by the end of the current year , then we should know the reasons why .
Let me give one example of this .
Today , a proposal for a directive on electrical and electronic waste has been announced .
This proposal has already been put forward several times , but has never been tabled .
We know that this is due to pressure from the American Government which is threatening to start proceedings within the WTO , but it would be appropriate , fair and democratic if the Commission were to explain to us just what was going on behind the scenes and why it is dragging its feet before tabling this directive .
President Prodi , allow me to express my apprehension and alarm at the line taken in the Work Programme for 2000 , a year which you described as a decisive year , and not only because of the lack of genuinely innovative proposals contained therein .
No , what gives real cause for concern is the semi-ideological approach of this Work Programme , its self-subordinating , unquestioning adoption of the American model , that introverted , robotic model of development which disturbs the sleep even of insiders such as the Chairman of the Federal Reserve , Alan Greenspan .
This programme is devoid of any autonomous vision of the Europe of today and tomorrow , making no contrast between the two , and it is impervious , if not blind , to elements which are reawakening the conscience of many of your European colleagues : seminal events such as those in Seattle , which you are appear to be determined to see repeated at all costs , or the repeated arrogant vetoes imposed by Executive Board on the candidates for the Managing Directorship of the International Monetary Fund , which have collapsed only in the past few hours under European pressure for the appointment of Mr Horst Köhler .
Faced with the American steamroller , you commit yourself to doing your utmost to subdue and eliminate transatlantic disputes , in the name of a hypothetical partnership between the global superpower and a Europe afflicted with lack of vision , purposefully induced by incessant lobbying from quarters such as the RT .
I do not have time to dwell on the other elusive , moderate - too moderate - features of your programme : the environment , health , justice , transport , security , the reckless enlargement of the Union which provoked criticism from your predecessor , Jacques Delors , the development of the on-line economy , which is one of the many universal remedies for unemployment , and the protection of citizen consumers rather than consumer citizens .
President Prodi , a friendly word of advice .
We live in ' the best of all possible worlds ' : threatening clouds of stars and stripes are filling the skies of Europe .
In the words of Charles de Gaulle to General Leclerc , when he had just liberated this beautiful city of Strasbourg : Mr Prodi , préparez votre défense , c 'est la défense de l 'Europe .
Mr President , I welcome the broad thrust of the proposals published by the Commission in its annual legislative programme for the year 2000 .
The most important issues that will be addressed this year will be the reform of the EU decision-making procedures , so that the enlargement process can take place in a streamlined and structured manner .
I support the enlargement of the Union , but such a process cannot take place until key EU institutions , including the Commission , the Council , and of course Parliament , reform their internal decision-making operations .
As a Member of the Parliament from the constituency of Connaught Ulster in Ireland , a peripheral part of this Union , I strongly believe in real and tangible representation for smaller Member States within the EU structures .
At present , the five larger Member States have two posts within the European Commission and there is one each for the smaller Member States .
Whatever the reform , it is vitally important that smaller Member States retain their right to nominate a Member of the Commission .
Undoubtedly , the European Council , representing the fifteen governments , will have to reform its structures .
From an Irish perspective , I strongly believe that Member State governments must have a veto over tax changes at EU level .
No changes at present can be agreed at EU level concerning tax policies without the unanimous support of all EU Member States .
I believe this is an important right , which should be left in the domain of national Member States .
In my own country , the tax regime is quite innovative in many ways .
The tax burden on middle and lower income workers has been steadily reduced , while sensible tax breaks have been given to encourage business enterprises .
This cannot be said of many of the other Member States .
Any proposal to give the European Council the power of qualified majority voting on justice and home affairs would be , I believe , very unwise .
In conclusion , can I say that I am very pleased that the President has , this morning , referred to fisheries .
He said he believes it is lagging behind - that real progress must be made in the year 2002 , because fisheries are established in areas where there is no alternative source of employment .
Of course we want to ensure by the year 2002 that the countries that suffered most when the common fisheries policy was put in place in 1983 will in future receive a fair and equitable share of the resources .
In conclusion , can I say that on a broader level it is important that the European Union , as an economic entity , does not fall behind in the global search for e-commerce opportunities .
The Commission must support educational and training programmes , to ensure that business structures take account of the opportunities which can be secured from the Internet and e-commerce in general .
An information technology revolution is certainly upon us .
We cannot be passengers when these changes take place .
We must be leaders of our business communities and of our educational institutions , so that information technology initiatives are incorporated into all key social and economic sectors of our society .
Mr President , Mr Prodi ' s Commission will not last for five years because people will not , in the longer term , put up with detailed regulation from Brussels .
It is perhaps difficult to know who is going to provide the salutary shock , and when .
That is often the case with historical new departures .
Coincidences play their part and minor matters can suddenly loom large because small things come to symbolise what is fundamental .
The fundamental paradox is that the Union identifies itself as being more and more democratic , at the same time as democracy is being quite systematically cut back in our countries .
One day , the voters will echo the remark of the little boy in Hans Christian Andersen ' s tale , ' The Emperor ' s New Clothes ' , ' Yes , but he is not wearing anything ' .
Last month , Mr Prodi talked of a radical decentralisation of the Union ' s activities .
In contrast , the five-year plan involves radical centralisation , through which responsibility for new legislative areas - of which there are many - will pass from the national and regional parliaments of the Member States to Mr Prodi ' s Commission in Brussels , with legislation being adopted on the basis of 62 out of 87 votes in the Council .
It is Orwellian to a T. Under the heading of ' decentralisation ' , centralisation is taking place .
Under the heading of ' democracy ' , democracy is being dismantled .
Under the heading of ' greater transparency ' , the Commission is proposing an arrangement through which documents that are at present available for public inspection will be locked away .
When he took up office , Mr Prodi solemnly promised - before our Group and here in the House - a completely new approach to transparency .
We were to be able to have access to any document , once the Commission had given it to others .
The elected representatives of the people would no longer be the last to be informed .
We should no longer have to sit in the committee rooms looking at the students from the Permanent Representations , in possession of documents to which we ourselves have no access .
We should no longer have to tolerate a situation in which the employers in the European Union or the farming industry ' s COPA can consult documents which we ourselves cannot obtain .
It is fundamental to a democracy that the executive should serve the electorate and the electorate ' s representatives .
In the EU , the legislature has been transferred to the executive .
The elected representatives of the people are awarded monopolies on power , while fundamental documents from the decision-making process are kept secret .
At the Conference of the Presidents , we decided to summon the ombudsman and Mr Prodi to a discussion concerning transparency .
I hope that Mr Prodi will say : ' I am sorry , I was not aware that my officials were doing the opposite of what I had promised .
I stand by my words . Here is my signature to the transparency that was promised ' .
Thank you , if there is , in fact , anything to say thank-you for .
Mr President , dismayed as I am by the fact that 14 Member States have prejudged Austria , I would like to take this opportunity to ask the Commission to extend its ambitious programme on account of the unfair treatment Austria has been subjected to .
I would particularly like to thank Mr Poettering for what he had to say in this connection .
In the run-up to the Intergovernmental Conference , special emphasis is being placed on the European Union ' s ability to function , which is in every sense pre-requisite to the success of the European unification process .
However , in refusing to talk - albeit only bilaterally - and thereby causing a breakdown in communication , the 14 EU partner States are putting this self-same " ability to function " at great risk .
The Commission must not stand idly by in a situation of this kind .
It has a duty to see to it that the solidarity enshrined in the Treaties is upheld .
With this in mind , I would ask you , President Prodi , to get personally involved in setting up a crisis meeting between the Heads of Government of Austria and the 14 EU partner States , so as to bring about détente and normalisation of relations .
In acknowledgement of my responsibility as a parliamentarian , I myself sent a letter to this effect to all the Heads of Government yesterday .
Mr President , I would first of all like to thank the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , for his work programme .
I concur with the remarks made that there should be more focus , but also that it should be better tailored to the five-year plan .
It seems as if we are talking about two different documents .
The first chapter of the work programme is entitled : " Europe , its neighbours and the world " and rightly so .
I have permission to quote one of the first sentences from this chapter : " the Union must be active on the regional and world stage . "
But in order to be able to play this role , it is vital to develop a practical form of cooperation between the Council ' s High Representative , Mr Solana , the Commission and the European Parliament in order to strengthen democratic control and democratic accountability .
In our opinion , it is also essential that the Commission ' s role be reinforced in the field of foreign policy .
We want to project a much stronger , united front as far as this European foreign policy is concerned .
But the instruments involved are also an important factor .
They help in the analysis of non-military crises and help us to act on them quickly .
If we look at Mozambique , for example , how long have we had to wait before real action could be taken ?
This is about very concrete issues , such as transport capacity .
To this end , we need swifter coordination within the European Union .
Take the enormous cattle losses Mongolia has suffered .
We know that there are funds available in TACIS and ECHO within the European Union .
But why are we not helping out ?
This is because there are too many bureaucratic hurdles .
The EU ' s overseas dealings will need to be better tuned to our need for a stronger , future European foreign policy .
In short , operational implementation is central .
Relations with Russia are of vital importance .
We find ourselves in a situation in which we cannot afford to fall behind the Council of Europe , which has levelled criticism at Russia concerning its Chechnya policy .
It is extremely depressing to note that freedom of press is still not guaranteed in Russia .
We had invited the journalist , Mr Babitsky , to visit us next Thursday , but this was vetoed by the Russian authorities .
I hope that the European Commission too , will protest in the strongest terms to the Russian authorities .
Mr President , Mr Prodi , when a parliament discusses legislative priorities then everything becomes a priority .
As far as I am concerned , the top priorities are : employment - and , consequently , economic growth - and quality of life - and therefore environmental protection , food safety and consumer rights .
I should now like to make a few comments on economic and social matters .
One of the Commission ' s initiatives , which deserves a high priority , is the e-Europe initiative .
Yesterday we discussed the Lisbon Summit for the economic and social revival of Europe .
Shared objectives for growth in order to enable us to move towards full employment are something I have hoped and prayed for .
Full employment does not mean the total absence of any form of unemployment .
There will always be some cyclical unemployment , with workers looking to change jobs , young people entering the labour market .
But full employment will be restored when there are no longer any long-term unemployed and when every young person is offered at least one training course within at least six months of entering the job market .
It is possible if we invest to a greater extent in what Mr Guterres yesterday called ' human capital ' , i.e. basic education plus , most importantly , lifelong training .
In this context , the e-Europe initiative comes at just the right moment .
In future , the computer-related content of jobs is going to be increasingly marked , but we have a lack of workers qualified in this area , as do the United States .
That is why the American Senate has made available a quota of almost 500 000 visas for a period of four years , reserved for highly qualified immigrant workers .
What we should be doing is educating our own intelligent young people and keeping them in Europe .
A Commission document has just shown that half of the young people who pursue postgraduate studies in the United States go on to stay there .
In order to keep our brainpower , to attract the best brains and to train them further , we must make massive investments in research and development .
The only two European countries who invest a greater share of their GDP in research and development than the United States , i.e. Finland and Sweden , are also the only two European countries who are able to compete on equal terms with the Americans in terms of communication technologies .
Surely this provides the rest of Europe with an example to be followed ?
In Lisbon , should we not establish a sort of technological convergence criterion requiring Member States , for example , within a five year period , to move towards a rate of expenditure on research and development equivalent to at least 2.5 % of their GDP ? This is still less than the level currently attained by the United States ?
In this connection , I should also like to applaud Commissioner Philippe Busquin ' s initiative to create a European research area .
Improved living conditions , employment and the quality of employment will continue to be intimately linked to our ability to make European research more dynamic .
Along the same lines , a proper European patent , the development of venture capital and support for young businesses are also of crucial importance .
Last night President Prodi reiterated my expression regarding Europe ' s lack of future prospects .
I am afraid that he misunderstood what I meant to say : I did not accuse the Portuguese Presidency or the Commission of lacking insight , but I did stress the fear of the future experienced by many of our fellow citizens in this radically changing world .
We all know that we are living through a paradigm shift with the advent of the information society and the development society .
But , in a world where 1.5 billion people are still living without electricity , providing every citizen in the world with access to the Internet society is not going to be achieved in the immediate future .
The most significant challenge for the human race is to avoid the separation between information-rich countries and information-poor countries , to prevent the advent of societies where , in the felicitous phrase coined by my friend , Claude Desama , the digital divide will be the new social divide .
The annual legislative programme is the most concrete manifestation of the European Commission 's key constitutional and political power , namely the exclusive right of initiative .
Such power must at all times be rigorously justified and clearly explained .
Yet this year 's work programme , as in all previous years , does not provide detailed justification for each of the multitude of new measures proposed .
A 15-page general summary does not exactly do justice to the 500 initiatives cited in the annex .
In future , the ELDR will therefore insist that there is clear justification for , and specialised parliamentary debate on , all measures announced in the work programme .
In particular , we will be looking for evidence that each new proposal has been properly tested against the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality and we will be looking for sector-specific debates in the European Parliament 's own specialised committees .
In other words , it is now high time for a comprehensive overhaul of the somewhat antiquated way in which this crucial programming document is developed and debated in future .
Mr President , I would like to thank the President of the Commission for giving us two speeches within the space of 24 hours .
Last night he clearly pointed out that we have the prospect of a successful European economy ahead of us for the next two or three years and quite clearly , if we have unexpectedly higher-than-normal growth , then that will help us in the endeavours of this annual legislative programme .
The Commission President 's speech this morning raises three concerns in my mind .
The first relates to subsidiarity , where we feel strongly in our group , as the Liberals have just said , that we need to have a test for every single proposal put forward to show that it is in the European interest .
Subsidiarity must be seen to apply : it must be clear that we are not legislating where it is not necessary to do so .
The second concern relates to budgets .
Given the higher growth rate than was predicted in the financial perspectives , which are based on 2.5 % growth , we can see our way forward to taking slightly different measures on budgets than we would otherwise have done .
On behalf of my group I would like to caution the Commission not to go ahead at this stage with shifting agricultural expenditure from category 1 to category 4 .
In Britain in particular we have a farming industry which is in desperate straits and wants to see some assistance given to certain sectors of agriculture : shifting money for agriculture from one part of the budget to another at this stage would be to give them a wrong message .
Lastly , a word of caution about the question of information .
This is what bedevilled the relationship between our Parliament and the previous Commission : the fact that we , under the Treaties , have access and the right of access to all information in principle .
It looks as if we are running into difficulties with our framework agreement .
I therefore stress that , if we want to have the Commission and Parliament working together , we have to be able to come up with a solution to this problem as soon as possible and not to have limitations on documents which are available to citizens .
As Mr Bonde rightly pointed out , we should have a European Union where there is a free flow of information from the bureaucracy to all our citizens .
Mr President of the Commission , when you entered upon your duties , you said that the Commission would be characterised by openness .
A lot of other people have also said that here today .
But what is the situation now ?
Why are the Commission ' s press conferences no longer being broadcast directly via satellite television so that everyone in all parts of Europe can follow what is happening ?
I hope that Mr Prodi is listening .
Regarding your letter to Mrs Fontaine about the ombudsman , Mr Prodi , do you consider that the ombudsman is bound by any principle of loyal cooperation between the institutions ?
Where , in that case , do you find a legal basis for this view , and do you believe that such a principle can suppress the ombudsman ' s right to express himself freely in the press ?
I also want to provide the following piece of information about your letter to the Wall Street Journal , in which you refer to a seminar in April on openness as proof that the regulation concerned has been prepared openly .
That seminar was , in fact , organised by the European Federation of Journalists and by MEPs Lööw , Thors , Hautala and others , but the proposal which was discussed there had nothing to do with the current proposal , which has been prepared very much in secret .
The main question , however , is that of whether the principle of loyal cooperation should take precedence over the right to express oneself .
Where is the basis for a principle in accordance with which you could suppress this right and make such demands upon the ombudsman ?
Mr President , the report you have presented is ambitious and complex , and I will only touch on a few points .
One : I cannot be other than content with your decision to start focusing on the Mediterranean , both because of the contribution to the Middle East peace process and because it will salvage and strengthen the historical and political ties which unite the countries of Southern Europe .
We consider that , with the implementation of the geo-political processes , the Mediterranean border is just important as eastward enlargement , which both Parliament and the Commission are working on .
Two : the internal market .
Working in the European Parliament , we can see that harmonisation of the existing legislation on civil law is essential .
In all probability , we ought to start work in the field of administrative law as well .
Moreover , every day , we become more aware of the need for a common legal system coordinating the different legal systems of the Member States .
Three : the preparatory documents .
I can only add my voice to the requests to limit the use of preparatory documents , which are presented several times by several different people in the European Parliament .
Despite the fact that they do , on the whole , make for a more in-depth debate , green papers , white papers and statements also have complex , problematic side-effects , as , more often than not , they prolong legislative action in matters in which timing is absolutely essential .
Lastly : the Commission ' s Work Programme seems to overlook two sectors which are in need of particular attention from the European institutions , especially in the light of the developments constantly taking place in e-commerce .
I feel that the Commission should submit proposals on the out-of-court settlement of disputes over on-line contracts and on amendments to the Directive on distance contracts , in order to provide increasingly effective consumer protection .
Mr President , with regard to fishing , I am not going to go into the details of the Commission ' s legislative proposals .
However , I would like to hear a clear commitment from the Commission that it will seek a solution for the speedy transposition into Community law of the recommendations of the regional and international fishing organisations .
Mr President , in the last plenary part-session , regarding the Gallagher report on the recommendations of the ICCAT on bluefin tuna in the Mediterranean , we had the opportunity to debate this issue of Commission delays , which are becoming a very serious problem .
Although these recommendations will become binding on a particular date , their absence in Community legislation means that the fleet is not complying with the measures and may lead to the initiation of infringement proceedings against the European Union .
Delays in transposition are an endemic problem in the Commission .
For example , we have been waiting since 1996 for the incorporation into Community legislation of the ban on landings from Honduras and Belize , or , for example , since 1998 for the control of the fishing capacity for albacore tuna in Community waters .
The Commission is always accusing Member States of not transposing its decisions and directives into their national legislation , while it is doing exactly the same thing on an international level .
It is clear that the proposal presented by the Commission on the communication on the reform of international organisations , with a view to speeding up the process , tries to separate the legislative processes both of Parliament and of the Council .
From the point of view of this institution , there are serious doubts as to whether this is the best way to resolve this problem .
I hope that President Prodi will now commit himself to resolving this problem once and for all , and that , in any event , Parliament will always be connected with the legislative procedure for incorporating the recommendations of international fishing organisations into Community legislation .
Mr President , yesterday , after the intervention of the President-in-Office of the Council , which had painted an optimistic picture of Community development , the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , took the precaution of pointing out that the economic development we are experiencing presented the enormous difficulty that it was accompanied by an increase in the social marginalisation suffered by the European Community .
Mr Schulz has just referred to this phenomenon , speaking on behalf of the Socialists , because we are currently running the risk that , as a consequence of the liberalisation of the Community economy within the framework of the globalisation of the world economy , we may see a situation of greater social differences and the disappearance of the European social model , which we are so proud of .
Mr President , the previous Commission worked under the motto " do less in order to do better " , as opposed to the supposedly active approach of the Delors Commission .
As we know , it is a question of quality rather than quantity , which was also mentioned by both Mr Schulz and Mr Swoboda , speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group .
The question is in which direction this Commission is heading .
I hope that this Prodi Commission is not one which does less in order to do it better , but rather one which does what has to be done .
While the Delors Commission took us from the Single European Act to the Union Treaty and an extensive enlargement of the European Community , I hope that the Prodi Commission will be the Commission of a social Europe , the Commission which ensures that economic development does not go hand in hand with social discrimination , but rather with social progress .
To this end , I hope that the Commission will bear in mind the points of view being expressed in the European Parliament .
As the President of the Commission knows , the current Union Treaty provides for a sort of relationship between the European Parliament and the Commission , whereby , although responsibility for legislative initiative lies with the Commission , it must take account of the positions of Parliament in drawing up legislation .
In this respect , I would like to refer to the codification of Community law .
At the moment , Community law is an impenetrable jungle , absolutely incomprehensible to the citizens of the Community , including those whose profession involves the exercise of the law .
Until now , Community law has developed on the basis of a form of casuistry similar to that of the medieval legislators , and we therefore lack any kind of system , specifically with regard to civil law , competition and the protection of consumers and intellectual property .
Finally , Mr President , I would like to remind you of a text which is mentioned in the Commission communication .
It is point 2 ( 3 ) on the statute of the outermost regions , which is to be implemented by the Commission .
Today the Commission is to speak of the first document in this field , and I hope that , in doing so , it will take account of the requirements of these outermost regions of the Community .
Mr President , the President of the Commission will not be surprised if I speak to him about the internal market .
So as not to repeat what has already been said , in particular what has been said by Mr Fiori , who I agree with , I will refer to another central point of the debate , i.e. the reform of the Commission .
What has the reform of the Commission to do with the internal market ?
The answer is a lot .
Mr President of the Commission , on reading your White Paper on the reform of the Commission , it is clearly apparent that the guiding principle , the philosophy behind this reform , is something very vague which we cannot accept in this Parliament .
This guiding principle is mainly the protection of the Community ' s financial interests .
That is clearly of concern to all of us , but it is only a starting point .
From there on , the Commission must begin to work , and must fulfil its obligations in accordance with the Treaty .
Allow me to give you an example , since the speaking time allotted to me does not give me much opportunity to expand on this idea .
Let us consider the intended reform of the infringement procedure .
What is the intention there ?
It is simply to administrate the existing resources on each level , instead of hearing this Parliament ' s demand that we should create a genuine administrative procedural law for ensuring legal certainty , which is necessary from the point of view of the European citizen , that is to say , from the point of view of the people who may have recourse to this infringement procedure .
It is simply said that this administrative procedural law will not be created , but rather demands will be selected .
How can this be ?
How can these things be selected in a purely arbitrary way .
From the point of view of this Parliament , this type of arrangement cannot be allowed .
We understand that the Commission has to be reformed .
We agree with the objectives of this reform . However , it should not lead to the abandonment of the great momentum of European construction , for the sake of protecting the Community ' s financial interests , however important we may all agree that that is .
The Treaty obliges the Commission , primarily , to provide that momentum .
Thank you , Mr Prodi , for your presentation and your documentation .
Congratulations on using the Internet for the general public - a very good idea .
I will start with trade .
We agree with you that we need a rules-based trading system .
It is essential .
Seattle failed because the United States , in particular , appeared unable to grasp the legitimacy of policies such as environmental protection , the preservation of rural communities through the common agricultural policy , animal welfare , health concerns and social rights .
It displayed incredible insensitivity to the legitimate concerns of the developing world and , frankly , the developing world has little so far to thank the WTO for .
We expect the European Union to continue negotiations , maintaining our strong positions on all these issues and using our links with countries in the developing world to ensure that the next round is a fair round .
Please , can we have detailed proposals in the next three months about how this will happen .
Innovation and knowledge - very appropriate for a new century . How much innovation has taken place in the Commission , or indeed in the Parliament may I say ?
We had a White Paper on innovation some years ago - what has happened since ?
One thing I would like to say very strongly is that we are very concerned in follow-up , not simply in excellent communications , which we welcome , but in follow-up , follow-up , follow-up ! ! ! !
We have under way the Fifth Research Framework Programme - what has happened to what was learned in the Fourth ?
What is the dissemination for the new ideas , the new products , the new comparisons of socio-economic systems ?
Follow-up again , please .
We welcome incidentally the formation of a European research area which you and Commissioner Busquin have put forward .
This is an excellent way in which to begin the century .
I welcome the forthcoming communication on enterprise , but I hope that past work will also be looked at before we go ahead with more .
I will now use a tremendous cliché truism - ' our greatest resource in the European Union is our people ' .
Is it not shameful that large Member States like my own and Germany cannot supply the number of people skilled in information technology ?
Is it not disgraceful that they are having to attract people from countries where those skills are needed ?
It is a disgrace and I hope that you will take it up when you look at legislation .
A further shocking waste of resources , Commissioner , is that women in technical , scientific and information technology fields are squandering their skills .
I hope there will be a follow-up to the Science White Paper .
Mr President , the internal reform of the Commission has begun .
We welcome that !
This is not the first attempt to turn the Commission into a world-class public service , but we , Mr Prodi , wish to believe in the sincerity and resolve of your promise to this House .

For the moment we have a series of measures and a White Paper .
You are examining it with the members of the Council and with the civil service unions and finally , this Parliament will offer its support and will cooperate with you in this great objective of making the European Commission the best administration in the world .
Go for it !
However , I would like to point out one fault in the document .
It lacks an analysis of the reasons for the failure of the previous system , and Mr Kinnock should have carried it out because he is an expert in the field , having worked in the Commission for five years .
For example , there previously were punitive measures or measures for assessing the merits of the civil servants , but , Mr Prodi , they were not used .
The officials responsible , including the Commissioners , did not make use of these measures , of these recourses which existed before .
Now that we are establishing new measures , how do we know they will be used ?
Only you know the answer to this secret .
The lack of motivation amongst excellent civil servants is serious .
We must take action and the example should come from above .
The reform of the Commission , Mr Prodi , should not only protect the financial interests of the Community .
Far more resources are lost through an ineffective and unmotivated administration .
Furthermore , we also have to accept that officials who take responsibility and risks may make mistakes .
You said in your speech that you prefer to make mistakes rather than fail to act .
Go for it , Mr Prodi .
Your task must be an historic task .
You are not the first to try it .
We hope that you succeed .
Mr President , it is interesting that Mr Prodi has presented today a work programme ; however , our agenda says that we are having a debate on a legislative programme .
Looking at it from the point of view of social and employment policy we certainly do not have a legislative programme before us .
In fact we have not had a legislative programme for several years now .
What we have had instead is a process of consolidation and the development of certain convergence processes such as that developed and launched at Luxembourg .
We welcome the Luxembourg procedure .
We hope it will be deepened , strengthened and extended to other areas such as convergence in social protection .
But does that mean that we have done the job in terms of legislation in the social area ?
I think not .
There are a number of areas where we need to update and modernise the social legislation we have adopted in the past .
With the deepening and strengthening of the internal market and globalisation we are seeing an increasing number of mergers , take-overs and transfers within the European Union .
That , to me , says that we need to look back at the whole framework of legislation we developed largely in the 1970s in this area - on transfers , collective redundancies , insolvency , and latterly on works councils .
We need to modernise and strengthen that legislation , not in order to stop globalisation or the deepening of the internal market - of course not - but in order to make sure that we manage the changes these things bring , through a spirit of partnership in all of our workplaces , large and small , within the European Union .
That means that we need to pursue with vigour the general framework on information and consultation at work .
In the health and safety field as well , there is a need to update and modernise the legislation we adopted in the past : the pregnant women at work directive , five years overdue for review ; the noise directive of 1986 , ten years overdue for review ; a number of directives that need to be radically updated and modernised .
But is it just about updating ?
No .
We do not need any new great raft of social legislation , but there are areas that have not been addressed .
We have outstanding promises for legislation on homeworking , on teleworking ; we have the yawning gap of social security in atypical work that has been outstanding for almost a decade now ; we have the promise of a specific directive on muscular-skeletal injuries outstanding from the last medium-term Social Action Programme .
There are other areas .
I had a woman come to see me recently , called Mrs Angela Elliot Mathis , working for Lucent Technologies .
She was head-hunted into the company at a very high level to work as a senior manager and a board member .
She had worked in a range of European countries for high technology companies .
Thirteen months into the job she was dismissed without notice and without reason .
She still has no reason for the dismissal .
The remarkable thing is that she has no protection in either Belgian law - she was working in Belgium - or European law .
Without that sort of protection people will not take the opportunity to live , move and work wherever they can within the European Union .
These are the gaps we need to plug .
Let us do it in the new medium-term Social Action Programme .
Mr President , I want to highlight the areas of the work programme which affect directly the work of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
With regard to regional policy , my group would like to see the Commission ensure the full application of the partnership principle at all levels of programming of the Structural Funds .
We , along with other groups in this Parliament , are still waiting for the Commission to present a proposal laying down the practical arrangements for the implementation of the code of conduct that would facilitate cooperation and proper scrutiny .
When , Mr President , will the Commission go further on spatial planning and submit new proposals to develop the decision taken at the informal Council meetings , notably at Potsdam and Tampere ?
Regarding transport and tourism , I and my group welcome the proposals reinforcing transport safety although we need more concrete proposals on road safety and in particular , the issue of blood-alcohol levels and speed limits .
I also welcome the ongoing commitment to the Galileo project and the review of the TENs strategy , especially with its highlight on the railway sector , a sector which we believe to be very important indeed .
However , I have to say to you that my group deplores the fact that several dossiers at this moment are blocked in Council .
We also want progress on both the working time directive and the slot allocation at airport directive , as well as measures to end the misery in air traffic control delays in Europe at this moment .
We are also concerned , President Prodi , at the lack of proposals concerning the tourism sector , a sector in which so many of our citizens work .
I regret that transport issues do not appear to have been taken seriously into account in the enlargement chapter and would encourage the Commission to present proposals to ensure better coordination between structural actions and instruments and the PHARE and TACIS programmes .
I also want to insist that Parliament ' s views and wishes on postal services , often stated in this chamber , are taken fully into account in any new proposals .
Whilst I am grateful to Mr Prodi for outlining the Commission ' s work programme this morning , I have to say that in the areas of regional policy , transport and tourism , the programme is more notable for what is missing than for what is in it , and I would hope that over the next year we could put those matters right .
Mr President , I should like to address the Commission in order to express my wish that the year 2000 should enable us to make progress in the general direction of coherence , particularly in the field of agriculture .
The fact is , if the European Union intends to fight for alternative rules for international trade , if it is to defend the European farm model , then it must acknowledge that there is still a lot to be done in order to put its political decisions into practice .
In the banana case , for example , we have not so far been able to reconcile the interests of our producers , those in the ACP countries , with the demands of the WTO .
Why not ?
Quite simply because the WTO , according to the Marrakech model , does not permit this , or permits it only with extreme difficulty .
So why , after so often declaring that the WTO must incorporate social and environmental regulatory mechanisms , and that the European Union intends to guarantee advantages for LDCs , does the Commission still adhere exclusively to the prospect of market liberalisation in this sector ?
Since Seattle has challenged the inadequacies of existing WTO agreements , I would argue strenuously in favour of the Union handling this issue in accordance with the rules which we intend to see predominate in international trade .
I would make the same call for coherence in another area , the management of the pigmeat crisis .
You will be aware that , as a result of this crisis , which has now lasted for more than two years , many independent producers find that they have been relegated to being mere casual workers for firms or other large-scale producers .
This is a situation which runs totally counter to our European farm model which is based on a multiplicity of diversified and multifunctional family farms .
Here too , Mr Prodi , I would like to sound the alarm , and I would call upon the Commission to put forward new measures which are properly suited to managing this type of crisis , in addition , obviously , to what you are already proposing , i.e. a solidarity fund .
My final point concerns the preparation of the budget for 2001 .
Admittedly , the budget lines for agriculture may be examined in order to reflect the need to show solidarity with the Balkans .
This is true . We should , however , pay attention to meeting the commitments made in Berlin regarding the CAP and , more especially , to retaining adequate safety margins in order , in particular , to confront the crises which are damaging the fabric of agricultural and rural life .
Can I take this opportunity to welcome the programme in the context of the five-year strategic plan .
I particularly wanted to congratulate President Prodi on emphasising the issue of governance in the overall planning process .
The Economist last week was rather scathing about the importance that was attached to this issue , but we have a huge challenge ahead in attacking the institutional architecture that we need to create for the 21st century - an architecture that has to be commensurate with our responsibilities and our position in the world .
The outbursts in Seattle and Davos for instance were not just about the issues - they were very much about a populace and a citizenry trying to engage with a new set of institutions and being not quite sure of how to do so .
Therefore , opening up the invisible cities of decision-making in Europe to the citizenry is absolutely vital .
Can I welcome the annual programme in particular because there was one omission from the five-year plan .
That was the whole area of education , youth and culture which did not make an appearance at all .
The volume of programmes dedicated to this in the annual programme lends a suitable importance to those areas because they can provide us with the solid basis that we will need in order to be able to face the challenges we are now presented with .
In moulding a greater Europe we have a significant challenge , but mobility in Europe - student mobility for instance - is still very low .
Only 2 % outside the old Erasmus programme of students are actually mobile in Europe , which is not something upon which we can build a new economy at all .
We are entering the new technological age , and again can I congratulate the Commission and also the Portuguese Presidency on the work that it has done to usher in the technological and informational age .
Again , we need a programme of education that matches the best practice across the whole of Europe .
We cannot develop a whole series of initiatives based on , for instance , small businesses or health on-line or whatever without educating people to be literate in those technologies .
This means perhaps looking again at all our educational programmes to see that they match the programmes we are particularly enthusiastic about .
Can I just , in finishing , say that we will have started four new programmes by the end of this year - Media , Culture 2000 , Youth and Socrates .
I hope that we will evaluate the work that was done in the previous programmes to ensure that these are not just another new layer but are actually a new beginning for the programmes that can present us with an educated European citizenry .
Mr President , I must object in the strongest possible terms to the proposal , within this legislative programme , to reduce the agricultural budget by EUR 300 million for the purpose of rebuilding Kosovo .
While I have every sympathy with the need to rebuild Kosovo , and while I understand fully that the CAP accounts for almost half of the entire expenditure of the EU , I nevertheless object to the agricultural budget being regarded as a well from which water can be drawn each time another department develops a thirst .
I know a guarantee has been given that the removal of this sum from the budget will not affect any of the financial obligations entered into by the Commission within the framework of the CAP , but I just do not believe it .
I do not accept that this will simply be a one-off event .
When farmers in my own constituency of Scotland are suffering their worst recession in more than 100 years , how can I explain to them that this EUR 300 million would be better off spent on Kosovo ?
When farmers are going bankrupt every day in the UK , when the level of suicides amongst farmers and farm-workers has reached unprecedented levels , when the economy of rural Britain is in spiral decline , how can I explain to them that EUR 300 million would be better off spent in Kosovo ?
In such circumstances , it would be mad to slash the budget to this extent .
We should be spending more to alleviate this crisis rather than contemplating spending less .
I urge honourable Members , when we come to vote on this issue , to vote against this proposal .
Mr President , I should like to return to the subject of the annual legislative programme , after that digression on the European budget .
I should like just to address one particular subject , which is the issue of what has happened to the initiatives that Parliament took under Article 192 of the EC Treaty .
As Mr Prodi knows , this new article added to the Treaty by the Maastricht Treaty gave Parliament the right to request the Commission to submit legislative proposals .
The last Parliament exercised this new responsibility on six occasions , but only once did it lead to a legislative proposal being brought forward by the Commission in response to our request , namely the proposals originating in the report of my colleague , Mr Rothley , on insurance for people using their vehicles in other Member States .
That is a very good example , but what happened to the other five ?
It seems that the Commission has not responded .
There is no obligation on the Commission to respond , but we would expect the Commission , in a spirit of cooperation with Parliament , to look at these proposals carefully and to respond in most cases .
One out of six is simply not good enough .
We now have an Intergovernmental Conference looking at the Treaties again .
Following the addition of this article to the Treaty at Maastricht we did not press the Amsterdam IGC to give Parliament a full right of initiative which would enable us to submit a proposal to the Council without going through the Commission .
We were happy with the compromise that Article 192 represented , but if this compromise is felt not to be working , and if it is not seen to be satisfactory from Parliament 's point of view , there will inevitably be pressure for the Treaty to be amended to give Parliament a full right of initiative , something the Commission does not want because it sets great store by its monopoly of the right of initiative .
I say to the Commission , if you do not want that article to be amended further then you must take your responsibilities under the existing article more seriously .
I would urge the Commission in future , when Parliament makes a legislative proposal in this way , to take it up , at least in the majority of cases if not in all of them .
Mr President , the Commission has submitted a promising work programme for the year 2000 .
We cannot do other than give this programme our full backing .
However , there are also some unfortunate gaps in it .
There is one gap in particular I would like to discuss ; it is one Mr Jarzembowski touched on just before .
I do not see the work programme make any mention whatsoever of tourism .
We are talking about one of the most important branches of industry here , both within the EU and beyond its borders .
We have long been promised measures for this sector .
It requires improvement as a matter of urgency , but nothing is happening .
But the Commission has other important tasks to perform besides those of a legislative nature .
As Mr Poettering has already mentioned today , it also has a pivotal role as guardian of the treaties .
With that in mind , the Commission - I say this in view of the occasion - has taken upon itself the task of monitoring the activities of one Member State in particular very closely .
As a citizen of the country in question , I do not object to this modus operandi .
Nor will my homeland have a problem with subjecting itself to European scrutiny in matters of human rights , the rights of foreign nationals , and anti-racist policy .
On the contrary , we have shown in the past that our country has one of the best records on all these points , and we intend to keep it that way .
If the Commission is to be the guardian of the treaties then please , Mr Prodi , be thorough in your work .
The behaviour of " the Fourteen " , or at least of some members of this coterie , can infringe Community law too , and in recent days and weeks , Community law has been infringed on a number of points , for example over the Cultural Capital 2000 issue , school exchange programmes in the Union , and other matters .
I have " and so on and so forth " written down here , but I hope that things do not continue in this vein .
Hence I urge the Commission to uphold its role as guardian of the treaties in these matters too , and to remain vigilant .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for this clear , practical , substantial debate .
The only thing I would ask is that you view my speech as just part of an overall debate which is taking shape day by day .
The " short speeches " technique adopted by Parliament means that we have to view all our speeches as part of the same debate as the speeches made yesterday and last month , and I would stress that , whereas last month we laid down the general guidelines , this time our debate has been detailed , for an annual legislative programme must be detailed .
This debate has clearly revealed the vital importance of our cooperation .
Literally all the subjects we have touched on this morning - the need for a major operation to coordinate the budget , the need for a joint action and the need to adopt a position on the Intergovernmental Conference and on relations with the Council - all require Parliament and the Commission to work together .
This is why our approach to the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference is so important , for the very reason that that is where the rules which will govern our all our future activities will be defined , for we cannot hold another Intergovernmental Conference immediately after this one .
There has to be a break .
Today , concern was expressed over the length of the list of subjects to be put to the vote .
Well , in my opinion , today was the right time to deal with the list and the right time for in-depth analysis .
Of course , certain areas are missing from this list .
Many of you have rightly expressed the opinion that tourism is a subject which is missing , which , as has been said , is a larger employer than agriculture .
Of course , we must turn our attention to this matter , although , as you are aware , the Commission ' s powers in this area are rather limited .
In any case , the list contains many subjects , the details of which will have to be discussed in committees .
Among those referred to - and I agree with the objection raised by one of the Members present - were the health and safety of workers , social policy , the consolidation of foreign policy , the elimination of the immense delays caused by Commission red tape and the various practical projects such as GALILEO , regional policy and education .
There is therefore a series of issues on which we must work together this year .
However , we also have a major opportunity , which was welcomed by a great many of you today , in that our economy looks set to be sound for at least two or three years .
We must make the most of this opportunity , since , as you have pointed out , we have a major problem with our budget .
Today ' s speeches reveal a precise , but ruthless analysis .
On the subject of agriculture , we cannot relinquish existing resources , which are considered to be vital for the basic subsistence of certain agricultural areas , but , on the other hand , we have foreign policy commitments , such as Kosovo and others , and there are therefore imbalances in our budget .
We can , in part , correct these imbalances with an economy which , we hope , will expand at a rate of over 3 % per annum - as Mr Elles pointed out - thereby increasing our resources , but we are all well aware that even these resources will not be sufficient to achieve a proper balance between available resources and the programmes and objectives which have been mentioned today .
In addition , it is vital for Parliament and the Commission to work well together to make these decisions .
This is the moment of truth , the moment when , together , we must take stock of our future , that is the limits for the budget , establishing the fundamental decisions to be taken and the major actions to be undertaken to shape our future .
On the one hand , this should be our focus in the coming months , but , on the other , as you have pointed out , there is the issue of competences , governability and the European Constitution , namely the powers of the countries , regions and Länder .
I am fully aware of this .
Last week , I met with the official representatives of the German Länder to discuss this issue , and we did not confine ourselves to decentralisation at all : the discussion went much deeper than that .
We talked about the levels of governability which need to be adopted in Europe , not decentralisation ..
It is for this reason that I have continued to push for a White Paper on governability .
We are in the process of creating something completely new .
We may receive criticism , be limited in our actions and encounter technical setbacks , but we are breaking down the intellectual barriers of politics with this experiment .
And in order to do this we must work together .
The White Paper on governability , on the one hand , and the difficulties of balancing the budget , on the other , are the two pillars upon which we must base a joint political action for the short term .
I can assure you of only one thing : the method adopted by the Commission is a method which genuinely does start from the drawing board ( whiteboard , not blackboard ) , upon which we must set down our ideas regarding what would be best for the future of the institutions for which we are responsible .
We must , of course , be thorough in this , as we are not supposed to be just drawing up general guidelines , and this is related to the third point which you addressed to me on the report on our actions .
Each year , we present a report on the actions we have undertaken .
In February , we presented an annual report on the actions carried out in 1999 , which we would like to expand . It already covers all the actions carried out , but we would like to provide more information on our current work .
These are the plans for a great European Union , plans with a specific objective .
If we do not implement these plans there will be no place for us in the new world .
A criticism was made of globalisation , which to me is absurd , for globalisation is already underway .
The problem is rather how to accomplish it .
Do we want to play a leading role in this globalisation ?
Do we want behave responsibly in respect of developing countries and the Third World in this matter ?
I feel that this is an extremely important strategy .
We can no longer allow ourselves to disregard Seattle .
On the contrary , we must take up the Seattle debate again , and do so immediately , in an endeavour , of course , or rather , with the firm objective of correcting the errors which caused Seattle to fail .
There is an obvious need for a collective conscience which will take care of the whole world and not just our own particular interests .
Woe betide us if we try to halt globalisation , for it is the one remaining hope for Italy , for China , for the world which is trying to develop in this global economy .
We cannot stifle these countries at such a decisive moment as this .
This , therefore is our destiny , and our task is to create a Europe which is increasingly able to play a proper role .
And enlargement is a part of all this : it is not just a means of preserving peace , it is a means of defining our role .
To return to the subject of enlargement , the Commission has taken a firm position , which is audacious but also resolute and responsible , for the objections raised are of two kinds : on the one hand , there is the desire to bring about enlargement immediately , which is a desire we share , but , on the other , there is the urgent need to specify clearly the implications of enlargement and the means by which it is to be brought about .
I am aware that my statement that we must allay the fears of public opinion in the applicant countries and the Member States as part of the enlargement process did not go down well in some of the applicant countries , being received with some concern , but my intention is to provide them , as well as ourselves , with a guarantee , for if merely a suspicion were to be raised that , in practice , enlargement was only superficial , pubic opinion would turn against this great , historic move , this seminal event which will define our activity and which gives a moral dimension to the political sphere we are trying to build .
To sum up , this overall balance , this sense of mission , this feeling of compatibility which guides the actions of every Parliament and every government , must preside over enlargement , the budget , and governability .
Mr President , I put an extremely topical and extremely precise question to the President of the Commission about his view of the relationship between freedom of expression and responsibility for cooperating loyally with the institutions .
Unfortunately , I did not receive any answer to this question .
It is a question which is being debated everywhere in Europe at the moment , and we should be extremely interested to hear his view .
No , not this time either !
Thank you very much , Mrs Thors .
The President of the Commission has given his answer and we must now continue the debate .
I have received five motions for resolutions , pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Cocoa and chocolate products
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0047 / 2000 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive relating to cocoa and chocolate products intended for human consumption ( 9947 / 1 / 1999 - C5-0252 / 1999 - 1996 / 0112 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Lannoye ) .
Mr President , I think it useful to remind you that we voted on this proposed directive relating to cocoa and chocolate products at first reading in October 1997 .
In fact , therefore , the Council of Ministers has taken a great deal of time to reach an agreement on its common position , since it was not until October 1999 that this common position was available .
It has taken two years , and I feel that opinion , and indeed the opinion of this House , has been overcome by weariness in relation to this matter , to the extent that a number of Members of Parliament - I should make it clear that this is the majority view within the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection - consider that this is a balanced compromise .
The common position is a balanced compromise and we should seek not to change it too much !
Personally , I find that it was Parliament ' s vote at first reading that resulted in a balanced compromise , and I am deeply sorry that the European Commission did not in any way support Parliament ' s position in its negotiations within the Council .
At no time did the Commission take up Parliament ' s amendments and indeed , during the debate within the Committee on the Environment , the Commission once again declared itself in favour of not changing this common position and , to put it plainly , of rejecting all the amendments .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has , however , adopted two important amendments . I welcome these even though , in my opinion , they do not go far enough .
To tell the truth , I feel that this is not an acceptable compromise and that the use of vegetable fats has been made an acceptable commonplace while not giving consumers sufficient information , ignoring the problem of the analysis method ' s lack of reliability , removing subsidiarity and complying with the requirements of multinational chocolate manufacturers , while ignoring the concerns of small specialist chocolate-makers and SMEs , consumer rights and the future of the millions of farmers involved in cocoa production .
I am thinking in particular of the cocoa producers of West Africa , numbering more than ten million , whose future has clearly been compromised .
Why should I say that when there is a proposed annex in the common position which appears to answer the problem ?
It is true that there is an annex restricting the list of permitted vegetable fats to six substances , which include shea nut butter , which is a product gathered in some poor countries of Africa , such as Mali and Burkina Faso .
Unfortunately , this restriction does not provide any guarantees for the future .
Firstly , it is in fact possible to manufacture cocoa butter substitutes without shea nuts , and I have no doubt that such solutions are being investigated on the grounds of the cost and reliability of the product .
Secondly , there are industrial processes , involving chemical or genetic engineering methods , which make it possible to obtain cocoa-butter equivalents , using a low-cost base material which is one of the six permitted , i.e. industrially-produced palm oil with a market price ten times less than that of cocoa butter .
By setting the shea nut producers , who deserve our consideration , against the cocoa-producers , the proponents of vegetable fats , with the support of the European Commission , and I deplore this utterly , are concealing what I hold to be the undeniable reality , which is that the only parties to gain from the entry into force of the text proposed by the Council in its current form are the multinational chocolate manufacturers , whose aim is to increase their profits by favouring cheap vegetable fats and intensifying the pressure to reduce cocoa prices .
I therefore think that a number of amendments tabled on the initiative of Members from various political groups , particularly Mrs Thomas-Mauro , Mrs Ries or Mrs Isler Béguin , are intended to re-establish the position which Parliament adopted at first reading and to give added value to the text .
Let me cite , in particular , the compulsory identification of any vegetable fat content on the front of the product ; the requirement for preliminary validation of a reliable analysis method ; the principle of subsidiarity , which was removed by the Council even though it had been proposed by the Commission from the outset , the rejection of methods of genetic engineering and chemical methods - I would point out that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection is in favour of rejecting the use of genetic engineering - and , finally , last but not least , a proposal for a serious impact study , which will not be carried out long after the directive comes into force but rather as soon as it comes into force , on the socio-economic situation of the cocoa-producing countries who are likely to be the first victims of this legislation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I feel that this is an approach which is in line with what we voted on two years ago .
Admittedly , it conflicts with the Council ' s common position , but I believe that Parliament ' s role is to play a full part in the codecision process and not to bow down before the decisions of the Council , even if they are the product of a very long gestation period of two years .
Mr President , chocolate was the topic of a stormy debate at first reading .
This was justified and not without results .
Justified because the original proposal focused exclusively on the internal market .
The Commission only took a passing interest in the quality of the product and had no consideration whatsoever for the ethical and legal obligations we have towards developing countries .
The discussion was not without results either .
Upon serious analysis of the common position , it has to be said that democracy works .
We did not sit passively on the fence , muttering under our breath , but took a pro-active approach in tabling amendments .
Should we assent to other legislation ?
Fine , if that is what is to be done , but could we do so on our terms , please .
We only wanted tropical fats ; the common position provides an exhaustive list of them .
We wanted double labelling , the common position has given it to us , only it would have been preferable to have the additional designation on the front of the packaging .
We wanted an impact study .
We are getting one , two and a half years after the directive has entered into force .
We wanted the Commission to draft an amendment proposal , if need be .
Well now , the Commission will need to do so and we can then amend it again if necessary .
We did not want comitology for essential amendments .
We are getting codecision .
And we asked for more precise measuring methods ; in my opinion , the Ispra research institute has acquitted itself of this task quite admirably .
Many of us in this House were displeased with the Commission proposal .
We were unable to ban fats other than cocoa , but we managed to condition their use in such a way that developing countries are actually finding the present text to be acceptable and that quality chocolate containing cocoa only can be distinguished from other chocolate .
Mr President , as shadow rapporteur for the PPE-DE Group , I am proud of the fact that virtually all amendments from first reading , which have impacted so heavily on the common position , are the product of our own hands .
As such , no more amendments have been submitted on behalf of the PPE-DE , but some of my colleagues will support amendments submitted by others , especially since it is our amendments from first reading which are being copied .
Even if none of the amendments survive , the result is still worth seeing .
I would like to finish off with the following thought . In the debate on chocolate , the word ethics was used more than once .
To me , ethical behaviour also implies that , if this House scored a victory , we should be able to say so and underline this .
If a victory is achieved , one should be able to enjoy it too .
Perhaps we ought to learn to do this one day .
Mr President , it has taken us twenty-five years to come to the point of a common position which represents a real compromise .
I want to pay tribute to Mr Lannoye .
He is a parliamentarian of considerable skill , and he has argued his case throughout with force and conviction .
But he undervalues his own contribution to this debate , because it is what he has done and others have done that have led us to a position which can be fairly regarded as a compromise .
Those who deny that and say that we are still in the position of total obstruction , are really admitting - as those are who wish in the vote tomorrow to reject the common position - that they do not want this directive at all .
They do not want to see the addition of vegetable fats anywhere , in any Member State , in any form , for anything called chocolate .
That is not a position which either the majority of the Member States or the majority of consumers in the European Union would accept for one minute , and I want to use my brief time to argue the contrary case .
If we move on from harmonisation at nought-percent vegetable fat , which has always been in the campaigning argument , we move to a position where we ask for safeguards for consumers , for the primary producers , and essentially for the standards that we set ourselves in the European Union .
The amendments that came before the Environment Committee , with the exception of the few that were passed , were wrecking amendments .
They were designed to postpone , for the lifetime of this Parliament and the lifetime of this Commission , any resolution of this issue , and that is not acceptable .
They called for impact studies to come into force before the directive itself can take effect or all manner of additional labelling over and beyond the double labelling on the packet which is provided here for the consumers .
My Group supports the common position with some exceptions , and they will all make themselves heard in this debate .
We believe that this is good for consumers .
They get a wider choice of product and separate and distinctive labelling .
It is good for the manufacturers of all the vegetable fats and I include cocoa butter in this .
Cocoa butter is the predominant component of all forms of chocolate , as it will continue to be , also for those who have produced the natural vegetable fats , a specific list which can only be altered with the advice and consent of this Parliament .
If I came from Burkina Faso or Mali or one of the countries that produced beurre de karité and I was told that the women ' s cooperatives who collect the shea nuts that are a substantial part of their exports to Europe , will be banned or put at risk because they are seen to be stooges of the multinationals , I would be very angry indeed .
The last point that I have time to make is to the producers of quality chocolate by the specialised methods we see in Belgium and some other areas .
Quality argues for itself .
You can have additional labelling if you want .
People like me will continue to eat it , but we want people to have the widest choice of all the products which will expand the import of cocoa and added vegetable fats into the European Union .
Mr President , the average citizen who hears about this debate on the chocolate directive will lick their lips at the thought of feasting on all kinds of delicacies .
After all , chocolate is also considered a stimulant , unfortunately .
Even as a new member of this Parliament , I am feeling the strain of the lengthy discussions on this topic and I cannot shake off the impression that chocolate has generated anything but a pleasurable experience in this Parliament .
This agony will come to an end today .
There are many interested parties in this discussion : the cocoa producers , the producers of vegetable fats , non-governmental organisations , chocolate producers and many more .
They are all interesting in their own way , but most interesting of all is the consumer , in my opinion .
The most important principle is that of the consumer ' s freedom of choice .
We politicians need to show some prudence in this respect .
After all , there is no accounting for taste .
The European Parliament cannot and should not prescribe a harmonised euro taste .
As far as we are concerned , there is no need for warnings in flashing neon letters on the front of chocolate packaging .
After all , chocolate is not exactly a product like cigarettes .
There are , of course , other interests which need to be taken into consideration .
For example , we need to be aware of the precarious situation of the countries where the ingredients for chocolate originate .
Prudence is called for once again .
After all , there are conflicting interests involved .
The countries that Ivory Coast exports cocoa to also import other competing ingredients from countries such as Mali and Burkina Faso .
The Council ' s common position as it is now before us attempts to accommodate all these interests .
We feel that it is lacking in one or two areas .
The best that can be said of this compromise is that none of the parties involved have been indulged completely .
There are no winners , but there are no losers either .
Most members of the Liberal Group can tolerate this precarious balance .
We therefore support the common position and believe that the directive should be adopted as soon as possible .
Let us proceed with the order of the day and put chocolate to its intended use , namely enjoyment .
Mr President , Commissioner , since we cannot reject the directive on chocolate which is , as it stands , unacceptable , Parliament is duty bound , at the very least , to improve it .
In the first place , we must ask ourselves what is the relevance of this directive which is going to change the definition of chocolate .
The European Parliament must be aware that the Codex Alimentarius , which dictates the composition of chocolate internationally , stipulates that it is made from cocoa butter .
What right , then , has the European Union , with regard to the food traditions of some Member States who incorrectly describe products including vegetable fats other than cocoa butter as ' chocolate ' , to enforce a change in the very definition of what chocolate is ?
In authorising the addition of 5 % of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter today , the European Parliament is opening the way to many other impostures .
What is there to stop us , in future , describing oil to which palm oil has been added as olive oil ?
In the second place , if the text of the common position goes unchanged , then consumers will be needing a magnifying glass in order to examine the composition of chocolate products .
This is really why I am urging my fellow Members to vote in favour of the amendments which will enable consumers , at the very first glance , to distinguish real chocolate from chocolate made with vegetable fats other than cocoa butter .
Finally , as producing countries , already aware that cocoa prices are today at rock bottom , we are in danger of making them collapse completely , if we adopt this position .
In order to avoid chaos in producing countries , the European Parliament must demand an impact study on the export situation .
I therefore call upon you to support all the amendments presented by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Mr President , Commissioner , as all chocolate-lovers know , proper chocolate is made from cocoa butter .
The addition of any other fats spoils the flavour .
Indeed the 1973 directive , which prohibited the use of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter , was intended to safeguard this quality .
With the inclusion of new countries in the European Union , some derogations to this strict ban came to be granted .
Harmonisation was essential in the name of the free movement of goods .
The Commission then had the choice of setting the European standard at the maximum quality level and extending the ban to all Member States but , under pressure from multinational companies wishing to reduce their production costs , in April 1996 the Commission proposed a directive authorising the addition of a minimum level of vegetable fats .
At first reading , Parliament got involved in a dangerous procedure of accepting the directive subject to certain conditions .
The Council leapt into the breach , adopting its common position , which recognises the designation ' chocolate ' even for products with other vegetable fats added .
Once again we see the concept of profits for the few triumph over quality for all .
At second reading , however , the European Parliament can thwart this directive which would have serious implications if it were applied .
Both consumers and small specialist chocolate-makers would suffer a reduction in quality and standards would be reduced to the lowest level .
ACP cocoa-producing countries would experience a considerable reduction in their market and their income .
This would involve more than USD 300 million for the Ivory Coast alone .
To say that they are extremely worried is an understatement .
Out of concern for the interests of consumers and the ACP countries , the great majority of my Group is in favour of banning the use of vegetable fats in order to safeguard the authenticity and the quality of real chocolate .
We have therefore tabled a motion to reject the Council ' s common position .
The small specialist chocolate-makers came to warn Members of Parliament at January ' s part-session in Strasbourg .
So , I ask all the Members who declared their solidarity with them to support our motion .
Mr President , consumer protection is our prime concern .
The issue of the directive on the production and sale of chocolate is thus just as important .
The European Union must lead the way in simplification , confidence , authenticity and respect for differences .
Since 1973 , European legislation has stipulated that the designation ' chocolate ' must be given to products containing only cocoa and cocoa butter .
Some Member States have enjoyed a derogation from this law since acceding to the Union .
That is fine , let everyone have their own chocolate bar in their own home .
In a shop in my own home town , in Reims , I wish to be able to purchase a bar of chocolate produced according to the gastronomic traditions of my own country , without having to inspect the product on all sides and to put my glasses on in order to check its quality .
This labelling frenzy is admittedly necessary since there has been a loss in confidence , but , ladies and gentlemen , if you give up a specific definition of chocolate , then at least do so clearly and openly .
I therefore urge you to support Amendments Nos 29 and 18 .
Tastes are certainly culturally conditioned .
If you yield to the compromise , then a foodstuff will be admitted into our territory which is described as ' chocolate ' but which is not chocolate , as far as we are concerned .
We are defending the concept of authentic chocolate .
Cocoa butter is the very essence of chocolate .
Let us respect the guarantee of flavour that it offers .
It is not enough to publish a White Paper on food safety in order to reassure consumers .
It is not up to the small specialists and the small-sized businesses to invent a way to promote their know-how or to identify their special features with a label indicating , for example , ' pure chocolate ' or ' pure cocoa butter ' .
We are condemning an entire sector of specialists and SMEs if we accept any other definition of chocolate .
Today ' s vote is a symbolic one .
We must prioritise information for consumers and the interests of African cocoa-producing countries , associated to Europe under the Lomé Convention .
Surely scheduling an economic impact study years after the application of a directive belongs to the realm of the absurd ?
In order to appease the multinationals , consumers would have their lives made more complicated as labelling would become more creative and reassuring , small specialist chocolate makers would have to establish a ' quality chocolate ' label , cocoa-exporting countries would have to adapt ... and you dare to speak to us of a Europe that is close to the citizens , that is generous , transparent and respectful of cultural differences !
We want none of your compromise chocolate , we are too familiar already with the Federalist recipe .
' Entente culinaire ' between peoples is a difficult issue , it reflects our differences in too clear and practical a manner , and does not work towards all-out harmonisation .
You should know , ladies and gentlemen , that making Europe tasteless will not contribute to its popularity .
Mr President , for centuries , cows have eaten grass and chocolate has been made from cocoa .
Then , a few years ago , Great Britain , which gave the world meat served with jam , hooligans and Adam Smith , started to feed cows on cadavers and to manufacture chocolate without cocoa .
These aberrations should have remained confined to the British Isles , but doing away with borders within Europe has allowed adulterated chocolate to move freely , to the extent that today , in seven out of our fifteen countries , without being aware of it , consumers are swallowing chocolate that has been tampered with , and that includes Mr Haider ' s Austria which , in that respect , has something in common with Mr Guterres ' Portugal .

In order to reassure us , we are told that the imitation cocoa is restricted to six tropical products : illipe from Borneo , butter from shea nuts - which are also used to manufacture aircraft engine oil - etc .
As we go from directives to amendments , however , these six products become seven , eight , nine , up to and including soya , oilseed rape and GMOs .
We are also told that the cocoa fraud will be limited to 5 % to begin with , then to 10 % , not to mention that no check will ever be carried out , in the same way that , for example , the boxes of Chiquita bananas are not checked , which are supposed to weigh eighteen kilograms and in fact weigh twenty .
The checks are pointless in any case , as we are told that the margin of error is 1 % , whereas scientists tell us that it is in fact 40 % .
We are told above all to ' eat and drink without fear , you are protected by the label ' .
Yet the label is a deception in graphic terms because it is illegible and a hypocrisy in scientific terms because the mention of ' palm oil ' , for example , is drowned among the list of ingredients .
Just as in the case of port we are not told ' South African counterfeit ' , for cocoa we are not told ' counterfeit ' .
Then , lacking arguments to justify the chocolate fraud , the multinationals say , ' You must accept 5 % , or there will be wholesale fraud . '
What then ?
All you have to do is call the product ' shea-late ' if it is made from shea nuts , or ' soya-late ' if it is made from soya , but not ' chocolate ' .
The 388 000 tonnes of French chocolate , for example , must be made from cocoa , and the French turnover of FRF 19 billion , for example , must be earned honestly by small specialists .
It is a legal obligation with regard to the Ivory Coast and African farmers .
We are linked by the Lomé convention and by the convention on commodities which the European Union has signed , with reference to cocoa .
It is also a financial obligation . If we do not fulfil it , then we shall be forced to compensate for the losses in these countries under the Stabex system .
It is an obligation in terms of health and food safety , since the substitutes for cocoa , such as Brazil nuts , may cause immunological reactions .
Finally , it is a question of honesty , of morality .
Let us put an end to this widespread dishonesty , where you begin with a product incorrectly described as chocolate and you end with a Commission incorrectly described as European , whose members are Americanically-modified organisms and whose standard is a flag of convenience concealing a globalist cargo .
Mr President , Commissioner , genetically modified organisms and mad cow disease were not enough to temper the enthusiasm of those involved in food manipulation .
Humans are continuing to play the sorcerer ' s apprentice , juggling with food safety .
Here , courtesy of industrial lobbying , we have chocolate with added vegetable fats .
Its cocoa content is going to be reduced by 15 % but it is still going to be entitled to the designation ' chocolate ' . This is the crux of the problem .
There is a clear lack of transparency , and yet we distinguish butter from margarine .
There will perhaps be a discreet entry , in small letters on the back of the package , indicating its new composition .
There will be deterioration in the quality , of course , but also in the flavour , and the goods are clearly not what they are represented as being .
This is unfair competition , with this ersatz , pseudo-chocolate being sold cheaper than pure chocolate manufactured by craftsmen with proper respect for authenticity , ethics and tradition .
It offers the prospect of large profits , however , for the multinationals , who have been working behind the scenes for around fifteen years to achieve their ends , i.e. having the derogations granted , on the occasion of a number of countries ' joining the Union , extended to become the general rule .
On the other hand , it represents a cause for concern among small specialist chocolate-makers and also developing countries which are cocoa producers , whose compensation is being seriously considered .
Finally , there is one major problem , while today we know how to detect vegetable fats in chocolate , we are still incapable of identifying and quantifying them .
There is , therefore , no traceability and the door is open to all sorts of abuses .
As far as we are concerned , the use of the designation ' chocolate ' should be prohibited for any product which contains ingredients other than sugar and cocoa .
We must not mislead the consumer by giving the name ' chocolate ' to just anything .
Europe must not become an accomplice in cheating , in the manipulation of food , at a time when food safety is becoming one of its priorities .
Europe must not adopt the lowest possible standards .
It must ensure the quality of food products and consumer health .
In the light of these principles , we are unable to endorse the aims of this directive .
Rejecting it would represent a strong message to our citizens and a responsible attitude adopted by Parliament .
This is the thrust of our amendment .
If not , when will we see wine made without grapes and butter without cream ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the common position on the chocolate directive is about a directive - and I quote the chocolate industry lobby verbatim for the occasion - which creates a truly unified market for chocolate products whilst upholding the national chocolate traditions . The directive also offers comprehensive information to the consumer and safeguards the interests of the developing countries .
But is this actually true ?
I will start with the information for the consumer .
The Commission has freely admitted that there is no foolproof detection method .
The margin of error is 2 % .
At 5 % , this is even 50 % more .
This seems to be unacceptable to me .
Furthermore , inspection depends on the type of chocolate and the information which the producer wishes to provide .
We are not taking ourselves and the consumer , in particular , seriously if we introduce a directive which we cannot monitor adequately .
I would now like to comment on the third-world interests . It concerns me greatly that both those for and against the common position keep bringing up the same arguments .
Those " for " claim that the common position will benefit the third-world counties while those " against " say that more than 1 million farmers in western Africa stand to suffer from it as a result .
Which is it and which will it be ?
Is it really asking too much to want to check what the effects of this directive will be on , for example , export and the sustainable development of cocoa-producing countries ?
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , I really need to get something else off my chest . Rightly or wrongly , it is said that this Parliament should not accept any amendments at the risk of jeopardising this delicate compromise .
Well , if that is the case and if that is an argument , I suggest we pack our bags and go home now .
Each common position always strikes a delicate balance between national interests , environmental conditions and social considerations .
The European Parliament must have its input in this dossier and ensure that the common position is amended on a number of points and becomes a directive which benefits the consumer and the third world alike .
Mr President , one of the joys of spending time in Belgium and France is the pleasure of these countries ' chocolate .
It is wonderful , but millions of people in Europe also enjoy the British product .
None of them come to any harm in the process .
Whatever its content they are happy to call this product chocolate .
It is insulting for us to play semantic games about the definition of this word .
The citizens we represent are not fools .
They can tell the difference between different varieties of chocolate and they have to be allowed to decide for themselves .
I have no doubt that this compromise will help the overall market increase .
The harsh fact is that none of us , Belgians , French or British , are paying the cocoa growers a fair price for their efforts and the contrast between our enjoyment of this luxury product and their poverty is shameful .
Mr President , on the present issue I represent a minority of the members of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left .
I consider that there is really no need for this directive and that it is unnecessary .
I think it is absolutely excellent that we should have different rules about chocolate in different Member States .
In this area there is no need for harmonisation at EU level . Instead , the previous system can be retained .
If there is in fact to be harmonisation , which is what the Council of Ministers appears to have opted for , I think it is better to allow content of up to five per cent of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter .
In that way , you can still have both sorts of chocolate and choose which you want to buy according to personal taste or national tradition .
The alternative , that is to say of prohibiting other vegetable fats , means also prohibiting a large quantity of chocolate products which people like and are used to eating .
I think that is completely unnecessary .
What is , however , important is that chocolate should be clearly labelled , which is something I think has been provided for in the proposal , and that consumers should be able to choose which products they in fact want to purchase and eat .
Nor is it certain that the Third World , all in all , would benefit from other vegetable fats being prohibited as added ingredients .
For one thing , other tropical fats such as shea butter would be treated unfairly , and certain countries would in that way suffer .
For another , the total market for chocolate products would probably decrease and thereby also , perhaps , the level of consumption of cocoa butter .
My conclusion is that I should ideally like to see the old arrangement maintained , with different rules in different countries .
However , since that is no longer possible , I think that the common position is acceptable .
Mr President , in many ways , I think that we are about to end up with a good compromise on the directive relating to cocoa and chocolate products , thanks especially to Mr Paul Lannoye ' s efforts .
I am very much in favour of clear labelling .
It means proper information for consumers and , because a number of countries have so far only been familiar with chocolate in which cocoa butter is used as vegetable fat , it may be relevant for consumers in these countries to learn that another vegetable fat has been used .
On the other hand , I do not think that it can , or ought to be , implied that chocolate in which , for example , shea nuts are used as vegetable fat is necessarily of poorer quality than chocolate in which the vegetable fat used is cocoa butter .
There are absolutely no objective criteria for saying that , and the Council is quite rightly leaving it to consumers to judge the quality .
We must not forget that shea nuts are just as essential to the countries which export them as cocoa is to the cocoa-exporting countries .
Any future investigation of the effects of the present directive upon developing countries ' exports ought therefore also to include both cocoa and shea nuts .
What , for me , is most important of all is that there must be no enzymatic or genetic modifications to the vegetable fat in chocolate .
A ban of this kind is the only means through which we can give developing countries a guarantee that they can go on at all exporting the goods which they produce by natural means .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is a known fact that chocolate made from pure cocoa butter induces a state of euphoria .
The same cannot be said for this directive which we had absolutely no need of .
Nor , surely , can it be said of this chocolate adulterated with vegetable fats recommended by the Council , which unfortunately did not follow the European Parliament ' s recommendations at first reading .
Indeed there would be a great deal to say about the attitude of some delegations within the Council .
Today ' s consumer has had enough of being deceived .
What is the Council putting forward to solve the problem ?
A tiny piece of difficult-to-read information , hidden on the back of the product wrapper .
This is not what we are asking for .
The consumer will not be able to make an informed choice .
We want the information to be obviously and clearly displayed on the front side of the product wrapper .
This is what we achieved in the European Parliament at first reading .
We know that the cost of the fats capable of replacing cocoa is much less .
That is why big industry is so much in favour of them .
Making things cheaper and cheaper : what image of Europe does that present ?
No matter nowadays what the consumer wants , what the consumer ' s preferences are , no matter the fact that public opinion wants ever greater transparency !
Who today can claim to be able to monitor this infamous 5 % of vegetable fats which would replace the pure cocoa butter ?
Nobody .
So what is to be done ?
Let us , fortunately , trust our SMEs , the small specialist chocolate-makers , who are going to have to work on a quality label .
This is what the consumer wants .
And let us , most especially , support our rapporteur , Mr Lannoye .
Thank you very much , Mrs Grossetête .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , before we continue , allow me , on behalf of the House , to welcome Mr Herman De Croo , President of the House of Representatives of the Belgian Parliament and a delegation from the Federal Consultative Committee on European issues , of which Mr De Croo is also Chairman .

It would be remiss of me not to remind you at this juncture about the excellent and stable relationship between the European Parliament and the Belgian Parliament which , as a result of the commitment to the European cause of most of our Belgian colleagues , has always gone beyond simple good neighbourliness , a mutual duty that we have both generously respected .
On the eve of the Intergovernmental Conference , and at a point when work is under way by the Convention responsible for drafting the European Charter of Fundamental Rights , we can only hope that relations between the Belgian Parliament and our institution will continue to be exemplary .
We shall all do our utmost to ensure that the visit by Mr de Croo and his colleagues is a great success .
Cocoa and chocolate products ( continuation )
Mr President , Mr De Croo , after debating for 25 years , we are gathered here once again to discuss chocolate , such a polemical debate for such a sweet subject .
We are talking about harmonisation , the harmonisation of tastes , of habits and , almost , of cultures .
In short , chocolate is a dividing factor and the divisions are neither ideological nor even national , whatever some parties might think .
What makes defending cocoa-producing countries an ideological matter , I ask you ?
It is an ethical matter .
In terms of the social aspect , we are talking about millions of families who make their living from cocoa production .
We have made formal commitments to them .
So what is the reason for this time limit ? Sixty-six months to carry out a study of the impact of this directive , such a time period is enough to cause irreparable damage to the export structures of these countries .
The potential impact must be investigated in advance , that is clear .
Moreover , if we must have harmonisation , for a consumer that is ever more demanding about the quality of what he eats and who , incidentally , has asked for nothing and has absolutely nothing to gain in this matter , in my view , the absolute minimum would be to limit the quality label or any other label of excellence to 100 % cacao chocolate , real chocolate .
Any other sort of harmonisation would mean lowering standards and that is not the sort of Europe that the consumer wants .
Mr President , rules make sense if their purpose is to protect people against the power of money , against health risks and against poverty .
If the European Union lays down rules governing the production of chocolate , then these should be geared to protecting the cocoa farmers in the third world , especially in Africa .
Rules are also important to protect consumers against genetic modification and against the addition of unexpected substances .
Lastly , rules are important to protect expertise and craftsmanship within Europe .
What is now threatening to happen is at complete odds with this .
Should free trade be granted absolute priority ?
This may fit in rather well with the development currently taking place within the European Union .
A social-democratic and christian-democratic project is being developed to put protective measures in place within a highly liberalised economy in which anything goes , and which promotes competition and considers the consumer ' s freedom of choice to be sacrosanct .
The price to be paid for this , by African farmers in particular , is too high .
I value the attempts made by Mr Lannoye to keep these negative developments within bounds , but it would be better still to continue to offer full protection against the processing of other products and cocoa butter .
A number of papers have been circulated to Members before this particular debate , and I would just like to highlight one from the rapporteur where he says that the only beneficiaries of the entry into force of the text proposed by the Council will be the chocolate multinationals .
Whilst I respect the commitment of the rapporteur to his cause , I suggest to the House that is nonsense .
This is not just a matter for big business : it is of great concern to little consumers , millions of them throughout the EU who wish for and deserve the right to choose , without having pejorative labelling applied to the product .
Mr Lannoye says that he has gone back to retable some of the original amendments .
I suggest to the House that this is not a time to go back - this is a time to move on , to move forward .
This is a single market issue ; this House should not be standing in the way of the completion of the single market but should be actively promoting it .
If I could share one brief historical fact with the House concerning my own country : the first mention of solid chocolate being sold in the UK was in 1657 when a Frenchman opened a shop in London .
So if it was legal in 1657 for a Frenchman to sell his chocolate in London , can I suggest to the House that , some 350 years later , it should at long last be legal for an Englishman , or indeed any other EU national , to sell his chocolate throughout the EU including the country of the rapporteur .
Mr President , 25 years ' discussion of the great existential issues surrounding chocolate and what it is and is not makes the European Union as an institution look slightly ridiculous .
The present debate has perhaps given me , as a war child , a certain insight into how things were when the peoples of Europe were killing each other for values symbolised by rather more important things than chocolate .
After all , this is not a product which is a threat to people ' s health .
Neither Scandinavian , Belgian nor British chocolate is dangerous .
It is not a product which affects the environment to any great degree .
The whole issue is therefore somewhat ridiculous .
As for the developing countries , I want to say that , if Britons , Scandinavians and others are not allowed to eat the chocolate they ate as children , they would certainly eat marshmallows or jelly babies instead on a Saturday evening .
Where is the benefit in that for the Third World ?
Mr President , we are in no position , here in the European Parliament , to state that one type of chocolate is better or worse than another .
Nor can we say that one kind tastes better and another worse .
Rather , we shall leave it to the individual consumer to judge which kind tastes best and is of the highest quality .
Consumer choice is the basic principle of the market economy and , as politicians , we should not be instrumental in running a kind of nanny State .
Malta ' s former prime minister , Dom Mintoff , attempted during the 1970s to reduce chocolate imports and to alter the way in which chocolate was consumed by tourists and by his own people .
With Chinese help , a chocolate factory was built on the island , but consumers did not like the locally produced chocolate and chocolate consumption fell .
If we direct developments in such a way as to create a situation in which there is only the one tradition of chocolate manufacture within the EU , cocoa-producing countries will be in danger of losing out since there would be a great risk of total chocolate consumption within the EU appreciably decreasing .
Let us not , therefore , make the same mistake as Dom Mintoff .
The proposal that information about the contents of certain forms of chocolate should be provided on the front of the packaging is discriminatory and completely unjustified .
It would be more like the kind of warning you find on cigarette packets .
The chocolate war has been raging within the EU for 25 years .
It has made ourselves as politicians and the EU as an institution look faintly ridiculous .
In the future EU , too , and within a society characterised by diversity , there must be room for two traditions of chocolate manufacture .
We now have the opportunity to bring the 25 year-old European chocolate war to an honourable end for all the parties concerned .
We ought therefore to adhere precisely to the common position .
Mr President , I am Belgian and I am not opposed to the common position .
If the chocolate which I love so much were to be at risk or if the tradition of Belgian chocolate manufacturers were to be in danger , then I would , of course , be opposed to it .
I bought some chocolate here in Strasbourg this morning and the French sales assistant explained to me quite clearly what exactly I was buying .
The designation on the front of the product states : Prestige noir intense 72 % cacao and in gold lettering , which , in France , is quite something , chocolat belge .
So I know what I bought .
In my opinion , the pending directive will make it even easier for producers of quality chocolate to set themselves clearly apart from the others if they so wish .
I do concur with the rapporteur on one point .
The producers of cocoa beans , namely the small farmers in the poor third-world countries , are vulnerable .
We need to keep a close eye on them and this is why I am in favour of a study being carried out by the Commission on the effects of the directive , no more than two years after the introduction of this directive .
So let us now deal with this matter once and for all and ensure that everyone can eat the chocolate they fancy and that a real internal market can be established for chocolate .
Mr President , the common position on cocoa and chocolate products is the result of long and involved discussions .
It constitutes a delicate compromise which was difficult to achieve but which is well-balanced .
Through the common position , the free movement of cocoa and chocolate products was introduced , but with strict conditions governing production and consumer information .
It is permitted to add vegetable fat other than cocoa butter to the minimum quantity of cocoa required in accordance with the Directive , but no more than five per cent .
Only those substances listed in the annex may be used .
They are all of tropical origin and produced in ACP countries .
The presence of these substances must be indicated separately but in the same area of the packaging as the product name and list of ingredients .
Consumers will then be able to choose and to distinguish these products from those which are manufactured exclusively from cocoa .
These conditions and restrictions , which are not linked to health issues , are the fulcrum of the common position .
The common position also provides answers to the questions and concerns of consumers , of cocoa-producing countries and of countries which produce chocolate , with or without vegetable fats .
Any change would seriously upset the balance of the agreement which the Council has agreed upon and would be doomed to fail .
Parliament ' s recommendation on second reading contains two amendments .
The first amendment reiterates the Commission ' s policy , and this can be approved .
The second really does not belong in a separate Directive because releases of genetically modified organisms onto the European market must be handled in a uniform and comprehensive way , which is what happens within the framework of the provisions governing the voluntary spread of genetically modified organisms in the environment and in the regulation concerning new foods and new food ingredients .
The second amendment may nonetheless be approved in principle .
There must be a more thorough examination of the consequences of these amendments against the background of the World Trade Organisation ' s pronouncements and the Montreal protocol .
The other amendments , which were rejected by the Commission ' s Directorate-General for the Environment , concern questions of special significance to the balance of the common position and cannot therefore be approved .
The common position involves a real compromise and is a clear advance on the legislation currently applicable . This hails back to the 1970s and is very incomplete , especially when it comes to labelling and consumer information .
To summarise , it is only Amendments Nos 1 and 2 which may be approved , and this for the aforesaid reasons .
- ( PT ) Mr President , I rise to speak on a point of order concerning the need to uphold the respect due to the European Parliament and its Members .
As you will all remember , during the last part-session here in Strasbourg , the European Parliament debated and adopted a resolution in which it condemned and stated its concern at the difficult conditions under which journalists work in Angola . It also condemned the trials they are constantly subjected to and the consequent lack of free speech and absence of a free press .
One of the Members who spoke in this debate was Mário Soares , who also supported the resolution adopted by a majority of this House .
Quite unexpectedly , the Angolan government , through one of its ministers and also one of its Members of Parliament , reacted to Mário Soares ' participation in the debate with defamation , slander and insults , accusing Mr Soares , with no evidence whatsoever , of being one of the main beneficiaries of the illegal diamond and ivory trade allegedly being carried out by UNITA , the main opposition to the MPLA in Angola .
These unacceptable statements by the Angolan Government not only affect Mário Soares . They affect all of us who adopted the resolution in question .
Given these circumstances , Mr President , I would like to express my complete solidarity with Mr Soares in the face of the slanderous campaign that has been targeted at him . I also invite the President of the European Parliament to express to the Angolan Government , through the appropriate channels , this Parliament ' s most vehement and indignant protest at the insult that was also targeted at this House , and which represents , apart from anything else , an intolerable abuse of the principle of independence that Members enjoy in carrying out their duties .
- ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to express my total agreement with the speech that Mr Queiró has just made on this subject , and to introduce another element into the discussion .
During the last part-session , in February , a debate was held on the situation in Angola and a resolution was adopted by this House .
In response to this resolution , the Angolan Ambassador in Paris wrote a letter to the European Parliament , and in this letter , a copy of which I have here , he insinuated at a certain point that a fellow Member of this House , Mário Soares , has political , ideological and " other kinds " of links with the war criminal Jonas Savimbi .
In addition to this letter , further statements were made , which are false , insulting and which attempt to undermine the dignity and honour of a fellow Member of this House , who has , in the past , been an excellent President of a Member State of the European Union .
Mr President , we all have the right to express our opinions in this House and in a democracy .
We may agree with something or we may not .
What is unacceptable is that a state that maintains relations with the EU should be allowed to respond by attempting to undermine the dignity and honour of a fellow Member of this House .
My question is , therefore , whether the President of the European Parliament has already responded to the Angolan Government through its Ambassador in Paris ?
If it has already responded , what was the tenor of its response ?
If it has not yet responded , it is crucial that this House is clear and unequivocal in repudiating the attitude of the Angolan Government towards our colleague , and therefore towards the European Parliament , an area of freedom and democracy in which we all have the right to express our opinion .
Ladies and gentlemen , I understand the political , institutional and compassionate motives behind these speeches .
I shall now give the floor to Mr Pacheco Pereira , who has asked to speak , but then I think we should stop because it would not be right to start a debate on a subject which , although important , was not on the agenda .
In future , I will keep you informed of the decisions taken , or not taken , by our President , and of the activities for which she gives the go-ahead on your behalf .
- ( PT ) Mr President , I share the objections of the Members who have just spoken about the unacceptability of a government such as that of Angola , which has for many years waged a civil war in that country and which has been accused by various organisations across the world of being corrupt , daring to attack the freedom of speech of a Member of the European Parliament who rightly criticised the abuse of human rights in Angola .
I would also like to make it quite clear , however , that as regards the European institutions , this is not only a matter of ensuring that the European Parliament issues a protest and a repudiation .
It would be useful if the Council , whose President is currently the Portuguese Prime Minister , could respond with equal vehemence to the criticism made of a Portuguese Member of this House , and did not maintain the equivocal stance that it has adopted concerning the offence that the Angolan Government has caused to that Member of this House , as well as to the institutions of the European Union .
This House therefore clearly repudiates Angola ' s attitude and hopes that the EU Council Presidency will also clearly voice this repudiation and will not remain silent in the face of these accusations .
I would like to thank Mr Queiró , Mr Seguro and Mr Pacheco Pereira for their speeches .
Our President will make sure that the official representatives of Angola are informed of this protest and will pass on the request which just been made to the President-in-Office of the Council , so that the Council and its President-in-Office also take some initiative in reaction to these unspeakable attacks .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Vote
Mr President , I regret causing some slight complications as regards the order of business of the plenary .
Following consultation with other members of the Committee on Development and Cooperation I appeal to you to postpone the voting on this regulation until tomorrow .
There are basically two reasons .
One is that the deadline for a request for separate votes on the amendments should have been made by 7 p.m. yesterday .
Because of a misunderstanding that request was not made in time .
To pursue the voting as a block vote today would , to my mind , be unfortunate .
Informal consultations with the Council have led me to believe that there is every possibility of being able to reconcile the differences that have existed between the Council and Parliament but if we vote en bloc we may forfeit that opportunity .
The other reason has to do with comitology .
We would benefit from additional discussions among party groups on certain details in relation to some of the amendments .
Hence , I would ask you , as rapporteur , to follow my recommendation for postponement .
( The vote was postponed until the following day )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0048 / 2000 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on measures to promote the conservation and sustainable management of tropical forests and other forests in developing countries [ 12487 / 1 / 1999 - C5-0014 / 2000 - 1999 / 0015 ( COD ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mr Fernández Martín ) .
Just to repeat what my colleague , Poul Nielson , stated yesterday , the Commission 's position on the amendments is as follows .
The Commission supports Amendment No 11 , in principle , and supports the following amendments : Amendments Nos 4 , 7 , 9 , 10 , 13 , 14 and 15 .
The Commission does not support the following amendments : Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 , 6 , 8 and 12 .
( Parliament approved the common position ( as amended ) )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0043 / 2000 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council directive on port reception facilities for ship-generated waste and cargo residues [ 11195 / 1 / 1999 - C5-0251 / 1999 - 1998 / 0249 ( COD ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mr Bouwman )
Amendment No 6 :
Mr President , I just wanted to point out what repercussions a split vote would have .
Normally , it is customary in parliamentary circles to vote on the most in-depth proposal first and then to move on to the less in-depth .
Due to this split vote , we are now voting on the least in-depth first and are working our way up to the most in-depth .
Since I am fairly new to this Parliament , I do not know how to deal with this , but I would at least recommend anyone who cares about the environment and who is in favour of the polluter pays principle , to vote for both split components .
( Parliament approved the common position ( as amended ) )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0040 / 2000 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the technical roadside inspection of the roadworthiness of commercial vehicles circulating in the Community [ 111287 / 1 / 1999 - C5-0323 / 1999 - 1998 / 0097 ( COD ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mr Piecyk )
( Parliament approved the common position ( as amended ) )
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE- Recommendation for second reading of the Fernández Martín report ( A5-0048 / 2000 )
Mr President , I voted in favour of the common-sense considerations on the ecological disaster which threatens our planet if current developments continue .
These concerns are , however , drowned out in a hotchpotch of irresolute declarations .
Neither the Brussels Commission nor the European Parliament have any desire to act or even clearly name the parties responsible for these disastrous ecological developments .
The European institutions confine themselves to pious hopes for the protection of the tropical forest , for example , while the major trusts of the wood industry , who are the industrial butchers of forests in any number of countries in south-east Asia or in Africa , foist their activities on the local populations . We know full well who they are .
In a number of poor countries , of course , it is the population which is destroying the forests by clearing trees , either to find a minimum income , or to clear the way and gain access to land that they could not otherwise access .
But to claim to incorporate the environmental aspect into the development process is pure hypocrisy when the ruling classes of rich countries are in fact blocking the poor countries ' path to development and are maintaining the majority of their populations in poverty .
. ( FR ) The text of the report before us today fulfils the need to conserve tropical forests .
The European Union and its Member States in fact have some responsibility for the conservation of an ecosystem which is essential to the environmental balance of the entire planet .
This responsibility is a historical one , primarily , and is related to the commitments made by Member States to the countries where the bulk of the tropical forest is located .
These historic links and expert knowledge must be made to serve the conservation of this ecosystem .
Our responsibility also stems from our status as consumers : many consumer products in Europe come from these regions and generally have an adverse impact on the forest .
Finally , the European Union actually includes large areas of tropical forest within the territory of its Member States , particularly France .
The department of French Guyana , in particular , is almost entirely covered by this type of vegetation .
In particular , the important thing is to enable real development in these areas , while respecting the culture and traditions of the inhabitants , without setting them in stone in a purely passive ecological conservation mode .
The European Union can make a contribution in this field if it can manage to coordinate efforts and know-how without seeking to control or foist a single strategy on Member States .
We have therefore backed the amendments of the PPE-DE , which support the flexibility necessary for the whole system .
Recommendation for second reading of the Bouwman report ( A5-0043 / 2000 )
The recent wreck of the Erika oil tanker off the coast of Brittany increased the awareness among the general public of the problem , among others , of ' degassing ' , the illegal discharge of waste oils , detritus or other waste associated with vessel cargoes , which some unscrupulous ship ' s captains undertake while at sea .
Although the breaches in the wreck had officially been sealed , oil slicks in fact continued to wash up on the shores , showing that either new leaks had appeared or that vessels passing through the vicinity were taking advantage of the situation to empty their tanks , or , probably , that both these things were occurring at the same time .
In the jungle of maritime transport , such behaviour is , unfortunately , frequently encountered .
It helps to make refuse sites of our seas and beaches , and to jeopardise the ecological balance of the marine environment .
Just today , in fact , the European Parliament is examining , at second reading , a proposed directive which has been under discussion for two years , which draws the implications of the 1973 Marpol International Convention , ratified by all Member States , to the Community level .
This convention makes it compulsory for vessels to dispose of their waste while in the port of call , in the port waste-disposal installations intended for the purpose , and , in return , requires the signatory states to construct appropriate installations .
We can only applaud the proposed European directive which would make it possible to apply these principles .
At the same time , however , we wish to ask the important question , which is : what is to become of the inspections ?
The proposal envisages that vessels docking in a Community port may leave again only on presentation of certificates proving that the vessel ' s waste and cargo residues have indeed been disposed of in the appropriate installations .
But what about vessels from outside the Community ?
Will they also be asked for certificates ?
And how will vessels that pass through our waters without docking into port be inspected ?
We think that , to begin with , access to Member State ports should be banned for vessels which do not present such certificates , even if they are from outside the Community .
Furthermore , the Member States , who , under the directive , are to make the commitment to step up in-port inspections , must also undertake to intensify their systems for inspections at sea .
We know only too well the pressure of competition in maritime transport .
There is no point in adopting conventions or directives if they are subsequently to remain dead letters for lack of inspection resources .
- ( FR ) The report on which we are called to vote today is indicative of the position which the European Parliament wishes to adopt in the debate on maritime safety , brought to the fore once more by the tragic wreck of the Erika .
Let me remind you that the proposed directive which we are discussing today is intended to improve the availability and the use of port waste-disposal facilities for operational waste and cargo residues .
It is totally in keeping with the 73 / 78 Marpol Convention ( Prevention of Pollution from Ships ) , while concentrating more particularly on the waste-disposal facilities in ports .
It forms part of the overall Community strategy for waste management and requires all ports to provide appropriate waste-disposal facilities , adequate for the needs of vessels .
Today we face maritime pollution problems , which we must tackle head-on by adopting bold measures .
The fact is , as the rapporteur points out , that regulations already exist , but they are not observed .
The system generally applied is the one governed by the ' polluter pays ' principle , a principle which is outstanding in terms of its inefficiency !
This is why we need to find an alternative . Such an alternative is offered to us in an amendment which I supported .
The amendment seeks to establish a system of charges which all vessels would have to pay systematically each time they dock in a port , whether or not they make use of the waste disposal facilities .
These charges would be used to finance the relevant installations up to 90 % .
This system would inevitably encourage vessels to dispose of their operational waste and cargo residues in port rather than degassing at sea , a deplorable practice which is commonplace nowadays .
Everyone knows that some vessels even took advantage of the pollution caused by the wreck of the Erika to discharge their waste at sea .
This is absolutely scandalous and intolerable .
There are , however , examples of good practice , because the countries around the Baltic Sea have already been operating in this way since 1998 .
I am well aware of the fact that this would cause upheaval in the organisation of the ports of many Member States and would entail additional costs for vessels .
But this is no more than the price which must be paid in order to guarantee the cleanliness of the marine environment , especially since the directive envisages that it should be possible to identify the vessels which cause less pollution and to offer them reduced rates ?
This system seems a fair one to me , and I therefore voted in favour of it .
- ( FR ) This proposed directive is most welcome within the European Union .
It forms part of the overall Community strategy for the reduction of marine pollution and for waste management and requires all Union ports , including yachting marinas , to provide appropriate waste-disposal facilities suited to the requirements of vessels .
International regulations were already in existence , since the Marpol Convention imposes binding international regulations upon all vessels , according to which all discharges at sea are prohibited .
The real problem , however , is the application and observance of these standards !
The fine ' polluter pays ' principle , so dear to many Member States , including my own , is far from being complied with !
The Erika disaster is testimony to this unfortunate state of affairs , as are the thirty-nine instances of degassing which went unpunished in the space of a single week !
This is why the European Parliament and its Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , confirming the outcome of the first reading in the previous legislative period , have proposed that every vessel entering a Member State port should bear 90 % of the costs of waste disposal and management , regardless of the actual use made of the facilities .
We feel that this is the only realistic and fair way to prevent the illegal dumping of waste at sea .
If the port facilities were in fact financed ( at a high level ) only by the vessels actually using them , then there would be grounds for fearing that many vessels would avoid these charges , since dumping waste at sea would prove less costly .
Moreover , we wish to set the level for mandatory inspection at 25 % of all vessels .
On the eve of the French Presidency of the European Union , this is the position which the French Socialists are preparing to champion .
All I can do is urge this House to do as much .
It is a political fight , in which our role , is it not , is to wage this campaign , even if it does lead use to make ambitious political decisions which occasionally go further than those of our own governments , and which are always far-reaching and positive ?
- ( FR ) It is not possible to ignore , today , the fortuitous coincidence of the second reading of this proposed directive against maritime pollution with the topical news of the tragic wreck of the Erika .
Admittedly , this text does not discuss accidental pollution , but we know full well that the implications of illegal degassing at sea are no less serious , even if it is a more insidious phenomenon .
In the last week of February , 39 instances of illegal degassing were identified in the vicinity of the wreck of the Erika alone .
Such practices are intolerable , but they are difficult to monitor , particularly at night or in foggy weather .
The proposed directive and the amendment proposing to establish a standard charging scheme for vessels in ports , in all European ports , in order to finance the processing of shipboard waste , tackle the problem on two fronts : they force the ports to set up the facilities and the organisation to handle the shipboard operational waste , either under direct state control or by subcontracting to specialised competent operators , and , more importantly , they deter vessels from evading their obligation to dispose of waste since they will have to pay the price in any case .
It is , however , essential to ensure that , as far as possible , this universal charge is shared across the board and is supported by national or European financial arrangements to enable smaller ports to gain access to waste processing services without their economic viability and thus their continuity suffering unduly .
Subject to this condition , then , what this directive proposes is Europe ' s initial model response to the legitimate feeling aroused due to the pollution caused by the wreck of the Erika .
To some extent , it marks the official acknowledgement and establishment of a European maritime area subject to shared regulations .
- ( FR ) The Council must already have debated at length on the subject of this directive on port facilities for disposing of vessels ' operational waste , but its final text respected the principles of stepping up the protection of the marine environment while taking account of the real situation in each of the Member States , without disrupting national practices , and this is not true of the text of the report which has just been presented to us .
A State such as France has already in fact implemented the terms of the Marpol Convention by guaranteeing that each port has top quality waste disposal and processing facilities , operated by private companies , which invoice the shipowner directly according to the type and nature of the waste .
Reducing the costs for use by vessels deemed to be ' ecological ' is therefore only natural .
This solution , which benefits the more environmentally friendly vessels , would seem to be much fairer than an arbitrary reduction in favour of the vessels labelled as ' ecological ' , ( and what would be the criteria for this ? ) or a standard contribution for the use of the facilities applied indiscriminately : we therefore refuse to replace a charging system based on the nature of the waste with a blind charging policy based on the volume of vessels , regardless of their level of risk to the environment .
It must also be said that ' clearing ballast ' at sea is unfortunately to a very great extent exempt from the charging system .
Only inspections at sea and more frequent inspections of vessels docking in ports would be likely to reduce the amount of dumping at sea .
For all these reasons the UEN Group , recalling its agreement with the Council ' s common position , is now opposing the text of this report which has twisted the principles of the common position .
The report urges Member States most strongly to face up to their responsibilities in full by implementing as soon as possible the inspection measures which , backed up by a system of penalties along the ' polluter pays / polluter cleans ' principle , would perhaps make it possible to prevent the recurrence of disasters such as the one which , recently , so scandalously disfigured the French coastline .
Recommendation for second reading of the Piecyk report ( A5-0040 / 2000 )
- ( FR ) The European Parliament has today expressed its opinion of the proposed directive on the technical roadside inspection of the roadworthiness of commercial vehicles .
It is indeed essential to improve the level of safety and to mitigate the environmental impact of these vehicles , the volume of which is constantly increasing .
Setting up random mandatory roadside inspections in order to check their state of repair throughout the year is a pertinent idea , provided that it can be implemented effectively .
This proposed directive would be an extremely useful complement to the efforts undertaken in towns and cities , especially in the form of urban transport plans , particularly in the conurbation around Rouen , which is crossed by 5 000 commercial vehicles daily .
It is also important , as a matter of urgency , to consider having recourse to alternative means of transport for goods ( waterways , railways , etc . ) and to consider developing clean vehicles .
These are the reasons why , ladies and gentlemen , I supported the proposed directive on the technical roadside inspection of commercial vehicles today .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

EU Charter of Fundamental Rights
The next item is the report ( A5-0064 / 2000 ) by Mr Duff and Mr Voggenhuber , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the drafting of a European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Madam President , the committee proposes to place a Charter of Fundamental Rights at the centre of the Union system , with mandatory effect upon the European Union , its institutions and the agencies .
We do this because there is a great concentration of power at the centre of the Union and it is clearly necessary for the citizen to be protected from abuse of that power .
We believe that the Charter will have three principal effects : first , it will reinforce the constitutional character of the Treaty ; secondly , it will be a point of reference for those , including this Parliament , that wish to drive European integration forward with a greater degree of democratic legitimacy ; thirdly , a Charter that is stylish and forceful will strengthen the profile of the Union for its present and future citizens .
This resolution mandates the European parliamentary delegation inside the Convention .
The Convention has already started the process of drafting the Charter upon the principal lines that we propose and upon the presumption that the final result will be binding .
A strong vote for this resolution will assist the Convention to complete its task and set criteria for this Parliament ' s final appraisal of the results .
We should avoid becoming obsessed with the question of subsidiarity .
The drafting of the Charter will certainly be informed by the application of that principle , but it is crucial that the Charter reflects modern European society with all its pluralism and with all its diversity .
The effect of the Charter will be steady and gradual rather than sudden and revolutionary .
There is also a controversy over the relationship between the new European Union Charter and the existing European Convention of Human Rights .
We are proposing that the Union should itself sign up to the ECHR so that those rights inscribed in the existing Convention would form the solid core of the Charter .
Madame President , our purposes are to write a charter that is so good that Member States will find it shameful to refuse to accept it within the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice .
The Charter represents a chance to build a modern post-national society , and marks a bold step forward from the sorrow and the pity of twentieth-century Europe .
I strongly commend the resolution .
. ( IT ) Madam President , the European Parliament is at last about to vote on the report , which has taken a great deal of time to prepare , on the drafting of the European Union ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights , and I hope that the patient work of the rapporteurs will be rewarded in this Chamber .
What I mean to say is that I hope that the damaging amendments made by those who see in the drafting of the Charter of Fundamental Rights an attack on democracy , no less , will be rejected .
And yet most of these rights already exist in the European Union as they are present in the Treaties , in the European Convention on Human Rights , in the institutional traditions common to the Member States and in the international conventions to which they all subscribe .
What is there to fear in a Charter of Fundamental Rights ?
This is only the formal ratification , the coherent expression of those sacrosanct individual rights , without which democracy would be reduced to a kingdom where the force of numerical strength reigns and the authorities may do as they please .
The European Union means the peaceful , supportive coexistence of different peoples and cultures , based on its tradition of respect for the rights of individuals .
The Charter will become a catalogue of shared principles which define Europe ' s identity before the world , an identity which is not based on blood ties , ethnic origin or national allegiance , but , indeed , on common values .
In the careful recognition of common rights , there will have to be acknowledgement of those fundamental social rights which are intrinsically no different from the other , more obvious rights , such as the right of freedom to join a trade union , the right to fundamental health and safety in the workplace and training rights , which have never been so essential for growth , employment and competitiveness in the global market as they are now .
There will have to be acknowledgement of the political rights of citizens and the human rights of every individual person . Fundamental rights will have to be defined in the face of fresh hazards .
A catalogue of fundamental rights which are recognised as binding by the European institutions also sets out the duty of the citizens to respect them .
The European Union is a civil , legal area of freedom , which is not just economic freedom but also freedom of security and justice , in a huge territory which , in the past , has been the site of repeated bloodshed .
The site of clashes between opposing armies throughout the whole of the first half of the century , Europe is now on the way to becoming a guarantee of peace and freedom from fear and want .
This is how we must see the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
There is no reason for anyone to be afraid when the prevalence of rights over force is enshrined in the law .
Madam President , Europe is founded upon fundamental rights .
So is the American Constitution , namely upon our fundamental European rights and the ideas of John Locke and the French Revolution .
American citizens can demand our European rights in their own courts , something which has provided them with empowerment , self-assurance and a pride in themselves .
Fundamental rights can create identity and citizenship .
They can also help individuals to take advantage of opportunities which are now arising in Europe through freedom of movement , the euro and information technology , that is to say the opportunities which are emerging in the new economy .
The assets we have as Europeans in the form of cultural differences are easier to maintain and to accept if citizens know that they can claim their rights throughout the Union .
Quite simply , freedom of movement demands a basis of guaranteed , fundamental rights .
Enlargement of the Union without guaranteed rights could even turn into a fiasco and delay our economic development .
A binding Charter is an indispensable requirement and a necessary part of a much-needed constitution .
I want to warn against joining the Council of Europe ' s convention , especially if this step were not to be combined with a binding Charter .
These complications ought to be studied more closely .
I hope that we are to have a modernised version of the wording of Article 6 of the Council of Europe ' s convention in which our already existing rights are listed in a summarised and concentrated form , with modern biotechnology and data protection added .
The Charter should be easy to communicate to citizens and be clear to them .
It should not be divided into two or contain a whole lot of references .
The Charter must be binding and embrace the European institutions .
It cannot be fair for citizens to be left without protection against abuses by institutions resembling police forces , such as OLAF and Europol .
This project will give rise to more powerful European individuals .
Madam President , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I will mainly focus on the issue of social fundamental rights .
Social fundamental rights form part and parcel of traditional fundamental rights .
For example , what use is the right to freedom of expression to someone who , owing to poverty and unemployment , suffers complete social exclusion ?
There are social fundamental rights which , by their very nature , are identical to and , as such , simply form part of , the traditional civil freedom rights .
There is , for example , the right of organisation and association which can be extended to the right of free negotiations on working conditions and the right of conducting collective action .
These rights should therefore be included in the first part of the charter .
In the case of other social fundamental rights , there should be a link between the way fundamental rights are worded and the effects thereof on the individual .
These fundamental rights are thus often described as instruction standards which are implemented by authorities in social legislation .
These are , however , no less essential to the charter as basic elements .
Quite often , this category of fundamental rights keenly shows up the misconceptions people have as to this charter ' s significance at European level .
The first misconception is that the EU charter will replace national guarantees for fundamental rights protection , as if , in future , individuals would need to call on the European Union and the European Court rather than their own authorities and courts , and as if fundamental rights on work , housing or social security would all of a sudden become European matters .
This is not the case at all .
No more so , in actual fact , than is the guarantee of freedom of expression or a fair hearing .
The purpose of the charter is to incorporate these fundamental rights in the European institutions and European policy .
This is , in fact , a reaction to a second common misconception .
It is not the case that the charter would only contain rights for which the European Union would be the first authorised port of call .
Even where the Union has no authority at all , policy measures which may be taken by or on behalf of the European Union can still infringe fundamental rights .
Accordingly , fundamental rights which cannot be guaranteed at EU level but can be violated by the Union , belong in the charter .
I would also like to comment on international treaties with regard to social fundamental rights .
The opinion of the Social Committee lists a few of these treaties : the Council of Europe ' s European social charter and the ILO ' s and UN ' s core Convention .
In Amendment No 22 to the Duff / Voggenhuber report , I argued that a reference to the ECHR should be placed in Article 6 of the Treaty of the Union , and that a reference to the to the ESC should be placed in the ILO ' s and the United Nations ' core Conventions .
Another amendment , regarding a more far-reaching alternative , Amendment No 23 , stipulates that the ECHR , as well these social international standards should be acceded to .
I would like to make one last remark regarding the necessity to establish a broad social basis and to enter into a dialogue with social organisations , even after completion of the charter .
We will need to conduct this general discussion then too .
Madam President , I would like , above all , to congratulate all the rapporteurs on the quality of their work .
They have successfully stated the importance of this matter for the European Parliament , Europe and its citizens .
The aim of this report is to give our fellow Members , who are members of the Convention , a clear and specific mandate detailing the expectations of the European Parliament and to give our fellow citizens clear evidence of our commitment to ensuring that their fundamental rights are properly respected by the institutions of the Union .
The area of competence of the Committee on Petitions justifies its interest in the framing of the charter .
The large numbers of petitions which it receives make it possible to assess the citizens ' perception of the Union and the rights they expect it to protect .
The opinion of the Committee on Petitions is intended to bring to light the aspirations expressed by the Europeans who refer their cases to Parliament in matters of non-observance of rights granted by the European Union .
The petitioners who write to us display a stubborn and unfailing conviction that they are entitled to a whole series of rights , thereby giving the impression that the European citizen is convinced that the Union actually already has a formal constitution wherein all these rights are enshrined , thus anticipating the decisions of the convention .
So our opinion stresses two key points which the rapporteurs , moreover , seem to share .
Firstly , the necessary visibility of the charter as a point of reference for the citizens .
This necessitates clear and concise drafting within a single , comprehensible text .
Secondly , the binding force of this charter , which is achieved when it is possible to defend the recognised rights in the law court .
The natural outcome of this determination is the inclusion of the future charter among the Treaties .
In conclusion , let me say that it is necessary to make a qualitative leap in the protection of fundamental rights .
This report must be a unanimous message from Parliament to ensure that the Council and the Convention respond to the expectations of petitioners .
Madam President , no doubt the Council would like to hear the opinion of the political Groups , which seems to me to be very healthy .
Madam President , we are holding this debate at exactly the right time .
The convention which is drafting the Charter on Fundamental Rights has begun its work and I believe that we are already doing so at cruise speed .
We are dealing with the content involving civil and political rights , and then we will deal with citizenship rights and economic and social rights .
It is therefore important for this Parliament to establish a mandate for the members of the delegation representing it and also to establish - and this seems to me to be essential - which political objectives this Parliament will pursue by means of this Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The representative of the Committee on Petitions is right to point out that the citizens often ask us what this Charter of Fundamental Rights is for .
Fundamental rights are recognised in our constitutions .
The Member States of the European Union respect fundamental rights .
There is a Rome Convention , upheld by the Court in Strasbourg , which is the ultimate guarantee in the event of a violation .
So what is this Charter for ?
I believe that Parliament should send a very clear message : the Charter of Fundamental Rights is a supplement to these rights guaranteed in the constitutions .
Being European has an added positive effect .
By means of this Charter we intend to bind the European institutions to a bill of fundamental rights and to bind the Member States to those same rights in their transposition and application of Community law .
This is the political message which we must send . Being European is a positive thing .
It adds to what we already have as national citizens .
The report which we are debating today and voting on tomorrow also seems to explain very clearly what the political objectives of this Parliament are .
We do not wish the Charter to be a mere declaration .
We do not believe that a declaration is sufficient .
We want the Charter to be incorporated into the Treaties precisely because we want the citizens to have more rights and guarantees .
Whether or not the Charter is incorporated into the Treaty clearly depends on the work which the convention is able to carry out .
It will depend on whether the work is useful and can be incorporated into the Treaties .
However , it seems to me essential that Parliament bears this objective in mind with regard to the drawing up of the Charter .
It is also important to state , as this report does , that absolutely no harm will be done to the protection of fundamental rights as laid down in existing provisions .
There will be no double use of the Convention of Strasbourg . We should make this very clear .
I repeat that what we want is to provide the European citizens with a supplementary guarantee when it comes to the application of Community law .
I believe that , by affirming the indivisibility of fundamental rights , as this resolution does , or affirming their innovative nature , we are taking positive steps towards an improvement in the living conditions of the European citizens .
Madam President , I would like to end by whole-heartedly congratulating both the rapporteurs and the draftsmen of opinions .
It is a matter of form in this Parliament to congratulate them , but I would like to do so from a political point of view and on behalf of my Group , because I believe that Messrs Duff and Voggenhuber , and all the draftsmen of opinions , have been able to provide the political response required by Parliament at the moment .
I therefore hope , Madam President , that tomorrow ' s vote will support the rapporteurs ' good work with a massive vote in favour of this report .
Madam President , Representative of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the exercise we are involved in today comes just in time and , every day , current events remind us how urgent this European Union charter is .
This is the background against which we are working .
A European Union charter : this clearly means that the charter is addressed to each and every one of our fellow citizens , admittedly , but also to persons resident in or visiting the Union .
That is important to note .
It is important at a time when the European Union is experiencing upheaval at its very centre .
It is important , too , and we would like to see this mentioned in the text that we are to vote upon tomorrow , at a time when we are involved in enlarging the Union to include countries for which the respect of fundamental rights is a significant question .
It is important , finally , at a time when we consider - and we should like to specify this in the text that we shall be voting upon tomorrow - that the Union has passed the stage of economic integration and has clearly undertaken a process of political and social integration .
The charter must contribute to this .
The resolution on which we shall be voting tomorrow is certainly not intended to give a binding mandate to our fellow Members , myself included , in the context of the convention , since we have already commenced work .
It is intended , rather , to say what Parliament expects of the convention .
To this end , I should like to stress two points .
In the first place , what do we expect to obtain from this exercise ?
Frankly , ladies and gentlemen , if the objective were to assemble a convention , original in form and composition , as we have today , in order merely to come up with an announcement of a text bearing the signatures of the presidents of the three institutions , then I think we would be on the wrong track .
We want more than this . It is in this spirit that we are working within the convention , both in terms of the timetable and the form .
My second point is to do with its content .
Our resolution does not say much with regard to content , but Parliament has already had , on at least three occasions , the opportunity to state what it expected from a charter on fundamental rights .
This was not the purpose of today ' s discussion , but it is worth highlighting three points .
Firstly , if we have put together such a unique body only to codify the existing law to the letter , then I believe it was not worth planning this new body .
Secondly , if the convention must confine itself to regurgitating all or part of the European Convention on Human Rights in order to void the question of whether or not the Union should adhere to it of all meaning , then I believe once again that we would be on the wrong track .
Thirdly , it seems to me that , with regard to the content , we have here the opportunity to restate , at Union level , a number of commitments that each Member State endorses , but which we must confirm on behalf of the European Union as such , recognising a number of rights , particularly in the economic and social sector .
Let me state here the extent of the difficulty of the mandate given us at Cologne , acknowledging social rights which would be nothing more than goals .
But , these specifically are the issues involved in the work which will be carried out within the convention and , on behalf of my Group , I wish to state the importance we shall accord the charter ' s content in terms of such questions .
In this spirit , I fully support the proposal which Ieke van den Burg has just made : if the Union is questioning its adherence to the European Convention on Human Rights , then it must also question its adherence to the European Social Charter .
Finally , I think that the European Parliament will be on the right track for the charter to be ready , in terms of both content and timetable , to be integrated during the French Presidency .
It would enable fundamental rights to be recognised in due form , and given the place they deserve in our internal legal system , a system which today is observed with a great deal of attention by citizens within the European Union , certainly , but also by the countries who wish to join the Union .
Madam President , the need for a binding charter is more a political than a legal issue , but this does not detract from its significance .
Fundamental rights are of secondary importance in treaties these days .
If they are included at all , this is done so in a completely chaotic format .
This is unacceptable , certainly if Europe professes to be a Community of values .
Therefore the charter must guarantee the citizen protection against the breaches of increasingly widening supra-national legislation .
The ECHR should apply as a minimum standard with specific European Union rights added to it .
Needless to say , we need to do everything possible to leave national constitutions intact as much as possible but it cannot be ruled out that it will affect these constitutions .
After all , the charter must be able to form the basis for new fundamental rights if so necessitated by social developments .
Finally , Madam President , it is essential for the European Union to accede to the European Convention on Human Rights , for Strasbourg must become stronger , not weaker .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Charter of Fundamental Rights must be an essential stage in the construction of Europe .
We must provide ourselves with the means to make it the founding element of European identity , allowing Europe to make the qualitative leap it needs in order to feel that it really does exist .
In this context , I should like to join my fellow Members in pointing out the need to ensure that this charter is of a binding nature , for the citizens would find it hard to understand the European Union working on defining fundamental rights if it was not then possible to guarantee them in law .
Fundamental rights , and let me stress this word , fundamental rights can be no less than mandatory .
If they are not , then the whole construction of Europe would lose its fundamental nature in the opinion of many people .
The future charter must be included among the Treaties and this must be achieved on the occasion of the next IGC , probably the last with the current fifteen countries .
France , the self-proclaimed home of human rights , must absolutely take advantage of its presidency during the second half of 2000 in order to table this amendment of the Treaties .
This is a formal request which we are making to the French Government .
There are , however , two points that I would like to mention here .
Firstly , I should like to stress the need for the charter to develop the concept of European citizenship due to residence .
More than ever , it is essential to avoid the coexistence in Europe of distinct classes of people enjoying distinct rights .
For example , how acceptable is it that an Algerian who has worked and paid taxes in France for thirty years may not vote in local elections whilst a European resident for six months in another European country can take part ?
This charter must make every effort to develop our definition of European citizenship based on the idea of residence .
The rights that we are defining , if they are to be fundamental , must be applicable to everyone .
Secondly , I should like to stress the urgent need to include effective protection for personal data held on computer within the scope of the charter .
Last month , the European Parliament in fact adopted an amendment asking for a Committee on Information Technology and European Liberties to be set up .
Well , this cannot truly exist unless it is based on a solid legal standard .
The charter must therefore ensure that it defines the limits of the content of files , the means permitted for data retrieval , and access methods .
Moreover , at a time when certain communication systems , certain spying systems , are prohibited , we must guarantee citizens ' rights with regard to the new European bodies which are being developed , and guarantee the rights of the citizen by means of parliamentary monitoring , but also consumer rights with regard to the new Internet marketing techniques .
This is a major issue for the guaranteeing of fundamental freedoms in the twenty-first century .
Madam President , my speech is going to be rather different to that of the previous speakers , since I should like to demonstrate that the Charter of the Fundamental Rights of the Citizens of the European Union , as outlined in the European Parliament report by Duff and Voggenhuber , would in fact be a charter that restricted fundamental rights even more .
This report in fact proposes including the citizens ' rights which have until now been determined at national level in a standard , detailed and binding European charter , whose application would be monitored and hence interpreted by the European Court of Justice .
I should point out , before going on , that I am not sure that all the other participants representing the Heads of State or Government and the national parliaments within the body established by the Cologne Council to prepare a preliminary draft charter are in fact in agreement with this position of the European Parliament .
So , for the time being , what I am about to say applies only to the Duff / Voggenhuber report .
Obviously , as far as those who promote the charter are concerned , defending fundamental rights which are already adequately protected in Europe at present , whatever they may say , is nothing but a pretext to conceal another , purely ideological , objective , which is to establish the beginnings of a European constitution , the crowning achievement of a superstate , even though the majority of the peoples of Europe do not want either of these .
And how right they are , for this detailed , mandatory charter , which would give standardised definitions of citizens ' rights for the whole of Europe , would impose a rigid legal framework enclosing each nation in regulations which were not entirely its own .
There are three reasons for our claiming that the charter , as envisaged , would curtail the rights of citizens .
Firstly , on the pretext of defending citizens better , it would distance them from the place where their rights are defined .
It would weaken the control that they currently have over it .
It would end in a situation where a nation could no longer amend the rights of its own citizens without obtaining the agreement of fourteen other nations , a suffocating formula , ill-suited to the nature and the interests of Europe , as I explained in the minority opinion appended to the report .
Next , the charter would provide a new pretext for the frenzied standardisation of citizens ' rights in Europe .
Indeed I am astounded that governments are prepared to allow this to happen .
Have they not learnt the lessons of the past ?
Do they really wish , taking the example of the French Government , to have to face twenty problems such as the case of the hunters all at the same time ?
Finally , this charter would tend to circumvent the rights of communities , primarily the national community , which are rights that are extremely dear to the citizens , since it is within this circle that the most realistic and most legitimate democracy is expressed .
Here we are at the heart of what we have called the process of reducing rights .
This process would , moreover , go much farther than one might think , for a whole series of beggars and minorities have started to come out of the woodwork , clearly understanding that if the charter is standardised and binding , as well as adopted under the dubious conditions of so-called European democracy , it may in years to come represent the weak link in the chain of democracy .
The Union for a Europe of Nations Group therefore considers that the charter , if it must exist , should be extremely brief and should present only the essential values , the fundamental principles of the countries of Europe , in the form of a political declaration .
It is perfectly feasible to imagine , as of the end of the year , candidate countries signing up to this charter in order to demonstrate their inclusion in the circle of European values .
If so , adhesion to the charter could be shared by both existing members and future members .

One thing is certain , Madam President , at all costs we must avoid foisting a standardised and binding text on the nations of Europe , lest we create the post-national society which Mr Duff has just been hoping and praying for .
This would be perceived as an attack on national democracies ' freedom of choice . Every country must continue to be able to choose its regulations freely in accordance with its own culture and development .
We would like the Intergovernmental Conference , which is just starting , to keep the essential principle of respect for national democracies continually in mind .
Madam President , on behalf of the Lega Nord , for which I am a representative to this House , I would like to express my delight at the fact that the European Charter of Fundamental Rights is , at last , being drawn up .
I like to remember that , right here , in France , a couple of centuries ago , the first moves were made to define these rights , and only in North America , during the same period , were these rights actually given expression , apart from in the works of philosophers and academics , in legal documents such as the State Constitutions .
Now then , the European Union does , in effect , seem to be a little behind , but we can make up time by using this vessel .
I am referring to it as a vessel because it is obviously still only a framework .
We do not , as yet , know what we will put inside it .
The report does , of course , contain some of the main points , but we will have to decide upon the definitive text later on .
This Charter is important because , although we do have other conventions and treaties , human rights are always under threat , even within the Union .
For example , I am thinking of the attempt to eliminate or cut down on the appeal procedures in lawsuits in Italy . I am thinking of the right to free elections which loses its meaning when , for example , the citizens of a country of the Union vote in a certain way , and vote freely , and then see their country penalised as a result of the outcome of the elections .
The right of citizens to vote for whomsoever they choose should be respected indiscriminately for all people at all times , without sabotaging the governments and countries which emerge as a result of these elections .
Then there is not just the question of citizens ' rights : the rights of communities need to be better defined , as do the rights of peoples , those peoples which are under threat , on the one hand , from globalisation , which wants to standardise everything , and , on the other hand , from a return to a single , centralist , oppressive nation-state .
In our opinion , however , we should be moving towards a Europe of peoples , peoples whose identity is not necessarily defined according to the present form of the Member States .
In particular , certain rules of some of the penal codes should be altered , such as article 141 of the Italian Penal Code , which goes so far as to punish acts of secession with life imprisonment .
I am not necessarily advocating secession , but I am claiming the right for anyone who might want to do so to be able to take action , in a peaceful and non-violent manner , of course , to uphold and apply this right which is sanctioned by the UN Charter , sanctioned by the Helsinki Final Act and , I hope , despite certain penal rules , will also be sanctioned by the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Madam President , as the low turnout during the most recent elections has shown , " Europe " as a concept does not mean a great deal to its citizens .
We cannot change this by giving citizens a Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Citizens need to see that the European institutions are actually acting in their interests and are not just out to increasing their own power .
If this happens , confidence among people will grow more than could ever be achieved by many a fine declaration or charter .
We do not share the presumption that a comprehensive charter can be drafted which comprises all current fundamental rights .
Such a document cannot be drafted , not now or in future , and this ambition is certainly not a task of the European Union .
What we should aim for within the Union is cooperation based on respect for the separate identities of peoples and states .
Fundamental rights must be secured where they can be protected as effectively as possible and where they can be embedded in the social fabric , that is to say within the Member States .
It is also vital that the ECHR ' s external supervisory role in the protection of fundamental rights remains intact . Equally , the authority of the Court in Strasbourg over this whole procedure should remain unaffected .
A legally binding charter will inevitably affect fundamental rights provisions in Member States and will undermine the role and the authority of the ECHR and the Court in Strasbourg .
If a charter were to be drafted nonetheless , we would strongly urge that this only apply to the institutions of the Union .
It should only include articles which can give a meaningful message to these European institutions .
Vague instruction standards or rights in policy areas , where the Union has no authority , must be omitted .
Finally , fundamental rights are based on human dignity .
The true value of human life , however , will never be fully understood if we lose sight of God , the Creator of all things , including man .
Mr President , dismayed as I am by the fact that 14 Member States have prejudged Austria , I regard the proposed Charter of Fundamental Rights as an opportunity to bring the European Union closer to the people .
I therefore welcome it .
In drawing up this Charter , the Union wishes to demonstrate its respect for the rights of the people and to show that it cares about the welfare of the individual .
At the same time , however , the impression has been created in the public arena that the European Union does not even respect the fundamental right - as it were - of an individual State to form a government with sovereign power .
Likewise , the impression has been created that 14 Member States have failed to play by the rules they themselves adopted , and have violated their obligations towards solidarity .
I would ask you this : how is a Union of the Member States that adopts sanctions out of prejudice , without giving the parties concerned a fair hearing and with no legal basis , to satisfy people that it intends to do more than just pay lip-service to fundamental rights ?
The decision taken by the 14 has done great damage to the perception that the citizens of the European Union have of Europe .
And I believe it is very doubtful indeed as to whether this damage can be made good by a Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Mr President , for years now , the European Parliament and our group have been asking for a proper description of fundamental rights of the European citizens in the European treaties .
The request was made at the time of the Treaty of Maastricht and the Treaty of Amsterdam .
In this connection , I would also remind you of the report which I had the privilege of writing in conjunction with Mrs Dury in preparation for the Treaty of Amsterdam .
This question was raised in that document too .
In fact , it was in this document that we achieved our first successes , for our anti-discrimination clause was used in the Treaty of Amsterdam virtually verbatim .
Later on , at the Cologne Summit , Parliament ' s wider request was also honoured .
A meeting was proposed for the purpose of producing a Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European citizen .
The question which concerns us today , more than anything is : what should this charter contain and what legal force should it have ?
As far as the latter is concerned , I would like to express my unequivocal support in favour of including a charter in the treaties and in favour of a charter which can be enforced on behalf of citizens upon the European courts .
We should not produce empty shells ; our citizens would see through them straight away anyway .
As far as the content is concerned , the charter must tie in with the existing conventions , such as the Council of Europe ' s European Convention for the protection of human rights .
In fact , in my opinion , the Union should sign up to that Convention without delay .
The charter should at least deal with the citizens ' fundamental rights , the political rights , the social rights and , in my opinion , the rights of minorities too , and it should form a supplement to what we already have .
It should not duplicate what is already there .
New threats , in particular , will need to be anticipated , such as in the field of information and biotechnology , and in the protection of the environment , of which man forms part .
Mr President , the rights of minorities appear to constitute one of the most difficult areas in the charter and because this has been and will be one of Europe ' s key problems , I would argue in favour of including fundamental rights of minorities in the charter .
I will probably submit a text on this matter myself .
But the most important fact , Mr President , is that the charter will be given legal force , that it will be included in the Treaty and that our citizens will be reassured that the European Union will take its fundamental rights seriously too , and will want to defend them up to the highest level .
Mr President , I would just like to say a few words on the question of the incorporation of the Charter into the Treaties .
The European Parliament declared itself fully in favour of this move , convinced that this is the way to guarantee the legal status of the Charter and to consolidate the protection of rights at a legal level as well , awarding jurisdiction to the Court of Justice of the European Union .
The governments , and , on their behalf , the Council of Cologne , left the question open .
They left a question mark over whether and how to incorporate the Charter into the Treaties .
We feel that the Intergovernmental Conference is our opportunity to resolve this question , and this opportunity must not be passed up .
There are , so to speak , two parallel operations .
It is the responsibility of the Convention to prepare the draft Charter in time for the Intergovernmental Conference to be able to decide whether to incorporate it into the Treaties .
In this regard , I would like to warn the representative of the Council , the Portuguese Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs , that the Intergovernmental Conference should already be starting to prepare for this eventuality .
If the Charter is ready in time , the Intergovernmental Conference will have to define the procedures for its incorporation into the Treaty .
As we are all aware , from the European Parliament ' s perspective , this should represent a step towards the constitutionalisation of the Union .
I am quite aware that the term ' constitutionalisation ' has come to be viewed with some suspicion recently , and that people are afraid to use it , or at least , prefer to avoid using it .
From time to time I find myself in difficulties , because the parliamentary committee of which I am Chairman has changed its name from the ' Committee on Institutional Affairs ' to the ' Committee on Constitutional Affairs ' .
And yet I feel that this is the right way for us to go and that it does not in any way mean promoting that concept we all fear of a European superstate .
Nothing can undermine the value of the national constitutions , in the same way that , according to the Treaties , European citizenship does not replace national citizenship , but incorporates it .
The governments did something very courageous when they gave the go-ahead for the preparation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights in Cologne , and now they should not have any regrets .
They should not turn back , but should exploit their decision to the full .
Ladies and gentlemen , human rights are a constitutional issue .
The incorporation of the Charter of Rights into the Treaties is the logical result of the decision taken in Cologne , which was taken for the benefit of the citizens , that they might have a part in the construction of Europe and fully identify with the plans for the Union , its principles , its values and its institutions .
Mr President , I should like to express my substantial agreement with the point just made by Mr Napolitano .
It is , when you think of it , odd to suppose that great institutions of this kind could be thought capable of existing without some constitution .
Manifestly we do exist and therefore manifestly we already have some kind of a constitution .
The question is : do we have an adequate constitution and what kind of constitution do we want ?
To say we need a constitution is not to say that the European Union should have the constitution of a state , for the Union is not a state and is not about to become one .
We all therefore agree that there should be proper recognition of rights within the Union and that this should be binding on the organs and institutions of the Union .
The EU organs and institutions can exercise far too much power to permit them that power without the proper control which a Charter of Rights would imply .
There is however one risk .
One of the great success stories of Europe is the way in which the European Court of Justice , especially when other institutions were blocked , succeeded in building the concept of Europe as a Community under the law .
If we create a Charter of Rights that overloads the Court of Justice , that has everybody beating a path every week to Luxembourg , we will destroy the purpose .
We must ensure that the main avenue for protecting rights is in the national courts and in a supervisory jurisdiction as exercised at European level .
If we do not succeed in that , we will fail in everything .
The conventions are , of course , concerned with the relationship between States and citizens and , since the EU is not a State , the fact that the EU increasingly behaves like , and is acquiring the powers of , a State is a problem .
In that way , a loophole has appeared in connection with fundamental rights , and this loophole should , of course , be closed .
In our eagerness to make things right , we are , however , in danger of doing a lot of damage . The EU is faced with a number of choices .
Are we to secure our own rights ?
Are we exclusively to look after ourselves and our own ? Or are we to reinforce human rights throughout Europe ?
The EU must not start competing with the existing authorities for resolving disputes , such as the Court of Human Rights here in Strasbourg .
That would , of course , weaken the latter and damage the situation regarding human rights throughout Europe .
In my view , the EU ' s Court of Justice should therefore be kept away from the project concerning fundamental rights .
Instead , the EU ought to take Strasbourg ' s judgements seriously and demand that present and future Member States ratify the European Convention on Human Rights , the ILO conventions and the essential UN conventions , as well as having economic and tariff agreements depend upon the parties adhering to these conventions .
In that way , the EU would reinforce the existing conventions , and that is something there is a need for .
I would like to join with my colleagues in congratulating the two rapporteurs despite the fact that I do not agree with everything that they have set down and suggested .
At the same time , they have been given an impossible task to try and square a circle that cannot be squared .
In the brief time that I have , I would like to concentrate on one specific point which the previous speaker has mentioned , as indeed have other speakers .
That is the potential conflict which could arise between this Charter and the European Convention on Human Rights .
Let us not forget that each Member State has ratified the European Convention on Human Rights , has incorporated it into its own national law and is bound by the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg .
Over the last 50 years , the European Convention , with the decisions of the Court , has grown and evolved to accommodate new rights , new entitlements and new freedoms that have developed with society .
Also , in case Members do not know it , under a strict legal interpretation any EU legislation supersedes any constitutional provision or any other national legislative provision in any one of the Member States .
Therefore , if this Charter were to be incorporated into the Treaties , it would supersede the European Convention on Human Rights , it would supersede any national constitutional provisions and would also supersede any national legislative provisions .
Therefore , whilst it is important that each of us must stand up for the inalienable freedoms and rights enjoyed by each individual citizen , as well as by groups of citizens , I think there is a better way to deal with this problem than through a Charter , namely through the incorporation of the Convention into European Union law and its enforcement at national Member State level .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with this proposed charter and some other reports which this House will be debating tomorrow morning , we have now entered a new period of European construction , the ' Dadaist ' period of European construction , which scorns reality and perpetually seeks moral justification for itself .
The fact is , you refute the transcendental and the sublime because you confuse moralism with morality - indeed , Goethe , as you know , said that moralism was the opposite of morality - and legalism with law .
Please understand that we are not challenging the existence of human rights .
We are saying that they should be taken into consideration among other rights , and that it is all of these rights which must contribute to the general interest , for it is general interest that is the primordial rule of political action , not the zeitgeist , the showbiz society , the mediagoguery , or weakness raised up as a system .
Indeed , human rights are no more than an object , a pretext , which the speakers here - like the pseudo-artist Duchamp - generally make a mockery of .
It is a pretext , when the very title of the proposed charter speaks of the fundamental rights ' of ' the European Union instead of fundamental rights ' within ' the European Union .
What you are trying to create is a precursor for a constitution that is impossible to find because in fact you have reached a dead end and you know perfectly well that the construction of Europe has turned into an unbelievable preachifying mass of texts and declarations .
Forgetting the people , social democrats hide , shamefaced , behind human rights and furtive liberals turn into social democrats .
But the people take note of these recantations and will , one day , reject them , or indeed the Western world will come to an end .


Mr President , the question we have heard several times in the course of this debate is this : what exactly is the point of this Charter of Human Rights , when there is already one , and even several universal conventions on human rights and a European Convention on Human Rights , and human rights are included in the constitutions of all the Member States , those of the candidate countries and , generally , in the constitutions of all countries , even those who do not respect human rights ?

It certainly is not useful , as has been claimed previously , in terms of improving or strengthening human rights within the construction of Europe .
No , and we should pay tribute to Mrs Berès for having just now clearly given direction to a debate which marks a key turning point in the history of the construction of Europe , the transition from an economic and commercial Europe to a political and institutional Europe .
Of course , the Charter of Human Rights is the first step in this direction , but , as with everything which characterises the construction of Europe , the approach is indirect , concealed , tortuous and , I might even say , ' Jesuitical ' .
The question of a constitution and its contents is not asked , but instead the question of a charter of human rights which is obviously the precursor for a constitution , it being understood that the precursor will eventually give rise to a constitution proper and then , possible , to a State .
The interesting thing about this approach - and here again I must pay tribute to Mrs Berès for her clear-sightedness and honesty , even if , as she knows , I totally disagree with her conclusions - is that it tends to determine what will be the principles of the European communities , or of the community of human beings living within the European Union .
When Mrs Berès speaks of the rights being applied not only to citizens but also to visiting and resident aliens , she is tackling a matter which , I feel , is probably going to be developed in the texts already submitted and to be submitted in future to this House , to wit , what will be the basis of the rights which will govern the European Union ?
Is it to be citizenship in the way that we traditionally understand it , with rights which characterise in a specific way the people belonging to a given community ?
Or is it to be rights extended to parties other than citizens proper , with a shift , or at least the start of a shift , from democracy based on citizenship towards democracy based on the equal treatment of individuals resident , whether long-term residents or visitors , on European Union territories .
I feel that this is a problem which as yet we can only see the premises of , but , in my view , it is absolutely essential to see the premises in order to be able subsequently to follow the thread .
Mr President , while I congratulate the rapporteurs on their work I fear that , as the road to hell is paved with good intentions , so it is with this Charter .
The nations of Europe can be proud of their record on human rights ; however , have they needed charters ?
Britain led the world in the battle to abolish slavery , but the only Charter - actually so called - which we have ever had in Britain was signed at Runnymede by King John in 1215 .
Of course , there are exceptions , exceptions so serious that Europe has a responsibility to do what it can to ensure that the inhumanities and atrocities of the past are never repeated .
But does this Charter add to what we already have ?
Does it add to or replace the Convention on Human Rights to which all EU Member States and applicant states are signatories , or does it just add another judicial forum , leaving lawyers with the happy and profitable choice between the European Court and the Court of Human Rights ?
Why not a simple declaration of human rights under Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty without the need for a charter for litigation ?
Can fundamental rights properly be protected by a court which is already overstretched and frequently arrives at its judgments long after the events which it is judging ?
Does this Charter simply aim to be an expensive distributor of compensation in the dreadful fullness of time ?
Ensuring fundamental human rights is the best of intentions , but a charter for litigation and bureaucracy is surely another road to another hell .
Mr President , why do we need such a Charter ?
It clearly is not , as Mr Berthu has said , in order to create a European super-state but more , as Mrs Berès has said , to make it clear to today 's citizens and tomorrow 's citizens that what we are in now is a Community of values : values based on democracy , freedom , equality , solidarity and respect for diversity , values - and I stress this to Mrs Garaud - that unite Europeans across frontiers , from the north , the south , the east and the west of the Community .
The big question is not whether we need such a Charter but what status it should have .
Some have argued that the Charter should simply gather together in a readable form all the rights that currently exist within the European Union .
This would be a valuable exercise : there is clearly a problem of awareness of people 's rights .
Many citizens do not know the rights that exist today .
A document clearly laying out such rights , and making it clear where and how these rights could be exercised , would be valuable .
But if that was all we were doing in the Convention then we should have left it to a team of academics , who frankly could have done it better than a group of 60 politicians .
I believe we have a team of 60 politicians working on the Convention because it is our duty to identify gaps in existing rights , to identify weaknesses in existing structures and to show the political will to correct those weaknesses .
So the Charter must fill in any gaps in existing rights , and it must be binding on the institutions of the European Union .
However , it is clear that not all rights will be equal , at least in the way they are implemented .
The rights need to be in two categories .
There needs to be a list of rights which will be directly upheld by the courts , but there also needs to be another list of general rights which the Community institutions and others will have to take into account when drafting policies ; some in the Court , some simply as background forming a valuable basis when we are taking other decisions .
What is clear , and what unites most people in this Chamber who want such a Charter , is that it must be in the Treaties .
If it is to impact on the citizen it must appear in the Treaties of the European Union .
Mr President , I would particularly like to thank the rapporteurs and the Committee on Constitutional Affairs for having adopted a position in favour of the EU becoming a party to the Council of Europe ' s Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
I hope that this position will be retained in tomorrow ' s sitting , as it will be vitally important if we wish to avoid confusion with the many various schemes in respect of fundamental rights .
I would like to raise the issue of reinforcing the political rights of citizens with the help of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
In my view , there has not to date been so much discussion on the subject .
If , however , we were to examine what a citizen of the European Union today can actually do , how much he or she can influence the decision-making process , we would see that there are not so many opportunities to do so .
Citizens can mainly stand as candidates in elections and vote in another EU country .
But why should we not establish some new institutions and instruments , by means of this Charter , enabling citizens to have a real influence ?
Why , for example , could we not take up the notion that a certain number of citizens - let us say from three different EU countries - could formulate a citizens ' initiative that then could be channelled though the European Parliament ?
Why can we not look to the future and see that it will be ever more important for our citizens to be able to take part directly in decision-making in other ways too ?
I think it would be natural for this to form part of the Charter and very little has been said about this so far .
During this past century , Europe has experienced two terrible wars , immeasurable tragedies , but , at the same time , it has witnessed unrestrainable civil , cultural and social progress .
The working masses fought , and achieved and consolidated positive results which protected their rights , and which , at the same time , played a decisive role in the development of democracy .
It is a bitter surprise to find that there is no specific , explicit reference in this document to those social rights which are , in actual fact , the most important part of the immense democratic process which became established in Europe during the course of the century .
I am referring to essential rights , without which democracy is not true democracy : freedom of thought , freedom of speech , freedom of the press and of association and so on are the basic framework of democracy , but within that framework and from that framework must emerge a healthy , solid structure which is a perfect combination of freedom and justice .
First and foremost , a document such as this cannot fail to include a specific , indisputable reference to the right to work .
It cannot and must not be without this reference .
Yes , social rights are mentioned , but they should be clearly and practically defined : the right to work , the right to health , the right to education , the right to housing , to a pension , the right , that is , to life , to a life where all have equal opportunities , according to those principles of liberté [ freedom ] and égalité [ equality ] which have played such a major part in our extensive history .
For this reason , therefore , I ask Parliament to approve the small number of explicit amendments tabled by Mr Kaufmann and myself on this subject .
- ( PT ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , the only really fundamental thing about the idea of a Charter of Fundamental Rights for the Union is an attempt , under the guise of appearing to be generous , to take a step towards the so-called constitutionalisation of the Treaties , or even more directly , towards a European constitution for a European State .
For this reason , we are against it .
We are not questioning the content of such a charter .
We come from a country whose constitution contains one of the most extensive enumerations of fundamental rights anywhere . We also belong to a party that was forged in the struggle for democracy , and one of whose greatest concerns has always been the steadfast promotion of human rights .
We oppose the charter , however , because in the idea behind it , we detect a kind of Trojan horse for federalism , a political trap which would entail other serious political and legal consequences for the Member States and peoples of Europe .
We do not think that it would be correct , and certainly not appropriate , to impair and disturb the balance of the Treaties at present .
On the contrary , the times and challenges we are currently facing mean that it is more important than ever to promote the Treaties and follow the precise , secure routes mapped out by the founding fathers which have brought us this far .
There is a very simple reason why the European Union does not need a Charter of Fundamental Rights : it does not have a fundamental rights problem .
The Europe to which we belong is even , to a certain extent , the cradle of the culture of fundamental rights .
As there is no problem , the charter is not a solution and as the charter will solve nothing , it is therefore a problem in itself .
Firstly , because it would divide us in a cause in which we should be united . Secondly , because it would give rise to an overlapping and potentially disruptive conflict with the protection afforded by the European Convention on Human Rights , under the tried and tested institutional framework of the Council of Europe and the European Court of Human Rights .
This is not a plus , but a minus .
The appropriate setting in which to enshrine fundamental rights is the constitutional law of each nation state . The appropriate setting for achieving international legal harmonisation and solid advances in the international protection of human rights is the agreements and conventions ratified by the Member States in as wide a geographical area as possible .
In other words , the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and , in Europe , the European Convention .
We need to work within these extensive international frameworks if we are really to make the protection of rights already recognised by Member States more effective internationally , instead of following a route that will restrict us because it runs counter to the main feature of the culture of fundamental rights : its universality .
If the EU really does want to take symbolic steps in this field , it needs to go down a different path . That would involve including all human rights agreements and conventions already ratified by the 15 Member States in the list of international texts referred to in Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union .
This would ensure that they were clearly incorporated into the acquis communautaire .
That would be a real step forward . This charter is the wrong answer to a problem that does not even exist and is therefore an additional problem which we feel we can do without .
Mr President , " the creation of an ever closer Union among the peoples of Europe and the maintenance and development of the Union as an area of freedom , security and justice are based on general and absolute respect for human dignity , which is unique to each person , yet common to all , and inviolable . "
So reads Item B in the motion for a resolution we have before us .
I consider it to be great progress that the European Parliament has specified and established a view of human beings which is deeply rooted in Europe ' s history , culture , popular movements and spiritual traditions .
I am therefore pleased that my amendment concerning human dignity - unique to each person , yet common to all and inviolable - obtained support in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , for we must establish a common view of human beings as the effective basis for the EU ' s urgent , global fight against the death penalty , its struggle on the side of life and also its fight against torture , against the sex trade and against sexual exploitation .
In our capacity as citizens , we have freedoms and rights , but we also have responsibilities .
I therefore welcome the fact that responsibilities have been incorporated in accordance with my wording in Item E.
I would also remind you of Amendments Nos 24 and 25 which the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats have submitted and which will be voted on tomorrow .
By way of conclusion , I want to discuss the fact that , in November 1999 , the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities in the European Parliament made a statement to the effect that the family does not have any special rights but only individual rights .
This statement totally conflicts with the UN ' s and the Council of Europe ' s fundamental human rights charters concerning the rights of the family .
Mr President , it is not often that one has cause to simply feel glad about something in the all too ponderous run of things in the European Parliament .
However , the report by Duff and Voggenhuber has given us cause for this today .
I would particularly like to take this opportunity to highlight how doggedly they have pursued their goal .
All too often one has the feeling in this House , that notwithstanding all verbal declarations , the superior might and advantages enjoyed by the Council and the Commission prevail , and all too often , this is where the interests of national parties and governments win through as well .
Duff and Voggenhuber , on the other hand , think of themselves as true European Parliamentarians whose task it is to further the interests of Europe as a whole .
And so tomorrow , we will be able to adopt a report , which is based on the premise that naturally the European Parliament , and not the national governments , would be responsible for instituting the fundamental rights of the European Union .
This Charter will only meet the needs of the citizens of Europe under two provisos . Firstly , it must be given substance , and secondly , it must be made binding in law .
However , it is stunningly disappointing to note how the Convention , which has been specifically set up for this purpose , is high on competences but very low in courage .
And so really , this report could also be viewed as an appeal to the Convention that goes like this : ' Dare to do something at long last !
Dare to include innovations in the Charter , particularly those in the sphere of information and biotechnology , but also where equal rights for women and environmental protection are concerned .
Dare to do more than just spend time in the glass palace of Parliament talking about the people of Europe - get out there and involve them ! And dare to adopt the standards on international labour law set by the International Labour Organisation . '
The Charter is precisely the instrument we need to give Europe a soul , and it could help create a common identity .
Why is it that EU governments are so quick off the mark when it comes to pushing through economic reforms but so hesitant when it comes to political rights ?
Do you not realise that Europe as we know it will fall apart if we put all our efforts into bringing on the economy and do not do anything to promote political fundamental rights ?
Conscious of my position as an Austrian , I would therefore like to make the following appeal to the national governments : ' wake up , it is in your own interests to give fundamental rights a chance !
With this in mind , I hope the report in question achieves an overwhelming majority in plenary tomorrow .
I should like to say that a Charter of Fundamental Rights is both welcome and essential , provided it does not fall into the following three traps .
The first trap is that it may just become just another public relations exercise - and we have seen many of them from the European Union , in employment for instance - which has no legal basis , which is not binding and which will therefore not allow citizens to enforce their rights through the courts .
The second danger is that it may give the European Union an excuse to continue not being legally bound by basic decisions or regulations of international bodies , such as the European Convention on Human Rights or the various decisions of the International Labour Organisation .
The third danger is that it may become a general Charter containing a loose set of average values , a mechanism for subverting the advanced human rights which have been acquired in various countries .
For example , if a particular country has the right to free education , then any general reference to the right to education in a European Union Charter could be the first step towards subverting that right .
Provided the Charter deals with these three traps , provided it addresses social rights in a serious manner , provided it is open to the new issues raised by the Internet , new technologies , etc . , and provided it applies to all persons living in Europe , then it may represent a positive contribution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , fundamental rights , citizens , freedom and human rights have a long tradition in Europe .
Fundamental rights of the modern age have their origins in the Magna Carta Libertatum of 1215 , the Petition of Rights of 1628 , the Habeas Corpus Act of 1679 , the Bill of Rights of 1689 and , lastly , the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen during the French Revolution .
The fact that fundamental rights have come to be guaranteed under constitutional law over the past 200 years is largely down to the impact these universal documents of fundamental rights have had .
It is now the task of twenty-first century Europe to combine the existing fundamental rights in the Member States and those aspects that apply to Europe .
The fundamental rights such as freedom of worship , freedom to meet and form associations , for example , are sacrosanct and inalienable rights to freedom from state intervention .
Applied to Europe this means that a European Charter of Fundamental Rights must protect the citizens of the European Union against the interference and intervention of European institutions in the fundamental rights of the citizens .
Furthermore , our group hopes that a written European catalogue of fundamental rights will put European integration on a firmer legal-ethical footing and help to create greater transparency and clarity for the citizens .
Our group deems it particularly important that the European Charter should neither replace nor infringe Member States ' own provisions on fundamental rights .
There has been heated discussion over the call for the European Union to sign up to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms drawn up by the Council of Europe in 1950 .
The Council of Europe ' s Convention is now 50 years old .
Our group opposes the Union ' s signing up to the Convention , not just because the existing European treaties do not permit this but , in particular , because we need our own catalogue of fundamental rights for the European Union , that is , one that reflects the convictions and beliefs we hold today .
At the same time , however , this means that we must confine ourselves to the traditional fundamental rights and avoid extending the scope to social and economic fundamental rights , which are not legally enforceable at European level .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs for the comprehensive work they have done , and hope that the deliberations of the European Parliament find their way into the Convention ' s discussions on the elaboration of fundamental rights .
Mr President , the rapporteurs Duff and Voggenhuber , as well as the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , have done some sterling work .
The report itself is sound because it conveys the key messages without going so far as to anticipate the work of the fundamental rights convention .
I therefore nurture the hope that tomorrow in plenary sitting , this report will be adopted in the form we in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights drafted it in .
However there is one point which I would like to be amended .
I have tabled an amendment to this effect on behalf of my group .
It concerns the question , raised repeatedly today , as to whether the European Union should sign up to the European Convention on Human Rights .
This was an important goal in the past .
It was an important and appropriate goal in the past precisely because there was no intention , at that stage , to create our own , autonomous catalogue of fundamental rights at European Union level ; viewed in this light , it was far better to have that , as a second-best solution , than nothing at all .
But that is not the path we want Europe to go down in the future , and nor should it .
With all due respect for the Human Rights Convention , we need more !
We need our own Charter that provides our own answers to the questions raised by the age we live in .
It must balance traditional , liberal rights with an adequate set of economic rights as well as offer effective solutions to issues pertaining to the social rights of citizens of the European Union and to the need to guarantee them a basic standard of social protection ..
The European Convention on Human Rights does not fulfil this task .
It is not in a position to do so because it came into being in the 50s , when political and social conditions were completely different .
Seen in this light , it is time for all of us to call for constructive work to commence on our own Charter .
We call upon the Convention on Fundamental Rights , the 62 politicians that David Martin mentioned , to take up this task .
Let us support them in this .
Mr President , the lawful object of the Charter of Rights is to protect the legitimate rights , expectations and aspirations of the citizen against the oppressive behaviour of government , business or other citizens ; and it is , of course , right that people should be thus safeguarded in respect of the European institutions and their activities .
However , having said that , the crucial matter is not the existence of a Charter but the proper safeguarding of the citizen , and the means by which the citizen achieves such protection today vary from Member State to Member State .
In view of the Community ' s normal legislative practice , I am somewhat surprised that it was not felt that this should be achieved by going with the grain of the established legal and administrative mechanisms of each Member State .
In other words , policy should be implemented along the lines of a directive rather than a regulation .
For example , I was speaking recently with some very senior judges in Germany who were clear , on the basis of the history and traditions of their country , that these matters should be contained in a justiciable charter .
But my own country has a very different tradition in this respect , as our own Prime Minister has made clear , and it is not part of the United Kingdom ' s tradition to safeguard the citizen in this way .
We do it differently and no less effectively .
I think it is very relevant that the present socialist United Kingdom government is committed to ensuring that the Charter is non-justiciable and does not extend beyond existing rights to those not currently contained in the treaties .
Mr President , for those countries which have a long tradition of directly , legally binding charters , a development of the kind proposed is not dramatic .
But for those which do not , it is a very radical step ; and in the meantime , I will keep a very close watch on the United Kingdom and what it may say and do about all this .
Mr President , we get the impression from some of the discussions on the subject of the Charter of Fundamental Rights that the family is becoming a politically incorrect concept in the European Union , so eager are some groups to dispense with the word .
The UN Declaration of Human Rights , the Convention on the Rights of the Child , the Council of Europe ' s Social Charter and the European Parliament ' s resolution on the declaration fundamental rights and freedoms clearly conclude that there is a special need to protect the family .
Unfortunately , not everyone sees the matter in this way , and , in my opinion , we can see an unnecessary conflict between the rights of women and those of families , which people try to accommodate by rejecting the family instead of seeking a radically new and egalitarian European policy on the family .
This means that family values in society are falling into the wrong , or at least biased , hands .
The new right is getting hold of them and using them to capture the moral high ground .
That is why the theme is tiresome to so many .
However , I believe that it would be a big mistake for the European Parliament to approve of this sort of trend .
Families are firmly connected with the European notion of society .
Like many others , the Christian Democrats want a society where freedom and responsibility meet halfway .
I see it as a family society because it is difficult to learn about joint responsibility and solidarity if it is not learnt in a small , close-knit community .
Society may be just , but it cannot ever love .
Its bosom is too cold and its arm too short .
Nevertheless , it is this very love that is a requirement for the healthy development of the individual .
And a progressive Charter of Fundamental Rights will be of no use to Europe if the members of its society have no wish to respect them .
Social development with that end in sight still takes place in the family .
There can thus be no people ' s Europe without a family-oriented Europe .
Families need recognition , encouragement , freedom of action and protection from social tyranny just the same as individuals do .
Family rights and protection that have been provided for in legislation elsewhere in this respect should be reproduced in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It is clear that there is a great fear among many people , particularly the people who elected me , that this Charter will override national constitutions , in particular as regards the support and protection of fundamental institutions such as family , marriage and the protection of life , born and unborn .
It is good to remember that Europe has shared a common position throughout its history regarding the importance of supporting and protecting family and marriage .
This is enshrined in all our constitutions as well as the constitutions of those accession countries joining the European Union in enlargement .
I can show you the constitutions of post-communist states in which the family and marriage is protected .
I welcome the reference in our Charter to family life .
Part 1 of Article 9 states : " Everyone shall have the right to found a family " .
It says it is inspired by Article 12 of the European Convention on Human Rights which states " men and women of marriageable age have the right to marry and found a family according to national laws " .
Society recognises marriage not on moral grounds but because it recognises on a rational basis the stability it affords society socially and economically as well as securing future generations .
In the interests of best practice - and whilst it is increasingly difficult to define family and we need great sensitivity and compassion in this area - we should not throw away the traditional family unit as the fundamental unit we strive towards , indeed we should uphold it .
Point 3 of Article 9 states , " the Union shall ensure the protection of children " .
It suggests we could add " in accordance with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child " .
I support this , but I would strongly suggest that we incorporate into the wording of point 3 that first and foremost , the Union will support the family as the primary and natural educator and protector of the child as is their duty .
The Union should only step into a primary role where the family is unable to fulfil its duty .
As it states in the Convention , " the family as the fundamental group of society and natural environment for the growth and wellbeing of its members , particularly children , should be afforded the necessary protection and assistance to fully assume its responsibility within the Community " .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the current presidency of the European Union believes that the plan to establish a Charter of Fundamental Rights is an extremely important step in creating a Community of values which will act as a focus for taking the process of political union further .
Many people are wondering how far we can go in this process of establishing a standard set of values and principles in this way , which would guarantee every citizen within the Union a set of rights that would strengthen their sense of belonging to an area with a shared civilisation .
A question that has already been asked here today is what makes us want to join together and to transcend our enormous diversity by creating an entity which will unite us all .
This is the key question as regards European identity , and it goes to the very root of why we are also joined together here , in this great home - the European Union .
Over the decades , and having survived all kinds of traumas and crises , we have established a way of life based on the values of liberty , democracy and respect for the rule of law .
For many years , a potential model based on the culture of freedom that we enjoyed in some countries in Europe was held up to those who lived in other parts of Europe . This culture is in fact part of a tradition of tolerance which has been cultivated in this continent and which now , in turn , is at the heart of the European project itself .
The ascendancy of these ideas and the end of the totalitarian era which marked certain European societies has created a new situation to which we must respond .
In our opinion , this is a question of responsibility and also of consistency .
The enlargement of the European Union to cover new countries , which is an ethical imperative and an essential strategy for stability and peace in our continent , will unite us with states which have very diverse political cultures and which , in many cases , have young and untried institutions and structures .
Both for these states and for those among them that are fighting for fundamental principles that will structure their contemporary societies , it is becoming important for these principles to be incorporated into a body of Community legislation to which they will remain linked after accession .
Do not think , however , that this idea of a charter or a body of principles is merely a type of safeguard mechanism in the face of new Member States , that is to say a kind of defence against other countries .
This is not the case , and that is not the purpose of all this .
Recent events have demonstrated that what we hold to be stable and permanent within our own countries , within the Community of Fifteen , may , in certain circumstances , turn out to be much less helpful than we might hope in terms of addressing problems that are often quite simple , but in other cases revive old ghosts .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights is nevertheless not intended to act as a substitute for the constitutional guarantees that we all enjoy in our own countries .
We must dispose of this myth - which has been regularly used as a weapon to attack the Charter of Fundamental Rights - so that we can stop it being used as an excuse by those who seek refuge in subsidiarity in order not to shoulder their responsibilities as European citizens .
No , we intend to provide something which will bring added value , a kind of additional guarantee , which would function as an instrument of the new European citizenship .
Here , Mr President , we must overcome certain problems which the debate within the Convention is beginning to run into and which I think it will face even more frequently in the future . I would like to emphasise that in making these comments , I am speaking on behalf of the Council and not necessarily on behalf of my own country , which has adopted a rather , shall we say , ambitious position on this matter .
The first issue regards jurisdiction . It concerns the need to guarantee complete compatibility between the two relevant legal systems , which could find themselves in conflict with one another in this process .
This is a real problem and one of which we should all be aware .
We cannot run the risk that when this charter comes into force a new area of legal uncertainty will be created .
We are embarking upon an exercise designed to make our citizens ' rights more transparent - not to ensnare them in a web of legal contradictions that could prove to be a source of confusion .
This also brings us to the issue , which has surfaced once again following Amsterdam , of the Union possibly signing up to the European Convention on Human Rights .
The second issue is how we define the people this Charter is designed to protect , in other words , are we talking about those citizens who have a Community nationality , or are we aiming at those people who happen to be living in the Community area ?
This is a fundamental question .
We will have to accept the consequences whichever answer we opt for , and all the more so given that many of us genuinely feel that the institutions and the institutions alone are the real object of this new Charter .
The third question , and a crucial one , is the body of rights .
How far do we intend to go ?
Are we to be content with a body of basic principles , a kind of lowest common denominator in academic European terms , or should reach out to more ambitious territory , and deal with the modern aspects of today ' s European Union ?
It seems that today ' s public is capable of calling for an area enshrined within the Union , and covering not just their economic and social rights but also the new rights that have been presented as part of modern citizenship .
How far is the Union prepared to go ?
Lastly , my fourth question , which is perhaps the most important one .
This is a debate in which some people are clearly advocating a text which is merely a declaration of intent , a piece of political rhetoric .
But unless it is binding , will any Charter of Fundamental Rights be anything more than a mere statement of principles , without any real value ?
If we create a Charter of Fundamental Rights which is merely a declaration of intent , will we not simply be taking refuge behind an issue which may be politically correct , but which does not reflect to the essence of the European Union as it is today ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , things have moved on and we cannot ignore this . This presidency believes that this clearly justifies the in-depth work that is needed on a Charter of Fundamental Rights .
What I mean , of course , is that with the Treaty of Amsterdam we launched an ambitious project to establish a greater European area of freedom , security and justice .
At the Tampere Special European Council , the European Commission and the Member States initiated a process of improving the structures for internal security , in order to provide stability in the daily lives of the general public , by guaranteeing to effectively combat organised crime and drug trafficking and to address other public order issues .
As part of this European effort , it is becoming essential to ensure that all of this action , that is any future action that we may take in this area , relates to a very clear body of principles , capable of providing the public with clear and transparent legal protection .
This is also why we feel - and we said so in Cologne when the idea of a Charter of Fundamental Rights was approved at the European Council - that this Charter is a vital element , central to the Union ' s future .
Unless our principles are reinforced in this way , unless the Union provides itself with an ethical pillar which gives it credibility in the eyes of the general public - a pillar which , in fact can also serve as a model and a point of reference for its external relations - we run the risk of being derailed as a result of extending our policies and watering down our values .
On this subject , I should like to mention the issue of the Intergovernmental Conference .
It is obvious that the issue of incorporating the Charter of Fundamental Rights is a crucial factor for the whole credibility of the ICG .
From the outset , the Portuguese Presidency has made its attitude quite clear : it is important to ensure that the agenda of the IGC should not simply be a kind of discussion of the division and management of power in an enlarged Union .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights is , in this context , and this is how we shall view it until the end of our Presidency , a vital element in producing a more balanced result at this conference , which will in fact also cover other issues , notably the issue of defence and security .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is for all of these reasons that the Council is taking a special interest in the resolution that this Parliament has just adopted on the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and will continue to attach the greatest importance to this resolution .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission would like to begin by warmly congratulating Mr Duff and Mr Voggenhuber for the excellent report they have presented and on the fact that the report before us today emphasises something undeniable : the process of drafting the Charter of Fundamental Rights is heralding in a new era in the building of Europe , like it or not .
I am convinced that the Union will accordingly accept its responsibilities towards the citizens of Europe , and will take a political initiative with a view to addressing the future political and moral legitimacy of the European Union itself .
The goal just outlined both by Mr Duff and Mr Voggenhuber and by the representative of the Council Presidency will require us to make every effort to ensure that work in the Convention drafting the Charter of Fundamental Rights is concluded in time to be taken into consideration , both by the Intergovernmental Conference and by the Summit of Heads of State and Government at the end of this year .
The Commission would like to begin by emphasising the importance of the composition of the Convention drafting the Charter of Fundamental Rights , because for the first time , representatives of the Community institutions and of national institutions , from both the legislative and executive branches , have been brought together in a single body established by the European Council .
This composition , which I believe to be a wise choice , covering both the Community and national domains as it does , will help to strengthen the legitimacy of the draft charter in the eyes of the general public , as well as guaranteeing the success of the work currently being done .
Once again , the Commission would like to make four key points quite clear to Parliament .
The first is that in broad terms , the Commission agrees with and shares the European Parliament ' s objectives with regard to the legal force of the charter , as regards calling for it to be incorporated into the Treaties and as regards the full range of laws to be incorporated into the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
However , I think that the report before us today also emphasises that there are questions to be addressed directly to the Convention , that is questions for those drafting the Charter of Fundamental Rights . These include , for example , the issue of the list of rights to be included in the charter .
But there are other issues which go beyond the Convention ' s remit , and which are above all a matter for the Heads of State and Government meeting within the European Council , as well as for the Intergovernmental Conference itself .
The truth is that the Commission , as stated in Paragraph 14 of the resolution tabled by the European Parliament , takes the view that the legal force of the charter should be determined by the Nice European Council .
However , the Commission believes that the process of drafting the charter must yield a clear and concise text perfectly accessible to the European public , but which is also drafted in rigorous legal terms that can be accepted as legally binding .
By the same token , the Commission feels that the Union must sign the European Convention on Human Rights , and that this is not a decision that can be taken by the Convention working on the Charter of Fundamental Rights . It must be taken by the European Council , when it decides on the legal force of the charter .
The Commission advocated this as long ago as 1979 and did so again in 1990 .
The idea that the European Union itself ought to sign the European Convention is also largely shared by the European Parliament .
Although the Court of Justice of the European Communities ruled in 1996 that the Community could not sign the European Convention on Human Rights , I must emphasise that it made such a ruling because there was no legal basis in the Treaties for the Community to do so .
Now that we are revising the Treaties and at the same time a Charter of Fundamental Rights is being drafted , this is a good time to address both issues : a charter with legal force and a political decision for the Union to sign the European Convention on Human Rights .
I would also like to clearly state a second idea .
There is no inherent contradiction between the Union having a Charter of Fundamental Rights and , at the same time , signing the European Convention on Human Rights . Quite the contrary .
I would like to remind you that an extremely large majority of the political groups in the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe three weeks ago adopted a recommendation that not only recognised and applauded the European Union ' s initiative to provide itself with a Charter of Fundamental Rights , but which also supported and looked favourably on the European Union actually signing the European Convention on Human Rights .
Furthermore , I recommend that you carefully read the contribution of the observer representing the European Court of Human Rights in the Convention responsible for drafting the Union ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights .
In the statement by the Court of Human Rights itself , the Court ' s representative expresses his support for the idea that the Union should have a Charter of Fundamental Rights and , secondly , that the Union should sign the European Convention on Human Rights .
With regard to the issue of a conflict between the rulings of the Court in Strasbourg and rulings in Luxembourg , it is worth noting that today , under Community law , the Court of Justice of the European Communities always refers to the European Convention on Human Rights , to actual decisions by the European Court of Human Rights , as the source of inspiration for decisions by the Court of Justice of the European Communities on fundamental rights issues .
This means that we are not talking about a revolution , but merely about enshrining in law what is today already practised in the Court of Justice of the European Communities in its relations with the European Convention on Human Rights itself and the Strasbourg Court .
I would like to make two more observations on the list of rights .
The Commission would like to reiterate that it is favourable towards the idea of a charter encompassing both civil and political rights , as well as social rights and rights deriving from European citizenship .
However , the Commission would like to see rights drafted on the basis of the European Convention on Human Rights , whenever necessary , made innovative , to the extent that they update the 1950 drafting of the Rome Convention and respond to the new challenges of human rights as well as those resulting from information technology , bioethics , gender equality , as part of the fight against all forms of discrimination , and paying close attention to environmental protection .
Lastly , I would like to say that in our opinion , the European Charter of Fundamental Rights is not intended to replace either national constitutions or the European Convention on Human Rights .
It has an obvious target , namely the Union ' s institutions and the Member States , when they transpose the provisions of Community law into their respective national legal systems .
It is also clear who the beneficiaries of this will be . Following the Tampere decision , it is the citizens of the Union ' s Member States who will benefit from the Union ' s fundamental laws , as well as the citizens of third countries who have permanent legal residence in EU countries , where the Heads of State and Government clearly said that they should have rights and obligations as similar as possible to the rights and obligations of the citizens of Member States .
I am sure that under this action plan , with closer collaboration between the Commission and the European Parliament , we will have a legal instrument that will banish the spectre created by the fear of contradictions and the spectre of the European superstate , but which will above all ensure that there is a legal system , based on fundamental rights , for the benefit of those on whose behalf we are all here - the citizens of our Union .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Vitorino .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Additional Commission contribution to the IGC
The next item is the Commission communication " Additional Commission contribution to the IGC on institutional reform : qualified majority for taxation and social security aspects of the internal market " .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am now with you again , while the Commission continues its work and now that it has just concluded its work ( that is the least I can say ) on the matter which I wish now to present to you .
Moreover , Mr President , if I wish to do my job properly , I shall have to return to the committee at 5.45 p.m. , as scheduled , in order to present another matter which I am responsible for , to do with the Community support framework for Portugal , while at the same time I must also answer another question in the following debate .
I am not very sure , given the joint , or parallel , organisation of our work , how I shall be able to do this properly .
I shall do my best , and I am pleased to give you an explanation , keeping in mind that we shall have other opportunities , within the relevant committees , particularly the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , to go into this subject , in connection with the Intergovernmental Conference and the reform of the institutions .
I would like to offer a word of thanks to two of my fellow Commissioners , Frits Bolkestein and Anna Diamantopoulou , for the support they have given me in drawing up this text .
I should like to remind you that I announced this text on 26 January when the Commission adopted its formal opinion and its proposals for the reform of the institutions . I did mention before this House our intention to outline and clarify some aspects of this opinion at a later date .
A few days ago we did this with regard to the Union ' s system of jurisdiction , the role of the Court of Justice and the role of the Court of First Instance .
Today we are doing this with regard to an extremely important , delicate and specific subject , the scope of qualified majority voting in certain areas of taxation and social security .
Mr President , we shall continue in this way to fuel the debate on the negotiations , particularly on the matter which is of interest to Parliament , the independent European public prosecutor responsible for combating fraud , but also on an extremely important matter , the reorganisation of the Treaties .
With regard to the subject which I have to present to you today , let me remind you that the Commission opinion issued on 26 January declared this to be one of the main areas we thought should remain subject to unanimity .
We had identified five categories of exceptions to the general rule which we approved , according to which , within the Union , decisions would henceforth be taken by qualified majority vote .
We had , however , identified , for institutional reasons , with regard to extremely serious or sensitive issues , five categories of exceptions requiring unanimity .
This was one of them .
We had also excluded decisions incompatible with the objectives of the internal market or which may give rise to distortions of competition .
This is the point we have discussed today in order to complete our opinion .
Ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to remind you that the proposals which you are to receive in a few moments , or in a few hours , do not include any transfer of jurisdiction , nor do they constitute an action programme in essence .
These proposals concern the methods for decision making in matters of taxation and social security .
Having said that , I should like to clarify three misunderstandings which sometimes arise .
Firstly , the Commission is not demanding new jurisdiction for taxation and social security .
Ever since the Treaty of Rome , the Treaties have provided for Community action in both these areas .
Switching from unanimity to qualified majority is not a transfer of jurisdiction .
The Commission is keeping strictly to the areas of jurisdiction which are already available to the European Community .
Let me take VAT as an example. in this matter , we are confronted with an important part of Community legislation which has been developed since the 1970s .
The fact that the Council may henceforth update this legislation by qualified majority , in order to take account of the development of , for example , e-commerce , can certainly not be considered a transfer of jurisdiction. the jurisdiction was already in place at Community level .
It is only the method of decision making which may change .
This is the first point that I wished to make clear .
The second point I would like to make is that the Commission does not wish to impose the levelling of national tax systems or social security systems .
The matter we wish to deal with is how to maintain what already exists and share it with all the new Member States .
Let us not forget that in the exercise we are currently involved in , in these negotiations , it is a matter of knowing how the European Union will operate with 18 , 20 , 25 , 27 or even 28 Member States , in order to ensure that each of these states , the ones who are already members and the ones about to join us , may get the most out of the single market , a market whose treaties have made a driving force of the economic and social development of Europe .
It is a case , then , of introducing qualified majority where we think it necessary , and leaving unanimous decisions where they are preferable .
Finally , the Commission wishes to make it clear that this additional presentation does not encompass its entire programme for years to come in all areas .
It does not include the measures that the Commission may envisage for the future , or the basic proposals that it intends to put forward at some point .
My fellow Commissioners , Mrs Diamantopoulou and Mr Bolkestein , will inform you when the time comes regarding the various aspects of the Commission programme .
I should now like to mention the principles which oriented our approach in the document which you are to receive shortly . Let me say again , unanimity is to remain the general rule .
The Commission opinion issued on 26 January considered that , because they reflect the fundamental orientations of the national legislator in matters of economic and social policy and solidarity , taxation and social security are largely decisive in the national political choices of citizens .
The Commission therefore considers it justifiable to retain unanimity in these areas as a basic principle .
We confirm this approach .
Moreover , these national choices are generally - let me specify - generally , neutral with regard to the construction of Europe .
This is the first principle .
But this first principle gives rise to a second , which is as follows : qualified majority to enable measures to be adopted which are more directly linked to the proper operation of the internal market .
We know , and you know , that some national legislation in the field of taxation and social security may , by virtue of its content or nature , have repercussions for the operation of the internal market .
The Commission considers that the Community must be able to adopt , by qualified majority , those measures which are most directly linked to the proper operation of the internal market .
That is the second principle .
Finally , my third principle , we must in future select the best instrument to respect subsidiarity .
It may simply be a matter of coordination ; it may be a matter of establishing minimum requirements ; it may also be a matter , at a higher level , of harmonisation .
But this selection of the best instrument must be limited to that which is strictly necessary .
Generally speaking , the end goal of measures for which the transition to qualified majority is suggested would not be to harmonise the national legislative systems systematically , but simply to coordinate them .
This is in any case , ladies and gentlemen , what has been going on for almost forty years in the field of social security .
We also consider it important to introduce it to the field of taxation too .
Still , before answering your questions , I would like briefly to mention the content of the proposals as you will read them .
Regarding direct taxation , we propose the qualified majority in order to coordinate the campaign against fraud and tax evasion and in order to ensure proper handling of situations involving the legislations of several Member States .
For the remainder , unanimity shall remain the general rule .
Regarding indirect taxation , in order to combat fraud , and modernise and simplify the acquis in the light of economic developments , in order to take account of the objectives of the Treaty in environmental matters , we propose to act by qualified majority decisions .
We further propose to retain unanimity for decisions on tax rates and the points of taxation .
In short , still on the subject of taxation , in the interests of clarity and legibility we are proposing to combine the provisions for all tax measures in a single article which will be reorganised and rewritten as Article 93 . In so doing we are seeking to achieve coherence .

My fourth point , this time , regarding the coordination of legislation in matters of social security , we propose qualified majority voting in order to update and adapt the conditions intended to avoid penalising people , not just workers. in addition to workers , there are also , for example , students who move about within the Community .
We must avoid penalising them .
Finally , with regard to the minimum requirements for social security , there is one possibility that we propose to extend to social security , which already exists for other areas of social policy , which involves adopting minimum requirements by qualified majority vote .
Mr President , let me just say one final word to explain the state of mind I have continued to work in , as we had done under President Prodi in adopting our opinion on 26 January . The Commission undertook to carry out clear , proactive work .
We eliminated any ideological thinking . We wish to keep to specific facts and tangible proposals in order to avoid approaching matters with slogans or ideologically .
Let me confirm , finally , that , in addition to this extra presentation , I shall be returning to this House to give further presentations of the Commission opinion on the whole of the reform of the European institutions prior to enlargement , as we did on 26 January .
Mr President , firstly I would like to welcome the Commission 's approach in general to the IGC .
The fact that we are getting this rolling presentation of more detailed explanations of issues is very helpful .
Secondly , I agree with the Commission that this is indeed an extremely delicate issue .
Taxation and social security get to what Mrs Thatcher used to call the nooks and crannies of everyday life .
It is something that affects Member States and their people in a very sensitive way and we have to be careful before the Community moves into these fields .
From what I hear , the Commission has got it more or less right and I would like to put a couple of questions for the sake of clarity .
It is right to say where the Member States have already accepted a Community competence , in other words where we have already passed a measure , then QMV should apply to adjust that measure .
That makes absolute sense .
What I was not clear about was when he talked about other measures where it was necessary to make the single market work .
How will that be defined ?
It sounds fine but how do you define a measure that is essential to make the single market work ?
That is a matter of intense debate .
Similarly , the issue of harmonisation against coordination : one man 's coordination can be another 's harmonisation and we need clear definitions of what is coordination and what is harmonisation if this is to work .
I wish him well in this area because it is an area in which we need a breakthrough .
But it is not going to be easy to get an agreement and I would like to see the document in detail before passing judgement on what the Commissioner said this afternoon .
Thank you , Mr Martin , for your assessment .
I understand that it is related to the detailed analysis that you will make of the Commission text .
The text will , as soon as it has been adopted - as is now the case - be made available towards the end of the afternoon .
I took careful note of the reference you made to Mrs Thatcher and I appreciate the concern you feel , in the light of your own country ' s particular sensitivity in this matter , in stressing that we must adopt a pragmatic approach .
Just now , ladies and gentlemen , I expressed my concern in this document , and in the discussions we will be having , to avoid ideology , to keep to a precise approach .
This is what I said in the course of one of my presentation sessions in one of the national parliaments - your own parliament in Westminster , Mr Martin - and I think I made myself understood .
Indeed I believe that this is the right approach .
So let me repeat that our watchword was to say that qualified majority should be extended to everything that directly affected the operation of the internal market and which might compromise its proper operation in an enlarged Europe .
We have , of course , worked on the three instruments which I mentioned , coordination , minimum requirements and harmonisation , treating harmonisation as the additional stage .
Further to this general answer , with thanks for your remarks , I shall be attentive to your criticisms or your proposals when you have had time to peruse this document .
Mr President , I believe it is absolutely right to comment that we do not need additional competences where taxation is concerned , but what we do need to do , in my view , is consider how we can develop the various topics more effectively .
To quote but one example : the country of origin principle in matters of VAT .
Would it not be possible to start by making adjustments to the current VAT systems , so that harmonisation systems can be implemented more efficiently at European level ?
Or another example : double taxation , which causes so many problems .
My question is this : will the Commission ' s work programme include a schedule for this , or how do you intend to proceed ?
Thank you very much , Commissioner , for your comments .
I do not understand your assertion that there will be no transfer of powers .
If you are increasing qualified majority voting and therefore taking away the national veto , you are effectively transferring powers from the nation state to the European institutions .
I am also very uncomfortable with your statement that you would only seek harmonisation of tax in areas " linked to the single market " because we know that , if that phrase is interpreted liberally - as the European institutions are inclined to do - practically everything can be said to be linked to the single market .
Are you aware , Sir , that the leader of the British Conservative Party has said that we have reached the limits of European integration ?
Are you aware of recent public opinion surveys showing that the British people are opposed to the transfer of further powers from the nation state to Brussels , and how will you take those facts into account ?
Commissioner , I should like to pick up on a point which you made in your speech .
You said that wherever we require unanimity , we shall retain unanimity , and wherever qualified majority voting is required , we shall use qualified majority voting .
We all know of course that the European Parliament takes the clear view that qualified majority voting must apply as the rule and unanimity as the exception .
If we forego this practice , then we also forego the subsequent promotion of the European Parliament to colegislator on all future legislative issues requiring a qualified majority .
In other words , wherever we maintain unanimity , Parliament will not have the legitimate , democratic , important role which it will have in all cases requiring a qualified majority , cases which , as far as Parliament is concerned , and because of the democratic way in which it functions , should be the general rule .
Mr Rübig , in answering I shall focus on the matter of VAT .
You ask me about the Commission ' s work programme and I had said , as a precaution , that we had not discussed this matter today , that the Commission had established its work programme and that the Commissioners directly concerned would be coming to address you at the proper time .
Nonetheless , you have asked me , broadly speaking , whether the great VAT modernisation project might be adopted with your proposals by qualified majority ?
I must answer that it depends what you mean by ' great VAT modernisation project ' .
More specifically , if you are thinking of the changeover from the transitional arrangements for levying VAT to the final arrangements , which would involve changing the points of taxation , we have clearly indicated that this matter would in any case be decided by unanimous decision , and I can confirm this .
As regards modernisation of the system in the light of recent economic developments , and I am thinking in particular of all the implications of globalisation , liberalisation and e-commerce , this is a question that you should ask Mr Bolkestein .
Jointly with the Member States , we are currently identifying what should go into this package .
A meeting was held on 2 March but , frankly , I think it is rather too early to be able to give you any further details .

However , I have now spoken about updating the VAT system , which means that I can now turn to Mr Helmer and say that I am well aware that these are sensitive issues , I am well aware of the importance accorded to taxation , in the name of national sovereignty , and to the matter of voting upon taxes and , in particular , upon the rates of taxation .
After all , I did have a seat in the parliament of my own country for twenty-two years .
I should merely like to use the force of my conviction together with you , certainly , and if possible also with the negotiators and Mr Tsatsos and Mr Brok , to say to the States which are reluctant and more sensitive than others on this subject , ' Please pay careful attention before rejecting the application of qualified majority voting to proposals which the Commission has made in a reasonable manner . '


We are talking about the proper operation of the internal market , and about the success of this internal market and all the countries involved in it , because it is in the interests of all the countries of the Union .
But what will happen in a much enlarged Europe , where disparities are even greater than they are at present in social terms and budgetary matters ?
This is why we recommend an extremely thorough , and I might almost say clinical analysis of these matters , in the interests of the internal market .
Finally , I would like to thank Professor Tsatsos for having mentioned the connection between these proposals and the role of the European Parliament .
Since I have been given the opportunity , let me confirm that one of the Commission proposals is to associate codecision directly to all measures decided by qualified majority as soon as legislative measures are involved .
It is evident that in these matters affecting the internal market and its proper operation - social security or taxation - there are legitimate grounds for the European Parliament to express its opinion and adopt a position .
Professor , we shall have further opportunities to state this and to try to convince the other negotiators of this throughout the coming months .
Mr President , Commissioner Barnier , I am extremely pleased that the Commission has produced this initiative .
It is clear that there is a need for harmonisation of taxation policy within the internal market and the currency union .
Those who deny this call the future of the internal market into question .
You talked specifically about VAT but I did not hear you mention two other taxes that have long been the subject of discussion , i.e. tax on interest and company tax .
These are clearly two basic taxes that we are going to have to harmonise in some way .
I do not know if you included this under tax evasion ; it does not feature in your document at any rate .
Could you comment on this ?
Mr President , I have to say that I am most impressed by the principles which the Commissioner has set out .
If we can limit these changes to the rules on qualified majority voting in connection with the operation of the single market to minimum provisions and to practice developed by the Court of Justice , I believe , in fact , that it may well be possible to implement these changes with the approval of all the countries , which is of course incredibly important .
At the same time , I have to conclude that , if the Commission wants to adhere to these three good principles , then it must , at some point or another , disagree with the note which the Presidency has submitted .
The Presidency has , of course , tabled the proposal that qualified majority voting should also apply to those areas dealt with in Article 137 , paragraph 3 , subparagraph 3 , concerning the defence of employees ' and employers ' interests , and in Article 137 , paragraph .
3 , subparagraph 2 , concerning the cancellation of contracts of employment .
I have difficulty in seeing what the justification is for this on the basis of the three principles which have been laid down and which have been emphasised by the Commission .
In the light of this , may I conclude that the Commissioner does not wish to comply with the Presidency ' s note on these proposals ?
Commissioner , you are proceeding with the utmost caution , and that is an approach which I support .
With reference to the argument of subsidiarity , I should simply like to tell you that , in my opinion , it is also important to put forward the argument of citizenship in fiscal matters .
After fifty years of building Europe , it is unacceptable that the citizens of Europe should not be equal in the eyes of the law simply due to their being classed as resident or non-resident .
The concept of citizenship is common property , on behalf of which we must move beyond failures such as Helsinki .
I have three specific questions that I would like to ask you :
My first question is this : do you anticipate that the instrument you are proposing might be applicable to the integration of financial markets and the requisite tax regulation thereof ?
My second question is : does the instrument that you are proposing in the area of environmental taxation provide for qualified majority voting ?
My third question is : would the instrument you are proposing enable the Council to put an end , by qualified majority decision , to the tax havens which exist within the European Union ?
Thank you , Commissioner , for your statement .
I am sure that none of us here will object to fraud and tax evasion being tackled but I must say that it is necessary to maintain the confidence of citizens in the Union , and I think that many Member State governments will be wishing to look very carefully at any extension of QMV before agreeing to it .
It does strike very much at the heart of what is perceived as the national ability to conduct one 's affairs .
I am thinking in particular of things such as the withholding tax , which it would have been quite unacceptable to have subjected to a QMV regime .
I hope those points will be borne in mind when you look at the practicality of getting the package through .
We are very happy to combat fraud and tax evasion and to improve social security legislation , but there are some points where there will be difficulty in convincing all the Member States to follow .
Commissioner , I have some very simple questions for you , which require just a ' yes ' or ' no ' answer in each case .
Can you guarantee that the Commission will not seek , under any circumstances , to use qualified majority voting to impose the withholding tax ?
Can you give the same guarantee in relation to the proposed tax on aircraft fuel , which was discussed in ECOFIN this week , and can you give the same guarantee in relation to corporation tax in the European Union ?
Are there any circumstances where the Commission would seek to use qualified majority voting on any of those issues ?
Can you guarantee that the Commission will not use qualified majority voting on any of those issues ?
Mr President , I can imagine that according to some Members , the citizens are sensitive to European intervention in tax and social matters .
I can tell you that in my country , many citizens lie awake at night , worrying about the fact that Europe leaves social and tax matters well alone on account of this unanimity .
This is why I would like to direct two specific questions to the Commissioner .
First of all , citizens who are very badly affected by non-intervention are mainly those who wish to enjoy free movement and , more specifically , cross-border workers .
Dossiers concerning the coordination of social security , expansion into third countries , supplementary social security systems have all been on the Council ' s table for years , untouched .
Could the Commissioner tell me if the present issue is also affected by qualified majority voting ?
Secondly , I would like to fall in with the Members who have asked whether the packages regarding the " Prima Rollo Group " , which are on the table , would be subject to qualified majority voting , as referred to by the Commissioner .
I should like to answer a number of you collectively , particularly on what we might term the tax package .
Mr Leinen discussed this , as did Mr Baltas and , just now , Mrs Van Lancker .
Let me make one preliminary remark . The purpose of this speech is not , let me repeat , to foreshadow the conditions for the execution of the Commission ' s work programme .
In order to facilitate the task of reforming the institutions , we wish to distinguish the everyday administration of policies ( the normal work of the Commission , and we have regular meetings on the subject ) from the reform in the context of the accession of thirteen new Member States .
Obviously , the Monti package is related to the proper operation of the internal market .
This is why Mr Monti , a few months ago , and now my fellow Commissioner , Frits Bolkestein , continue to make it a political priority .
I hope that all these efforts will produce a result before the conclusion of this IGC , before the ratification which will follow the Treaty of Nice , and that we shall have this tax package at our disposal , in the interest of the proper operation of the internal market , before any amendments to the Treaty may be ratified .
Mrs Thorning-Schmidt and a number of you , including Mrs Van Lancker , mentioned the social matters which are extremely important , particularly with regard to third country nationals .
We do wish to include them as beneficiaries of social policy ( Articles 42 and 137 , which are to be subject to qualified majority voting ) .
Once again , regardless of ideological considerations , we have reordered the paragraphs of the new Article 137 in order to subject to qualified majority voting everything which affects , from our objective point of view , the proper operation of the internal market : social security and protection of workers , worker protection in the event of cancellation of the work contract , collective representation and defence of the interests of workers , including codetermination , working conditions for third country nationals legally resident on Community territory , and financial contributions for the promotion of employment and job creation without prejudice to the terms of the Social Fund .

The recent history of the development of the European Union shows that , in Maastricht , we were aware that creating the single currency would require improved coordination of social measures at European level , but , at the time , we had not yet achieved it .
In Amsterdam , as I remember specifically , since I was one of the negotiators of the Treaty almost up to the end , we expanded the definition of the objectives of social policy within the Treaty and the Community was granted its own areas of competence , complementary to those of the Member States .
In Nice , prior to the great enlargement , I would ask you , please , to see this text as anticipating events .
As we exist right now , we could continue to operate more or less and to live together , but that is not what it is all about .
We should form a Community , and I do not feel that we can subsequently come back to this sensitive issue if we do not resolve it now .
As I said , we must form a Community of 27 or 28 Member States , despite the much greater disparities .
We wish to ensure that the Community has effective means to support this restructuring at Community level .
We therefore propose that it should be possible to adopt these minimum requirements by qualified majority vote , and not by unanimity , in all the areas I have mentioned .
Finally , I should like to tell Mr Jonckheer that , for all sorts of reasons , I absolutely agree with him on the matter of citizenship .
I should like to assure him that , with regard to tax provisions in matters of the environment ( many of which are directly connected with the operation of the internal market in addition to citizens ' welfare and quality of life ) , we are well aware that these issues entail the risk of distortions of competition , which would moreover be exacerbated by enlargement , and we therefore propose that in fact all measures for taxation in matters of the environment should be decided by qualified majority .

I am aware that my answers are necessarily incomplete given the time available .
Mr Bolkestein , Mrs Diamantopoulou and myself will have the opportunity to address you again in future .
We wish to initiate this debate , and to fuel and feed it on the basis of these proposals , as I undertook , in order to facilitate to some extent , the difficult negotiations within the Intergovernmental Conference .
But , in the final analysis , as we all know , what we need is the political will .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0201 / 2000 ) . We will examine questions to the Commission .
First Part
Question No 39 by ( H-0174 / 00 ) :
Subject : Consideration of the international legal status of the waters of the Western Sahara On 4 November 1999 Mr Fischler ' s head of office wrote a letter to Mr Pierre Galland , who had taken an interest in the effects of the EU-Morocco fisheries agreements on the Western Sahara self-determination process .
Given the EU ' s support for UN resolutions on the Western Sahara and the concern generated by the ambiguous content of the letter sent to Mr Galland , does the Commission not think that , as a matter of urgency and in agreement with the Council , it should officially consult the UN Secretary-General regarding a legal definition of the Western Sahara ' s waters based on international law ?
It should be borne in mind that the territory in question is engaged in a process of self-determination and the negotiations on fisheries agreements should therefore not lead to any misunderstanding regarding the EU ' s attitude towards the territory ' s future , nor should its inhabitants ' rights be infringed .
The Commission confirms the position expressed by the chef de cabinet of the Commissioner for Agriculture and Fisheries on 11 January in response to a letter from Mr Galland on behalf of the coordination committee of the Sahrawi support organisation .
That position recalled that the fisheries agreement which expired in November 1999 applied to Morocco 's fishing zone which is defined as waters over which Morocco has sovereignty or jurisdiction .
This definition does not in any way affect the status of Western Sahara and its coastal waters .
This is a matter which falls under international law , and in particular various UN resolutions , and the responsibility of the UN Secretary-General , whose efforts to find a just , equitable and durable solution have been consistently supported by the European Union .
I would like to start by thanking the Commissioner for his kind answer , although I find it to be completely insufficient .
The letter which I referred to in my question was very unclear as to the European Commission ' s conception of the coastal waters of the Western Sahara .
However , you have expressed it with extreme clarity ? .
There is no doubt that the Kingdom of Morocco is currently occupying the Western Sahara and this territory is currently undergoing a process of self-determination .
However , according to international law , it should be considered that Morocco has control over that territory , although it in no way has sovereignty over it .
If it cannot have sovereignty over the territory , neither can it have sovereignty over its coastal waters .
This would prejudice the future of those waters , given the possibility that the planned referendum on self-determination will support the independence of that territory .
What situation would the Government of the Western Sahara then be in with regard to the waters which it would have the sovereign duty to administrate ?
I agree absolutely that we should reach a fisheries agreement with Morocco which is favourable to the interests of the European Union fishing fleet , in particular the Spanish fishing industry .
But I believe this is not contradictory , on the contrary , with a legitimate interpretation of international law which I ask to be done formally .
Does the Commission commit itself to formally consulting the Secretary-General of the United Nations ?
Yes or no , Commissioner ?
I have many regrets in life and one of them is that I am not a lawyer , so if the honourable gentleman will excuse a scriptural reference , I tip toe on these waters with some nervousness !
But I understand that international law is quite clear and that the question of territorial waters is directly related to the question of the sovereignty of a territory itself .
That is a question which is being considered at the moment in the context of the referendum and of the UN Secretary-General 's initiative .
As I am sure the honourable gentleman knows , we strongly support that initiative and if there is any way that we can assist the UN Secretary-General , then we would certainly want to do so .
That also goes , of course , for his special representative .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 40 and 113 will be taken together , at the request of the Commission .
Question No 40 by ( H-0241 / 00 ) :
Subject : Landmines In a recent statement in the UN General Assembly the Council Presidency stated that the EU remains the main contributor to de-mining programmes worldwide .
However , people in the field complain about the limited role the EU is playing and the confused nature of EU funding for de-mining .
Could the Commission provide me with a breakdown of the funding provided by the EU for all activities relating to anti-personnel mines ?
How much money goes into mine action programmes and how much into R & D in de-mining technology ?
Could the Commission draft an annual report on its APM policy to eliminate the existing lack of clarity ?
Could the Commission tell me what progress is being made with regard to introducing a regulation on anti-personnel mines , which would provide a legal base for these activities and bring them together within a single transparent framework ?
Question No 113 by ( H-0251 / 00 ) :
Subject : EU action to combat mines Will the wide range of action programmes to combat mines have to be financed solely from budget line B7-661 , which is now more justified than ever ?
What provisions will be taken to ensure that NGOs enjoy effective access to Union funding ?
With reference to the conditions making aid conditional on accession to and compliance with the Treaty of Ottawa , what criteria and procedures will be used for the implementation of EU actions to ensure that , in the field , some vulnerable communities are not victimised twice ?
I hope you will excuse me that in answering the questions together , I take slightly longer .
I am particularly pleased to have the opportunity to reply to Mr van den Bos on anti-personnel mines today .
I will also take this opportunity to respond to Madame Carlotti ' s question .
The Commissioners today adopted a communication and a draft regulation on European Union action against mines with the aim of achieving better coherence , greater effectiveness and more visibility in the very considerable activities in this area in which we are already involved .
In doing this , we are responding to and building on the initiative of Parliament to create a specific budget line for mine action .
Anti-personnel mines create appalling casualties in many of the poorest parts of the world .
But they are not only a constant and treacherous threat to life and limb .
They are obstacles to economic development and to the implementation of a range of Community programmes in support of reconstruction , rehabilitation and development .
That is why the Union is already involved extensively in mine action across the globe and why we were so active in the negotiation and conclusion of the Ottawa Convention on the prohibition and destruction of anti-personnel mines which entered into force a year ago .
Over the past eight years , European Community support for mine action has exceeded EUR 180 million .
We have intervened in all corners of the world .
We have supported action by national authorities , international organisations , and not least NGOs .
We have contributed to de-mining and mine destruction as well as to victim assistance and research into new de-mining technology .
But until now , we have not had a coherent overall approach to our mine action .
To take full advantage of the diversity of our instruments and funding mechanisms , we must make sure that we have a framework in which we can formulate the necessary horizontal guidelines and priorities in order to ensure effectiveness and consistency in what we do .
The funding of mine action from the geographic programmes and their budget lines will continue .
Mine clearance and other forms of mine action are often a preliminary step to any sensible development programme .
Therefore they should form part of national or regional reconstruction and rehabilitation plans .
The new regulation and the special budget line will support and complement the geographic line by providing the overall policy framework and by functioning as a general reserve and a source for funding for international programmes .
The resources available for EU mine actions should remain at least at the same level in real terms as we have achieved over the last few years , that is about EUR 30 million a year .
Regular programmes for mine clearance and destruction under our new policy should principally benefit countries which have subscribed to the Ottawa Convention .
But we must also be ready to provide exceptional assistance to mine victims at their homes or when they have been displaced , even when they have the misfortune to find themselves in a non-signatory country .
Finally , the European Union is recognised as one of the leading contributors to mine action within the international community .
The entry into force of the Ottawa Convention a year ago provided us with a forceful new instrument and a set of ambitious targets for the years to come .
We have signed up to the objective of eliminating all landmines worldwide in ten to fifteen years .
That will require determination , consistency and perseverance .
With the funding and coordinating mechanism under the new regulation and communication , we are well placed to take on that challenge .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his reply which I find extremely satisfactory .
It indicates the Commission ' s high level of commitment to this issue .
I only have one additional question , which is whether the Commissioner would submit to us an annual report on the Commission ' s actions in this field ?
- The new regulation provides for the Commission to submit an annual report to the Council and to Parliament on its actions the previous year by 30 April of the following year .
A breakdown of the mine-action funding per country by the European Union from 1992 to 1999 , as well as for projects in the last year , is attached to the communication and we will continue to provide that sort of financial information as well .
Can I say how grateful we are to the honourable Member , and to other members of this House , for their encouragement and support and for the leadership they have shown in this issue , which is of enormous importance as , alas , we continue to discover .
Thank you very much , Commissioner , for this comprehensive answer .
Might I ask you to clarify one point ?
If the justification for budget line B7-661 were increased , what measures could be taken in order guarantee effective NGO access to Union funding ?
One thing that we obviously need to do is to advertise very clearly what is available .
We have taken a website that will enable us , I hope , to inform the NGO community and others more clearly about what is available .
We intend establishing a multi-annual work plan .
We will refer to that on our website .
I hope , therefore , that NGOs will feel involved in what we are doing .
We depend a great deal on their active support and understanding .
I should like to mention one other area which is of concern to them , even though they are not always so directly involved in it , namely the whole area of research , on which we spent EUR 17 million out of more than EUR 40 million in the last full year in 1998 .
But overall I can assure the honourable Member that we will be involving NGOs as much as possible .
They have a great deal to contribute to this important work .
Question No 41 by ( H-0212 / 00 ) :
Subject : ' Dialogue on Europe ' initiative The President of the Commission intends to launch this initiative on 8 March 2000 .
The Commission 's communication on the subject implies that the intention is to explain the consequences of the IGC 2000 to the public opinion of the Fifteen .
Since this initiative falls under the PRINCE programme for providing information to the citizens of Europe , does the Commission intend to include the Charter of Fundamental Rights as one of the main themes of this initiative ?
Mr President , in agreement with the European Parliament , the Commission has taken the initiative of instigating what we are calling the ' Dialogue on Europe ' which is intended to raise awareness regarding the issues involved in institutional reform in the context of the enlargement of the Union .
The Commission considers that all the institutional matters liable to have a connection with the work of the Intergovernmental Conference should in fact come within the scope of the debate which has been initiated .
This also , therefore , applies , and this is my answer to your question , to the matter of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of citizens .
In complete agreement with Mr Vitorino , I can assure you of the Commission ' s determination , in close collaboration with Parliament and your representatives , both at the Intergovernmental Conference and in the convention for negotiation of the charter , to promote dialogue on all current thinking on the future of the Union .
This dialogue on Europe will be developed with all national and regional institutions , but also with opinion formers , the media and organisations in civil society .
This is completely justified given the actual purpose of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Mr President , I would first of all like to thank the Commission for its reply .
I am satisfied with it for two reasons .
Firstly , it links the Charter of Fundamental Rights with the Intergovernmental Conference , which is the political objective of this Parliament expressed in the report by Messrs Duff and Voggenhuber .
Secondly , because it is going to include it within this campaign .
Furthermore , I was very pleased with Mr Lamy ' s reply - which was inevitable , given that Mr Lamy knows these issues very well - concerning the decentralisation of the information campaign .
I believe that this is an important objective because , if we want to reach the people , we have no choice but to go to where they are and , therefore , the decentralisation of the campaign is a priority task .
As on other occasions , such as the Intergovernmental Conference of 1996 , this Parliament must offer the Commission its support in order to monitor information activities .
I am pleased to hear the Commissioner 's comments on the Charter .
I would like to push him to give details about the nature of the campaign .
Last Wednesday we had a very successful launch of the European information campaign involving Commissioners and Members of the European Parliament .
I would like the Commissioner to reassure me that , when the campaign is decentralised , information offices in the Member States will involve Members of the European Parliament in the information campaign as a matter of course .
After all , it is the MEPs who are supposed to represent the citizens .
We are at least as well-placed as the Commission to engage in that dialogue with the citizens .
The answer to Mr Martin ' s question is ' yes ' , and I can include Mr Barnier and Mr Vitorino in that .

The Commission does intend to involve Members of the European Parliament at grass roots level in the Dialogue on Europe initiative .
Indeed , no later than this evening there is to be a coordination meeting between the Commission administration and that of the European Parliament in order to determine the practicalities of the approach to be adopted .
The simple answer , Mr President , is ' yes ' .
Question No 42 by ( H-0215 / 00 ) :
Subject : Environmental threats facing Europe The recent leak of cyanogen into the river Danube has revealed the existence of hidden environmental threats which could imperil the whole of Europe , while a report by the European Environment Agency predicts that during the first decade of the 21st century the production of paper , glass and plastic waste will increase by 40 to 60 % , emissions of cadmium and mercury will rise by 20 to 30 % , and waste management will place a strain on the environment with heavy metals , gases and other toxic substances combining to create the ' greenhouse effect ' and generate air and water pollution .
On the basis of the information provided in the report , how does the Commission intend to react , what policies will it pursue and what measures will it take to safeguard Europe from the environmental threats it faces ?
Mr Fischler will reply on behalf of Mrs Wallström .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for his answer .
Of course , the European Parliament appreciates the Commission ' s efforts to promote Community policy on environmental protection and , especially , its efforts to incorporate the environmental dimension into all policies , i.e. mainstreaming .
However , since you mention the problem of the pollution of the Danube , I should like to ask a supplementary question : you are obviously well aware of the recent accusations by the Romanian Minister for the Environment , Mrs Lilian Mara , who maintains , and many of us share this view , that the ecological damage caused to the Danube by the NATO bombings is far worse than the damage caused by the recent leak of cyanogen .
As we all know , the bombings destroyed bridges , oil refineries and chemical factories , which damaged the ecology of all the areas along the Danube .
I would like to hear your views on the matter , Commissioner : do you intend to take action for the economic , ecological and cultural restoration of the areas which were damaged ?
Mr President , Mrs Karamanou , firstly , as I am sure you are aware , my colleague Mrs Wallström paid a visit to Romania and Hungary and was able to get an idea of the scale of the disaster at first hand .
She also reached agreement with the competent ministers of these countries on setting up a task force to handle these issues .
The key issues to be addressed by this international task force have already been established .
As far as the financial aspect is concerned , the Commission is in the process of looking into which funds could be made available for an emergency aid package .
In addition , the PHARE and ISPA programmes are of course available in principle , which brings us to the question - to be answered in conjunction with the States concerned - as to how much money could be employed from these two funds .
Commissioner , I am convinced that the Committee on Budgets will be delighted to read this information as soon as they are provided with it .
Question No 43 by ( H-0242 / 00 ) :
Subject : Concern over the memorandum on nuclear safety at the Kozloduy plant in Bulgaria Despite the constructive step represented by the signing of the memorandum between the Commission and Bulgaria on nuclear safety at the Kozloduy plant and the opening of accession negotiations with Bulgaria , there is legitimate concern over the agreed procedure for decommissioning the four unsafe reactors at Kozloduy , as the procedure is not in line with the Union 's position or Bulgaria 's commitments in the agreement it has signed with the Nuclear Safety Account .
What decisions have been taken regarding the definitive closure of units 1 and 2 by the end of 2002 and what steps have been taken to conclude an agreement on the definitive closure of units 3 and 4 earlier than 2006 , as called for in the agreed memorandum ?
Will the Commission use the opportunities and means available to it in the context of its partnership with Bulgaria to bring about the definitive closure of units 1 to 4 at Kozloduy , and in what way ?
Is the setting of a date for the decommissioning of reactors 3 and 4 - as referred to in a letter of 17 February from the President of the Commission , Professor Prodi , to the author of this question - a condition of granting financial aid to Bulgaria ?
What was the outcome of the meeting held on 4 February between the Commission and the Bulgarian authorities and what is the joint working party working towards ?
Second Part
Commissioner , thank you for your answer .
However , I also have a number of queries because , during your hearing before Parliament ' s Committee on the Environment and here today , you talked of decommissioning nuclear reactors which , as we all know , are extremely dangerous , as quickly as possible .
And not just these reactors , but also the reactors in Slovakia and Lithuania .
Of course , I appreciate that there are certain difficulties involved in closing them down immediately , but is that the earliest possible date ?
I just wonder because , although you set a specific date for units 1 and 2 , saying that they would be closed down before the end of 2002 - which in my view is quite a long way off because , as you know , we are afraid of an accident in any one of the four reactors , which would be disastrous both for Bulgaria and the Bulgarian people , as well as for neighbouring Greece and Europe too , since , as you know , these installations are very dangerous - what is stopping you from setting a date for the closure of reactors 3 and 4 ? And why are you keeping them open until 2006 , or even longer as you will no doubt turn round and tell us in the future ?
Mr Trakatellis , opinion is extremely divided as to how unsafe the reactors 3 and 4 actually are .
I was very surprised to learn that I was openly criticised by some Member States following the conclusion of the agreement in Bulgaria , because this agreement was said to be too hard on Bulgaria and to go far too far , and because safety standards at these power stations were said not to be as bad as the Commission was claiming .
Now it is up to me who I believe .
I believe the reports that were compiled at the outset , and I still maintain that we must abide by the principle of risk avoidance in this case .
On the other hand , I must ask you to bear in mind that the decision on whether to go for the nuclear option in energy production is the sovereign right of each and every State .
The Commission is no more able than Parliament or the Council to forbid any country in the world from using nuclear energy , or to force them to shut down reactors without delay .
All we can do is put a package together , as we have done in Lithuania and Slovakia , and , just recently in Bulgaria too , that enables the country in question to deal with the economic and financial consequences of shutdown operations of this kind , and their impact on society and infrastructure .
It must be left to the country concerned to determine how to implement the objectives set as quickly as possible .
All I can say is that this is what proved to be attainable during negotiations , which I headed myself part of the time .
If we had tried to achieve more , then we would have failed to reach agreement and ended up with no shutdown dates whatsoever .
You can always do one of two things in such cases : either accept the attainable or maintain a very intransigent attitude , which may , at the end of the day , salve your conscience on the environmental policy front , but will leave you empty-handed .
As a matter of fact , I believe we achieved a particularly positive outcome in Bulgaria , in view of the extremely difficult situation there .
I would like to point something else out to you , somewhat circuitously , but you will soon see why .
As far as the shutdown dates for blocks 3and 4 are concerned , it says in the text that this will be decided on in 2002 .
So that is quite some way off the shutdown date we had mind .
As the Commission understands it , this shutdown will take place by latest - and I repeat , latest - 2006 , which is also stated in the text .
The fact that the Bulgarian government signed this text without questioning this , has a certain political significance .
That is all I can say on the matter , but I think you know what I am driving at .
Questions to Mr Lamy
Question No 44 by ( H-0206 / 00 ) :
Subject : Trade preference for least developed countries Precisely what damage in specific European sectors is Commissioner Lamy seeking to avoid in his commitment to waive all EU quotas and export tariffs on ' essentially ' all products and services from the world ' s least developed countries ( LLDCs ) rather than waiving them in their entirety ?
As LLDCs account for less than 0.5 % of world trade , will he reconsider his reservations in this respect ?
What timetable does he propose for the implementation of this measure ?
The European Community initiative intended to offer free access to the markets of industrialised countries , and the most advanced developing countries , to essentially all products of the least developed countries , was launched as part of the process which led to the Seattle Conference .
The initiative was drawn up immediately after the Singapore Conference , when the Council invited the Commission to make proposals in favour of the least developed countries , both for immediate action and additional medium-term action .
In its conclusions dating from June 1997 , the Council made reference to the expression : ' essentially all the products of LLDCs ' .
Regarding the immediate measures , in the GSP regulation at the end of 1998 , the Community established , for all least developed countries , a system equivalent to that of the Lomé Convention , as the Council had requested .
In 1999 , as part of the post-Lomé negotiations , the Council , among other things , specified what it intended to do regarding market access for LLDCs and decided that the Community should , in the year 2000 , commence a process which , by the end of the multilateral trade negotiations and by the year 2005 at the latest , will enable free access for essentially all LLDC products , based on the trade system existing under the Lomé Convention .
The difference between all and essentially all products affects , as we well know , a number of specific agricultural products .
This is the mandate which the Commission was given and therefore , naturally , we must respect it .
My own services are currently preparing proposals which will be presented to the Council when they are completely ready .
At the same time , the Community , in its ' least developed countries ' initiative within the framework of the WTO , seeks to associate other commercial partners to this market opening policy of ours , which would consist of exempting essentially all the products of LLDCs from duties and quotas .
This initiative is intended , if I may say so , to kick-start our own proposal which , combined with what we can achieve with other parties , would enable the least developed countries to sell their products , in virtually total freedom , on a large number of markets other than our own .
I am thinking particularly of the markets of the developed countries : the United States , Japan , Australia , and New Zealand .
I am also thinking , possibly , of a number of emerging countries , already industrialised .
At the moment I am making great efforts to move forward this initiative which we have included in the rescue package which we are working on in Geneva .
That is the state of play at the present time .
As the questioner indicates , we should ask whether the restriction associated with the expression ' essentially all products ' may be retained for very much longer as soon as we consider granting these countries total access to our markets .
As far as the Community is concerned , following the signature of a new agreement with the ACP countries which no longer includes the obligation to offer equal access for all ACP countries , we could in fact start thinking about more extensive liberalisation of access to our markets in favour of the least developed countries .
I should not , however , wish to start thinking about this until our present initiative regarding essentially all products has reached a sufficiently advanced and credible stage , following talks with our commercial partners , to be able to move on to the next stage .
I should specify , finally , that access to the market is not the only requirement for countries that , occasionally , do not have a sufficient export capacity for internal reasons , be they distribution , logistical or transportation capacities .
It is therefore necessary to look at what is termed ' capacity building ' , i.e. technical assistance measures to be implemented in order to ensure that this access is tangible and not just theoretical .
This is the response I wished to give to this question which looks to the future .
I am grateful to Commissioner Lamy for his answer , as far as it went .
I certainly agree with what he said in the last part of his answer about the need for capacity-building in the least developed countries as well as , perhaps the need for asymmetrical measures , resulting in a certain level of protection for their markets that we do not seek to enjoy in return .
But my main concern in asking the question - and I do not feel this has been fully dealt with - is over this matter of exactly what " essential products " means .
Commissioner Lamy talks about certain agricultural products , but it has been precisely the protectionism of the common agricultural policy that has most offended developing countries and which has held back development for many of those countries in terms of agricultural production .
What more specific comments can he make about which sectors and which products will be concerned , and for how long ?
That is the sort of message we want to hear .
I wonder whether it would not be a better step forward , in terms both of winning the confidence of the developing countries and of acting as an example to other trading partners , for us , as Europe , to say : " now is the time ; we are going to offer this now .
We do not want to wait for five years ; let others follow our example " .
There are two parts to my answer to this question .
Firstly , I think I gave a clear answer to your question when I said that the difference between ' all ' and ' essentially all ' affected only a really very limited number of agricultural products .
I am thinking particularly of sugar which can effectively constitute an additional resource for several of these countries .
You know that the Community , and in this case the Commission , has considered the idea of a complete review of conditions in the sugar industry .
These are matters to which we shall no doubt return . But that is something that only we need concern ourselves with .
Regarding the more comprehensive initiative that we have undertaken , I would like to try to convince you that at this stage it is more important , as far as these least developed countries are concerned , that the Community should persuade the United States , Japan and a number of developed countries to follow our initiative because , in terms of real export capacity , this initiative opens up a market to them which is , roughly , twice or three times larger than our own .
In terms of our priorities , then , Mr Howitt , and in terms of efficiency , I feel that , given the choice of either eliminating the difference between ' essentially all ' and ' all ' , a problem which I acknowledge must be solved one day , and considerably increasing the size of the market opened for ' essentially all ' products , duty free and quota free , we are on the right track if we work , in the first place , on expanding the market .
Thereafter we will be able to start to think , as you wish , on the approach we might adopt with the Member States , who sometimes show some reluctance , and a European Parliament which will also have to be convinced , when the time comes , that we should go on to the second stage .
Question No 45 by ( H-0208 / 00 ) :
Subject : China 's accession to the WTO In keeping with the Commission 's opinion on the IGC , would the Commission agree that the accession of China to the WTO represents a sufficiently important agreement to justify invoking the assent procedure of this Parliament ?
Will the Commission agree to submit the agreement on China 's WTO accession to this Parliament 's assent even if the IGC has not yet been concluded ?
Mr Clegg , the Commission acknowledges that the agreement on China ' s accession to the WTO is an extremely important decision .
It is , moreover , exactly the type of agreement which would be submitted to Parliament ' s assent if the Commission ' s proposals to the Intergovernmental Conference were accepted by the Member States .
The fact remains , however , that at this stage they are no more than proposals and the Commission cannot contravene the regulations in force under the Treaty establishing the Communities , nor can it anticipate the decisions which the Member States will take at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Let me remind Mr Clegg , if necessary , that , in consideration of its service-related aspects , the agreement on China ' s accession would in any case be subject , in principle , to the consultation procedure envisaged under Article 300 .
This would mean that Parliament should have the opportunity , pursuant to Article 300 , to declare its opinion on this agreement .
Obviously , in the normal course of things , it is up to the Council to consult the European Parliament .
This is the legal and institutional answer to your question , Mr Clegg .
With regard to more practical aspects , let me restate my determination to try to find some way , together with the European Parliament , to have Parliament play an active part in these negotiations .
I have said this on several occasions , and I feel it is important in terms of relations between the Commission and Parliament and also in terms of the effectiveness and capacity of the negotiator in this type of case .
I am therefore perfectly willing , as always , to discuss this matter in somewhat greater depth with the relevant parliamentary committee .
Thank you very much for that reply .
Let me reiterate my appreciation that the Commission and Parliament are , for the first time , speaking with one voice on changes to Parliament 's role in important trade agreements .
I just want to ask you a non-legal and institutional question : if we look , for instance , at the decision which was taken to submit the Uruguay Round conclusions to the assent of this Parliament , there were some legal questions relating to the institutional and budgetary implications of the Agreement , but the decision was fundamentally a political recognition that this was an agreement of such importance that the strict boundaries of what was then Article 113 could , so to speak , be overstepped , thus allowing the Agreement to be submitted to Parliament 's assent .
My own view is that the accession of China to the WTO , whilst perhaps not quite as eye-catching as a multilateral agreement , is just as important to the future global trade regime , and that a similarly political position might therefore be taken by both Parliament and the Commission .
I would urge you to do so .
I would ask you what you think we could do together to promote this type of action .
Like you , Mr Clegg , I believe that China ' s accession to the WTO , whenever it takes place , is a matter of crucial importance .
Having said that , I feel that the comparison you make with the Uruguay Round is not totally justified .
At the time of the Uruguay Round , particularly when the mechanism for the settlement of disputes was being set in place , there was a institutional shift in the international legal order which justified assent , specifically with regard to an unequivocal reading of the Treaties .
As regards China , legally speaking this is the procedure for the accession of a country to the WTO , and it is proceeding according to a relatively appropriate and familiar route , one which , for the time being , has not given rise to any disputes .
I suppose , then , that the Council will be reluctant to require assent because the Council is not in the habit of going much further than is required by the Treaties in terms of consultation with Parliament .
The important thing , from our mutual point of view , is that , when the time comes , we can , either in committee or in plenary session , have a debate on the conditions which , I hope , will be those we have agreed with the People ' s Republic of China , and that this will be completely transparent .
Personally , I am perfectly willing to take part in this . I know , when the time comes , that questions of a rather more political nature will be asked .
That is perfectly normal , I feel , and I look forward to it .
Mr President , Commissioner , I suppose our parliamentary members should be satisfied with the consultation procedure at this stage , although I myself agree with Mr Clegg that it should have been possible - to touch briefly on legal matters - to invoke the assent procedure by now .
My question , however , concerns concrete matters and the substance of this agreement .
When talks between the EU and China commenced , we MEPs were told that there would really not be any great problems , as approximately 80 % of the EU objectives were contained in the outcome of the negotiations between the United States and China .
Now , however , it would seem that the rest , the remaining 20 % , are so problematic , that time is passing by and the talks have already ended in deadlock on many occasions .
I would like to ask whether it is a question of the Chinese not being prepared to accord us the same negotiating status as they did the US representatives or why we should not be able to achieve consensus on the remaining - the tail end - 20 % .
This is a good question . I remember using this expression , contrasting 80 % and 20 % .
It was intended to offer an explanation of the fact that a good deal of the work has already been done because , thanks to the most favoured nation clause , we inherit everything that the previous negotiator has achieved .
That still leaves 20 % , however , and for a very simple reason .
In bilateral negotiations , each party tries to focus on the areas where he is least competitive , since it is understood that the rest will be left to the others .
That is why , in a number of subject areas , the United States have signed a bilateral agreement with the Chinese which is of benefit to us but which , on several points , is not as favourable as if we had negotiated it ourselves .
That is the first reason .
What we have to do as far as possible , and I am making every effort to achieve this , is to ensure that what is generally a good deal between the Americans and the Chinese is also a good deal for Europeans .
So we are left with this remaining 20 % , and it is only 20 % , but , as you know , in negotiations the last few percentage points make all the difference , and this is where we are now .
There is another , more technical reason , involving some subtle points .
Although the designations are fairly similar , there may be very different tariff items .
Let me take the example of spirits .
Bourbon and gin are not handled in the same way as whisky and cognac .
Even though all spirits are ostensibly the same , there are cases where tariff items are not the same .
These are more technical considerations , but they show that all these aspects must be looked into and negotiated in detail .
It is not quite over yet .
I mentioned that I would be going to Beijing during the last week in March in order to attempt to resolve what I feel are real difficulties in these negotiations .
These concern the political section with regard to which the Chinese authorities have expressed a number of reservations .
My mandate at present is to attempt to overcome these reservations , and I shall make every effort to do so .
Thank you very much , Mr Lamy .
The time allotted to Mr Lamy has fully elapsed .
Question No 46 will therefore be replied to in writing .
Questions to Mr Fischler
Since the author is not present , Question No 47 lapses .
Question No 48 by ( H-0173 / 00 ) :
Subject : Cost to agriculture of EU enlargement On the basis of the most recent studies and estimates , what cost will the forthcoming enlargement of the European Union place on agriculture and what will be the impact thereof ?
Although I have signed this question , as an elected representative , I must say that I am not really its author .
As the Commissioner can imagine , the question is posed by farmers , in the European countryside , who are wondering , at this stage , whether they , their income and their Community aid , will have to pay the price of enlargement .
The Commissioner has not been explicit .
However , his services , the Commission , and some of us MEPs , all know that there are studies and estimates covering this issue .
The Commissioner is , at times , the master of side-stepping the question , with all the skill of a bullfighter , and failing to provide an answer .
However , the Commission , if it wants the countryside to support its positions , must clear the fog , and be explicit .
Therefore , I would ask the Commission , if it does not want to talk of its data and studies - which exist - at least to calm this real fear of the farmers and reply as to whether the cost of enlargement will be met at the expense of the farmers ' income and , furthermore , whether he can guarantee that it will not have an effect on Community aid .
Mr President , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , I believe it should not come as news to you that farmers ' revenue does not just consist of subsidies , rather they must earn most of it on the market .
Therefore the comparison you have just drawn is inappropriate to my mind .
Secondly , these are two completely different questions .
In your question , which I answered , you asked what enlargement will cost .
The question as to whether the Common Agricultural Policy will be amended in the course of enlargement , is an entirely different matter .
All I can tell you today is that the CAP that was adopted in Berlin for the next seven years , still holds good .
In addition , a financial perspective was adopted in Berlin , i.e. we decided how much money we could spend .
You raised the idea of studies : the first studies were made several years back , and we sent these to Parliament .
We are in the process of carrying out new studies and as soon as we have the results , we will be more than happy to make them available to you .
Question No 49 by ( H-0187 / 00 ) :
Subject : Community initiative LEADER 2000-2006 The Community initiative LEADER was planned as a pilot programme to enable the Commission to introduce innovations in development practices in sensitive agricultural regions .
According to the conclusions of the first two programmes , LEADER has operated differently in each country , depending on the varying extent to which state and regional bodies have been involved .
Since state and local administrations are preparing their proposals for the 2000-2006 period , will the Commission say what has been the take-up rate of the first two programmes by Greece , and how does it rate the success of the two previous LEADER programmes in the case of Greece ?
Question No 50 by ( H-0190 / 00 ) :
Subject : Balance between fisheries agreements in the North and South The Fisheries Council of October 1997 analysed the imbalance between fisheries agreements in the North and South , given that shipowners fishing under agreements with countries of the South are increasingly required to co-finance the agreements , which are free of charge for shipowners in the case of the North .
It also analysed the fact that agreements with northern countries are under-utilised , despite the interest shown by other Member States in making use of these fishing opportunities .
The Council therefore asked the Commission to consider decisions allowing quotas to be transferred from one Member State to another and to examine by what means the financial costs of agreements should be ' equitably shared , on a non-discriminatory basis , ' between the Community and shipowners .
Can the Commission say what studies it has carried out on the possibility of transferring quotas and what the outcome was ?
What decisions have been taken to balance the financial cost of agreements with the North and South ?
What is the Commission 's assessment of the above-mentioned imbalances between these two types of agreement ?
I have asked a question because I previously consulted a series of decisions taken by the Council of Ministers in 1997 on certain guidelines for fisheries agreements and , as far as I can see , they have not yet been complied with in the European Union .
I do not wish to have an argument with the Commissioner , but I simply wish to know whether , following the guidelines laid down at the time , on the next renewal of the fisheries agreement with Greenland - where we all know that fishing quotas are not used or are under-used - the fleets which do not have access at the moment to this agreement , will be offered the possibility of using those quotas which are not used or which are under-used .
I actually referred to this at the beginning of my answer .
It is certainly a problem , for although the Commission shares your view in principle , Mrs Fraga Estévez , that under-utilised quotas should be transferable , we still lack the necessary arrangements for doing so , because the Member States will not give their consent .
You mentioned the Council .
That is why we must overcome this problem .
But I do not believe that we can solve the problem by paying fees for fishing quotas under a new agreement with Greenland .
That is no way to solve the problem .
We must draw a distinction .
" Yes " to sharing out non-utilised quotas and a mechanism for doing so , but we should not start introducing licence fees where we do not have to pay for the quotas .
There is little point in doing that in our view .
Question No 51 by ( H-0195 / 00 ) :
Subject : Compatibility of special export aid with Community law Following the devastation caused by the storm which struck western Europe in December 1999 , the forestry sector is in a particularly serious plight .
In response to the urgent need for stocks of fallen timber to be disposed of , the French Government has , amongst other measures , decided to grant 50 French francs per tonne in order to subsidise the transportation of timber intended for export to other EU Member States .
Under the Community 's competition rules ( and , in particular , the Community preference requirement ) , such aid is rightly prohibited except when it is intended to remedy a situation which may be regarded as exceptional .
Hence , Article 92 ( 2 ) ( b ) of the EC Treaty states that ' aid to make good the damage caused by natural disasters or exceptional occurrences ' shall be compatible with the common market .
Is the export aid which has been made available by the French Government compatible with Article 92 ?
If so , could such aid be extended to cover timber exports to third countries ?
If so , what are the criteria used by the Commission in order to determine the amount of timber eligible for such aid ? For how long will the aid be available and what is the cost involved ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a few days ago , the Commission had dealings with the French Government over the state aid that France wishes to grant the forestry industry for the purpose of repairing the tremendous damage caused by the storms of December last year .
The notification from the French Government includes a measure intended to facilitate the transportation of wood from the affected regions .
However , the notifications make no reference whatsoever to where the wood is destined for , in particular , they do not indicate whether it is to be exported to other Member States or to third countries .
Understandably , therefore , the Commission has asked the French Government for additional information .
Since the Commission has not yet received all the additional information it requested , it is not in a position at this stage to give a definite answer to the question as to whether such measures are compatible with Community law .
I should like to ask the Commissioner to clarify his answer .
Obviously such aid is already officially provided for in the countries of the Community .
Instead , the question concerns countries outside the territory of the Community , and may be expressed thus : will we , or will we not , have the possibility of obtaining a derogation in terms of the tonnage , costs or time limits with regard to wood exports , in consideration of the quite exceptional nature of this storm ?
My question clearly concerned exports outside the common market , outside the Union .
So as to make it absolutely clear : wood is an industrial commodity under Community law and it stands to reason that export aid , of the kind for which provision is made in agriculture , for example , should not be permitted under any circumstances where the export of wood is concerned .
We can only apply existing Community law in such cases .
Provision is made , under Article 87 of this Community law , for damage - and I repeat , damage - which is the direct consequence of a disaster , to be made good .
In other words , firstly there has to be evidence of damage , and secondly , a direct link has to be established .
You must also consider the following : if we were to entertain such an idea - after all , the price of wood is not just down in the French forestry industry , for the disaster has brought it down throughout the Community - then every other Member State would be within their rights to come and ask us to approve export aid .
This would be a clear distortion of the market .
Question No 52 by ( H-0202 / 00 ) :
Subject : Preventive distillation - increasing the quotas The Commission has opened preventive distillation at 10 million hectolitres for the 1999 / 2000 wine year .
The notification periods have been extended .
According to available information , the quotas in some Member States have already been exceeded .
Does the Commission feel able to increase the preventive distillation volume from 10 to 15 million hectolitres and to comply with special requests from certain Member States ( e.g. Germany ) for a higher volume ?
Yes , Mr President , the Commission received the communications from the Member States with the applications for preventive distillation , on 24 February .
On the same day , a proposal was submitted to the administrative committee for wine marketing to the effect that the preventive distillation volume should be increased from 10 to 12 million hectolitres .
In fact this proposal met with the approval of a majority of the management committee .
That being the case , it will be possible to fulfil all the contracts concluded in the Member States .
The only exception in this respect is Spain , where , in view of the high number of applications , the take-up rate , if I can put it this way , was 98 % rather than 100 % .
This meant that Germany ' s original allocation of 148 000 hectolitres could be increased to 468 000 hectolitres .
That is what the contracts concluded in Germany amounted to in total .
The amended regulation on preventive distillation will be published in the Official Journal in the near future and will be made retrospective to 24 February .
Commissioner , in view of the enormous wine harvest , which yielded 140 million hectolitres , and in view of the wine market regulations that are to enter into force this year , has the Commission had any more thoughts - this being the last year when we will have this option - about using obligatory distillation as a means of relieving pressure on the market , or does the Commission not take the view that this would be the subject of a further instrument ?
Mr President , Mr Langen , firstly , if we can give consideration to all the applications submitted by Germany and nearly all the applications submitted by the other Member States regardless , then this would suggest to me to that the balance has largely been restored to the wine market .
I take the view - particularly in the light of the fact that we want to achieve a significant reduction in obligatory distillation - that we should not create the impression that we are now back-pedalling .
Thank you very much , Mr Fischler .
Questions Nos 53 to 60 will be replied to in writing .
Questions to Mrs de Palacio
Question No 61 by ( H-0156 / 00 ) :
Subject : Reopening of the railway line between Oloron and Canfranc The Commission has told the Spanish press ( 9 February 2000 , EFE press agency ) that it is aware of the need for a railway in the Pyrenees and that the Spanish Government wishes to see the Oloron-Canfranc ( Vallée d 'Aspe ) railway line reopened on the French side .
The Commission has also confirmed that if the two countries in question agree , it will support the inclusion of the line in the trans-European rail network when the guidelines for that network are next revised .
However , should the Commission not take the first step and encourage the two Member States concerned to apply the policy of shifting traffic from road to rail and persuade them to seek an agreement on the reopening of the line ?
What immediate action does the Commission intend to take in order to expedite such an agreement ?
With regard to your question on the reopening of the railway line between Oloron and Canfranc , we must study the land-based and sea-based alternatives which may help to alleviate the situation of traffic congestion at the two eastern and western extremes of the Pyrenees .
In fact , these two extremes of the Pyrenees are suffering from saturation since they are the only real land links of any capacity between the Iberian Peninsula and the rest of the European continent .
We in the Commission have expressed our support for the analysis of a new rail crossing in the central part of the Pyrenees and we have supported various initiatives in the region through the granting of subsidies for different studies analysing the possibilities .
Furthermore , as you know very well , Spain and France have set up a monitoring centre for traffic in the Pyrenees in order to seek the most suitable solution to the problem facing them .
In any event , the final decision in this respect is the responsibility of the Member States .
With regard to the Trans-European Networks we cannot include anything which is not supported by the Member States .
Meanwhile , I would like to tell you that the Commission will take account of the results of the work of the monitoring centre for traffic in the Pyrenees when reviewing the Trans-European Network and we hope that this review will be ready before August .
Thank you , Commissioner , but what I would have liked to know is what the Commission is actually doing to ensure , specifically , that the Member States construct a proper railroad in the Somport Valley .
Today , the works on the road route are already under way .
We are right , therefore , to ask questions about the future .
Personally , I am afraid that provision will be made for a little tourist train just to , perhaps , keep the ecologists happy , and that will be all .
Studies have been carried out , however , such as the Gretab study , to cite but one , which show that in fact the railroad route via the Somport-Pau-Canfranc-Jaca pass would enable a volume of heavy goods traffic equal to that currently using the Mont Blanc Tunnel .
What we would in fact like to see , therefore , and what I would have liked to know , following Mr Lamoureux ' s proposals within the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , to the effect that the European Union was really going to prioritise rail , is what do you actually propose to do in real terms in order to ensure that Member States also make this a priority ?
Mrs Isler Béguin , I would like to say that we are trying to convince the Member States on the basis of the conversations and opinions which they express to us on the different issues and the studies which they send us .
However , as you well know , we clearly have problems with one of the countries involved with regard to the railway between Oloron and Canfranc .
There is no doubt that crossing the great mountain ranges of the European Union is a problem .
For this reason , in 1999 , the Commission subsidised a study observing the flow of through land goods and interchanges in sensitive areas , namely the Pyrenees and the Alps , because they have similar problems .
Furthermore , we intend to produce a communication on this subject - on the Pyrenees and the Alps - before the end of the year , proposing concrete solutions .
However , the concrete solutions must clearly be accepted by the Member States .
The conclusions of this study that we are carrying out will also be taken into account in the revision of the guidelines on the Trans-European Networks and , furthermore , the INTERREG II programme has also financed general studies on the suitability and viability of a future central crossing in the Pyrenees , adapted to heavy goods transport .
Having said all this , and as I have made very clear in some of my appearances , I believe that we must make an enormous effort to develop goods transport by rail .
We face a level of demand which is clearly not going to be resolved by means of an increase in roads and we need to study a better use of the rail infrastructures , which is an alternative which is not only much more appropriate from an environmental point of view , but furthermore , they are an alternative which allow us to use some existing infrastructures .
In other cases , such as the specific case we are talking about , we must put the infrastructures in order , but of course we are prepared to speak to the Member States - and we are doing so - to see if we can persuade the two countries involved to finally accept a project of this type which will allow for a central crossing in the Pyrenees .
Madam Vice-President of the Commission , I would like to know firstly whether it is true that one country is causing difficulties , secondly , which country this is and thirdly , what type of difficulty it is causing .
I would also like to know , since you have mentioned it , when the Commission communication on the report on the Alps and the Pyrenees will be made available ?
Since you have asked , the state which has opposed it until now is France .
It is clearly the countries of the Iberian peninsular which have the greatest interest here .
This does not only affect Spain , as the bordering country , but it also affects road traffic to Portugal , given that the Pyrenees pose such an obstacle .
The communication on sensitive areas basically tackles the issue of how to combine two elements : the environmental demands of the Pyrenees and the Alps and the need to facilitate the movement of goods and people .
As I have already said , we intend to present the communication before the end of the year , and we also intend to analyse , not only the particular issues affecting the sensitive areas , but also the possible concrete solutions in the field of more suitable infrastructures , funding , use and safety .
Safety aspects are also important , given the use of extensive tunnels .
Question No 62 by ( H-0163 / 00 ) :
Subject : Blood / alcohol limits for drivers Since 1988 , the Commission has been advocating Community legislation concerning maximum blood alcohol limits for drivers .
In 1997 , the Commission stated that it was necessary , to reduce the number of road casualties and increase road safety .
At present , the limits vary widely within Europe , from 0.8 in some countries down to 0.2 in Sweden .
Sweden ' s experience has been very encouraging ; a low limit has increased road safety .
The EU is at present adopting legislation to promote mobility and road safety .
Why is the Commission reluctant to submit a proposal concerning maximum blood / alcohol limits for drivers , even though this would reduce the number of road deaths ?
As everyone knows , the excessive consumption of alcohol is the cause of many of our road accidents .
The European Union has supported , and the Commission considers important , a limitation on general levels of alcohol in the blood , specifically to guarantee that appropriate limits are not exceeded .
The Commission considers the suitable limit to be , in general , around 0.5 mg per mille , which in certain cases , new drivers , for example , could possibly be reduced , at least for a specific time period , and thereby make it even more restrictive .
I must point out however that , although the Commission intends to express this type of guideline , it will do so by means of a recommendation .
Given the principle of subsidiarity , we do not consider it appropriate for us to propose a directive setting this limit on alcohol levels , but rather we should produce a recommendation to the Member States on this issue .
Alcohol constitutes the second greatest danger to health in the EU according to a report on health produced by a high-level working party .
Alcohol is also the greatest contributory cause of accidents on European roads and a very important contributory cause of the most serious accidents .
I find it extremely commendable that the Commission too considers that blood alcohol levels must be kept low among drivers , for safety and alcohol do not go together .
We know from the experience of countries which have low upper limits that this is a way of reducing the number of deaths and serious accidents .
I should also like to put a following question to the Commissioner . Why should it be impossible to issue a directive covering this area when the majority of countries now have an upper limit of 0.5 per mille and only a few have a limit in excess of 0.5 per mille ?
As you have pointed out very well , the number of deaths on European roads caused by excessive alcohol consumption has risen to 10 000 .
Most countries apply a level of 0.5 mg .
The 0.8 mg limit is only in force in Ireland , Luxembourg , Italy and the United Kingdom , and only Sweden has a limit below 0.5 mg .
We are going to present a communication on road safety , which you in this Parliament will receive shortly , and recommend a maximum limit of 0.5 mg .
We consider that legislation should be reserved for cases where it is absolutely necessary to legislate .
Since there are very few states with a limit greater than 0.5 mg , we consider that his recommendation will be sufficient to persuade the relevant states to harmonise their own laws .
We believe that subsidiarity and the recommendation will be sufficient for the alcohol level in the various states to be set at 0.5 mg or less than 0.5 mg .
As we are talking about blood-alcohol levels I wonder if the Commissioner , in her recommendation is also going to be looking at the broader issue of drugs ?
This is an important issue that is often left out when we are talking about driving .
Will this ever be put into the recommendation ?
The problem is obviously that drugs produce states which clearly limit drivers ' response capacities .
The problem with drugs is that , while in some countries their consumption is subject to criminal prosecution , in others it is not and , therefore , given this differing treatment , we cannot , at least for the moment , make any progress in this field .
However , this issue worries me , as it worries you , and I would like to see whether , within the new fields of action and specifically within the new areas of communitised policies , we can make more progress in this respect .
Lastly , I must add that , in the case of drugs , control is more difficult , since the control systems are not so automatic nor so immediate as they are in the case of alcohol levels .
Question No 63 by ( H-0164 / 00 ) :
Subject : Verona-Munich railway link The project for a new Verona-Munich through railway line has been under discussion for years .
Traffic on the Verona-Munich route is increasing , yet only one third of the capacity of the existing railway line is being used .
The way to reduce the air and noise pollution caused by long-distance lorries would be to switch all heavy through traffic from road to rail .
To achieve this , motorway tolls for goods vehicles must be increased and a fast and efficient railway line must be provided .
If a new line is built , care must be taken to select the option that has the least damaging impact on the environment .
As the infrastructure is supposed to last for hundreds of years , it is essential to find the best solution .
It appears that the Commission favours the Brenner base tunnel project .
Why does the Commission not intend to reconsider the alternative ATT3 project put forward by the engineers Trojer and Kauer ?
Has the Commission studied the potential environmental impact of the various projects for a Verona-Munich rail link ?
Can the Commission finance a further study of the question of the transport of goods via the Brenner ?
The project for a railway line between Munich and Verona , agreed by the Italian , Austrian and German Governments in 1994 , is included in the Trans-European Transport Network and foresees the construction of a high speed network with combined goods transport .
In principle , it largely follows the route of the current conventional line .
The proposal of the ATT 3 project , which is well known to the Commission , deviates from the route established in the guidelines of the Trans-European Network .
I must say that the preparatory and construction measures have always been based on the agreed lines , and that to deviate from that initial approach would cause a significant delay in the development of the project itself .
As well as the ATT 3 proposal , which is of interest to the honourable Member , the Commission has received another series of alternative proposals and considers , based on technical , economic and environmental evaluations by the Member States involved , that the so-called base tunnel , work on which is under way , offers a series of advantages when compared to other alternative routes .
I must also say that a significant proportion of the economic aid already granted is directly related to the environmental aspects of the project , and that we are going to continue to support the Brenner project economically and especially the technical design of the section of the base tunnel which is about to be started .
Obviously , in any of these activities , the environmental impact , bearing in mind that this is a sensitive area , as I pointed out a moment ago when speaking of the Pyrenees problem , is one of the key elements in determining the specific project and in monitoring the carrying out of that project .
Mr President , one thing I would just ask you to bear in mind about this , is that owing to the noise pollution , a high-speed train has quite an impact along those stretches of the track that do not run under the mountain of course , and I would ask the Commissioner to consider this : why should it not be possible to make the breakthrough we need , and which will solve the problem between Munich and Verona in the long-term , with something along the lines of the Brenner base tunnel ?
After all , it would not be too difficult to transfer all the through heavy goods traffic to rail and bring it through the mountain , thereby solving the problem once and for all .
All we need is a ban on transiting heavy goods traffic .
This would relieve pressure on the Brenner motorway , which is under great strain and also causing a few problems of a socio-political nature , and would also free it up for private vehicles and local heavy goods traffic .
Amongst other things , in order to ban heavy transport , the first thing we need is an alternative route for heavy transport .
The truth is that there is currently no such alternative . Therefore , the first thing we have to do is suitably develop the corresponding routes .
Of course , all of this is linked to our society and its development .
However , I believe that we cannot limit that development ; which does not mean that we do not have to make every possible effort to ensure that this development respects the environment as far as possible , with the least possible effect on that environment , especially in sensitive areas such as the Alps and the Pyrenees .
Mr President , I would expressly like to thank the Commissioner for the great sensitivity she has shown so far in her handling of the Brenner traffic and Brenner base tunnel issues , and I particularly appreciate the fact that mention has repeatedly been made of the need to give special consideration to the environmental implications .
I would point out that the alternative project ATT3 - and I would like to thank Commissioner Kinnock and the chairman , Mr Coleman , for their efforts here - has been examined closely and in great detail by the Commission over the past two years , and I have also received a written report on this .
I would just like to add that the question from Mr Messner goes like this : " in the event that a new installation is to be built , the project that is the most and least environmentally friendly is to be examined " .
It is completely beyond me as to why anyone should ask the Commission to make sure that something is as harmful to the environment as it possibly could be .
This is all about people living in a sensitive area who must be protected .
The fact that this request came from the Greens makes it all the more baffling , and it should be thrown out for this reason .
The Brenner project is one of 14 projects involving trans-European transport connections and , of course , the Commission will continue to support this project , although , at the end of the day , it is the Member States which must develop it .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 64 to 114 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Commission .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.25 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Eco-label
The next item is the recommendation for second reading on behalf of the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on a revised Community eco-label award scheme ( C5-0223 / 1999 - 1996 / 0312 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , as you just said , this is the second reading for the directive on the awarding of the eco-label .
The European eco-label is , it has to be said , a product of the internal market .
Its function , partly in response to the increasing flow of products across borders , is to label products and services which have a high level of environmental compatibility .
Its function , on the one hand , is to provide information to consumers from one country to the next and , on the other , to increase awareness within industry and among citizens to recognise and promote environmental issues .
And this is of major importance when it comes to the daily shopping trip .
I am of the opinion that the meaningfulness of a European label which is tailored to the European internal market is beyond dispute .
However , it is often a long road from the conception of a good idea to its practical implementation .
This is precisely the case with the eco-label whose main claim to fame at present is , unfortunately , its virtual anonymity in most States .
I think that only a very small minority of citizens have ever actually seen it and for this reason my report has paid greatest attention to the wholly inadequate preparations for the label .
What are the weaknesses in the current eco-label regulation which have given rise to today ' s unsatisfactory situation ?
I think that a key problem lies in the cost structure of the label .
The test procedures which companies and their products must go through in order to obtain the label are long and costly .
We are therefore advocating that the stipulation of testing requirements should look to keep test costs to an absolute minimum , although this must obviously not be misinterpreted as a qualitative watering down of testing requirements .
As well as the cost of test procedures , the on-going fees which must be paid to the European eco-label system are also highly significant .
Here , too , we envisage a reduction in costs for SMEs , firms in developing countries and enterprises involved in other aspects of European or international environmental legislation .
In this regard , I should cite , for example , EMAS and ISO 14001 .
In addition to a reduction in costs for certain enterprises , the report also envisages a maximum fee .
In this we are following the example of almost all the national labelling systems , which also have this ceiling .
The purpose of this approach is to make the labelling system equally attractive to large consumer goods manufacturers and service providers .
Let me make something perfectly clear at this point : this is not a present to the large multinationals , as is being mooted in some quarters , but an important step towards the label exerting a wide influence in the long term .
We must also clearly understand that without a certain amount of financial impetus for the European label we will not make any headway .
In my opinion , we should take on the responsibility for this financing .
Another important point in this second reading is the regulation of the relationship between the national eco-label and the European equivalent .
At first reading we were still advocating the gradual abolition of national labels in favour of the European eco-label ; it is not without good reason that we have abandoned this position .
In some States national labels are well established and enjoy public recognition .
This is the case , for example , as regards the Nordic Swan in Scandinavia and the Blue Angel in Germany .
In my estimation it would be nonsensical and contrary to the spirit of subsidiarity to abolish these proven labels in favour of an as yet unestablished European label .
Our approach should be different .
We must ensure that the co-existence of national and European labels is coordinated and in this regard the working plan provided for in the common position , which we have supplemented in various respects , but which I think will meet with approval , is extremely important .
The eco-label regulation treads the fine line between economic and ecological interests , one group wanting above all to enforce stringent environmental requirements , the other with an eye on the marketing aspect of the label .
Both groups , however , have one thing in common : they want the eco-label to succeed .
I believe that the regulation which we are considering today has found a solid compromise between the interests of all the groups involved and I am convinced that the constructive proposals of our House will also be acceptable to the Council and make for a highly successful European eco-label .
Mr President , Commissioner , a speaker in this House yesterday expressed the view that economic globalisation is not an incontrovertible necessity but the evil outworking of a few multinationals .
Whilst I found this observation quite persuasive , it is , of course , dangerous and misleading because nothing which we are currently doing in Europe in terms of the economy or the environment can be seen in isolation from potential global developments .
And it goes without saying that this also applies to the awarding of an environmental label in the European Union .
Take the failed WTO negotiations in Seattle , which have opened our eyes as to the difficulty Europe faces in making itself heard by third countries when it comes to its progressive social and environmental standards .
If we re-commit today to awarding a European environmental label , we must also consider that this will send a clear signal to third countries that it will be present on our products in developing countries and , of course , that others can and will follow suit .

The environmental label must and will signal to third countries a whole range of important environmental concepts : that adverse effects on the environment can be reduced in the manufacture of certain product groups ; that common goals for environmentally friendly consumption should be promoted ; and that the relevant international standards must be observed .
Economic globalisation has already made it possible for developing countries to share in the prosperity of rich countries and will continue to do so in the future .
However , one thing must be made clear from the outset , and the common position before us does just that : the same rules must apply for all states .
If the production plants in a country are required to meet the criteria for the environmental label , then this applies to all the production plants where the product in question is manufactured .
If we can achieve this , then we will have globalised an important environmental principle .
Mr President , we have not yet given up on the goal of a common European label , at least that is my interpretation of the common position .
The eco-label may have suffered thus far from a lack of acceptance , but a working plan which allows for coordination with the national labels can only increase acceptance .
Our proposal in committee to automatically award the eco-label to products and services which already carry national labels and which satisfy the requirements of the European label did not , unfortunately , achieve a majority .
It would have afforded the opportunity to disseminate the European label even more quickly and effectively .
An important issue is the involvement of non-governmental organisations and associations .
It is essential that expert opinion and protection of consumer interests have some influence on the awarding process .
This can only benefit the status and merit of what the label stands for in terms of ecology and the consumer .
The aim of our amendments is to increase the participation of associations .
There is much to be said on the question of fees .
We need to introduce a system which covers the costs and it is therefore not right at this stage to fix maximum fees , which would seem premature until such time as we know the actual costs involved .
In this regard I would disagree with Mr Schnellhardt because it seems to me that even though the well-known national labels do give rise to costs , suppliers are still happy to acquire them .
It is right , however , that there should be a cost reduction for SMEs and for products from developing countries .
Overall , we must succeed in establishing the European label in Member States which do not have their own label .
If the common label has a function at present , it is that of filling the environmental label gaps in Europe .
The path which we are taking is the correct one , but a recognised common European label is not yet in sight and a major effort is required in this area .
Mr President , the present proposal reinforces , improves upon and tightens up on the voluntary eco-labelling system which has existed in the EU since 1992 and which has not , unfortunately , been as successful as had been hoped .
We know from the Nordic Swan and the German Blue Angel that the eco-labelling of products is an extremely significant and powerful tool for getting consumers to change their purchasing behaviour and to shop in an environmentally friendly way .
That is , of course , what we all want , namely to be able to shop in an environmentally friendly way and so influence producers and the development of society in ways which favour ecologically more sustainable products and services .
I think that the Council ' s position is fairly commendable , and I am also satisfied with the amendments from the committee and from Mr Schnellhardt .

I consider , however , that the proposal needs to be reinforced in certain ways , above all when it comes to the role played by consumer and environmental groups and the co-existence of different eco-labelling systems .
Those who argue the case for having only the one eco-labelling system are making a big mistake , I believe .
I am totally convinced that , wherever there are well-functioning eco-labelling systems , it will be possible also to introduce the EU flower that much more easily and more quickly .
It is about getting the consumer to look for and to choose eco-labelled products .
Once purchasing behaviour has been altered , it is extremely simple .
The key to success lies , to a very large degree , in the credibility of the environmental and consumer groups and in the good opinion in which these are held .
If these groups are involved in the right way , eco-labelling will also develop very much more quickly .
If you would allow me to make a point of order ...
Mr President , the proposal we are now debating for a revised Community programme for awarding the eco-label has been significantly amended since the Commission ' s original proposal .
It has also been altered a great deal since its first reading by the European Parliament .
Happily , all these changes are , on the whole , improvements .
Those of us in the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left believe that we have obtained a relatively good hearing for the views we already held at the first reading .
For us , the following principles were important when we assessed the proposal in the course of the journey . First of all , this common eco-label should not replace or get in the way of national eco-labels which are , in fact , at present functioning significantly better than the EU flower symbol when one considers both the number of labelled products and the extent to which consumers are familiar with the various labels .
It is therefore especially important that the idea of prohibiting national eco-labels has been abandoned .
I also believe it is important to realise that there is nothing to prevent the existence of parallel eco-labels .
In Scandinavia , which perhaps has what is at present the most efficient eco-labelling system , there are now already a number of eco-labels complementing , and operating fairly well alongside , each other .
Secondly , we want the environmental movement to have a decisive influence over both the awarding of labels and the criteria for receiving them .
Our experience shows that the labels would , in that way , be given greater credibility .
Moreover , this system functions excellently where it has been introduced .
We are therefore especially pleased that the idea of a more commercial form of organisation has been abandoned .
I also think it is good that the idea of a graded eco-label has been done away with .
It is easier just to have the picture of a flower .
A graded system , like the one that existed originally , would probably cause more hassle than it would be worth in terms of additional information provided .
We are also pleased that the proposal is to cover the service sector , too .
All in all , we think that the common position and the amendments which have been submitted , including the amendments from the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , make this into quite a good report .
Mr President , whilst recently at my sister-in-law 's house , I noticed that she had a container of " eco-friendly " washing-up liquid .
When I congratulated her on this , she looked rather guilty and admitted that the green bottle now contained normal detergent , as the alternative product was not only more expensive but needed four times as much and even then it did not get the dishes clean ; by refilling the container , she could both do the washing up effectively and impress eco-warrior friends .
The moral of this story is , of course , that to compete in the mainstream market , eco-products must give a performance close to their alternatives .
Only then can these products move out of the niche market they already have and into the mainstream .
The eco-label should not be associated with mediocrity .
The German Blue Angel and the Nordic Swan have led the way in eco-labelling .
To scrap these successful schemes now would be to throw away the baby with the bath water .
In the long term , I can see the merits of the single European eco-label , but this must not be imposed on those with existing schemes .
A single scheme has advantages for business : for example , only one registration fee and inspection , standardised packaging , and advantages for consumers who will not be confused by a plethora of labels .
Eco-labelling is moving on from forest products and detergents to computers and household appliances , but why stop there ?
Services such as tourism and clean taxes could register .
In addition , groups of similar small business could possibly cooperate and register together .
In the United Kingdom , we have a flourishing ethical financial services sector , offering savings and pensions which invest from a green perspective .
These should not only qualify for an eco-label , but be allowed to sell their products without hindrance throughout the EU in a single financial services market .
Mr President , first of all , I wish , of course , to thank the European Parliament ' s Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , in particular the two rapporteurs , Mr Schnellhardt and Mr Poggiolini , for the very constructive work which has been carried out in reviewing the regulation on eco-labelling .

The proposal for a revised Community programme for awarding the eco-label is mainly aimed at making the programme more effective and more open and at improving the methods used .
It ought to make the programme more attractive to manufacturers , distributors and consumers .
In particular , the proposal accords greater responsibility to the bodies responsible for eco-labelling and to various interest groups when it comes to establishing ecological criteria .
The Commission considers that these objectives will be fulfilled thanks to cooperation with , and interest on the part of , the European Parliament and the Council .
I believe that the relationship between the Community ' s eco-labelling programme and the national eco-labelling programmes is better and more clearly defined in the current proposal .
The proposal also reinforces the interested parties ' role and participation .
This applies , in particular , to various interest groups and to the environmental bodies dedicated to eco-labelling .
Their participation is crucial if the present voluntary instrument is to be favoured and made more widely available in the correct way .
It is one of the few European instruments which will , in fact , be able to play a key role in supporting sustainable consumption .
With regard to the amendments tabled by the European Parliament , the Commission considers that these have helped improve the exposition of the regulation .
With regard to Amendments Nos 1 , 4 and 8 , which propose active participation on the part of environmental and consumer organisations , the Commission shares the view that their support and participation is crucial if eco-labelling is to be balanced and credible .
We are therefore able to accept these amendments .
With regard to Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 7 , which relate to certain aspects of cooperation and coordination with national eco-labelling programmes , the Commission is convinced that common supporting activities are important , particularly with a view to making the Community ' s eco-labelling better known .
We are therefore able to approve these amendments , too .
Amendment No 5 proposes four ways of making the fee structure more flexible and easier for those who apply to be accepted .
The Commission supports this overarching objective .
After all , eco-labelling is , of course , voluntary , and the fees ought not to be so high that those who make the most effort in the interests of the environment are prevented from applying for the eco-label .
Amendment No 6 concerns fee reductions for small and medium-sized companies , as well as developing countries , and emphasises that these should be appreciable .
The Commission is able to support this amendment , too .
To summarise , the Commission is therefore able to approve all the amendments .
Mr President , I wanted earlier on , as I concluded my previous speech , to make a point of order to which I should like to alert the President and the Bureau .
Before the vote tomorrow , it needs to be made clear that certain amendments to the present report have not been translated .
They are only to be found in English .
This applies , for example , to Amendments 7 and 8 .
These are only available in English , which is totally unacceptable .
If we are to be able to vote on this report , these amendments need at least to be read out before they are voted on .
That was the first point .
The second concerns , for example , the work programme for environmental strategy ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Thank you very much for pointing out the position regarding amendments .
The services are looking at this and I hope that they will be ready in time for tomorrow .
We cannot allow the debate to continue because we are running out of time .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your contribution .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Incineration of waste
The next item is the recommendation for a second reading on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the incineration of waste ( C5-0274 / 1999 - 1998 / 0289 ( COD ) ) .
On Amendments Nos 36 and 37 , which have been distributed , I am shown as the joint mover of the motion .
I discovered this yesterday evening and notified DG1 of the fact this morning .
DG1 acknowledged that a mistake had been made by the translation service .
I then asked for this to be corrected .
DG1 refused , saying that they did not have the time .
I should like to say that I think this is completely unacceptable .
They have had more than 12 hours in which to correct the amendments concerned .
I feel very put out that these have been made publicly available with wrong information about who the movers of the motion are .
It is a question , then , of Amendments Nos 36 and 37 , of which I am not the joint mover of the motion .
Thank you very much for pointing that out .
We will try and make sure it is corrected by tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I would like to thank the Members for their fruitful cooperation .
As a result of this , we have been able to table various amendments in a joint effort and reach agreement on a number of issues .
This is illustrated by the compromise we reached on the scope of the directive .
I would also like to thank the European Commission for providing the information and technical advice , which was extremely helpful .
In a civilised society , it is to be expected that waste should be processed in an effective and environmentally responsible manner .
In the European Community , this will increasingly be done by incinerating waste and recycling energy .
This process will obviously need to be closely monitored for emissions of dangerous substances .
Once we have reached a point where , in order to counter the adverse effects on the environment , dangerous and organic waste , in particular , is no longer dumped , incineration should then inevitably deliver environmental benefits .
By tightening up emission standards , a balance was struck at first reading between what is viable over a period of about five to seven years and what is necessary from an environmental point of view .
The emission values currently proposed by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection are a reasonable compromise .
It should , however , be noted that stricter requirements are already in place in a number of Member States .
It is one thing to prescribe sound environmental standards but quite another to comply with these .
Compliance requires adequate control which , in turn , requires proper monitoring .
Just imagine a situation in which we laid down excellent standards for emissions of dangerous substances such as dioxins but , on the other hand , left the way open for exemptions from all kinds of monitoring obligations .
We would then run the risk of not , on balance , making any progress , and the quality of air would not improve .
In addition , we also need to avoid a situation where it becomes clear there are long-term health risks for a reason which may not be immediately obvious , namely that the emission of harmful substances is not measured .
We cannot justify the occurrence of illnesses , such as cancer or blood diseases , which we have not prevented because there was no obligation to measure the emission of harmful substances by incineration plants .
Mr Florenz was among those who were right to point out that clear measuring regulations are vital .
I expect , therefore , that we will be joining forces in order to put a sound monitoring process in place .
As far as the scope of the directive is concerned , I am pleased to say that , thanks to good mutual cooperation , we have reached an acceptable wording .
However , we need to bear in mind that , with this draft , we have deviated a long way from the first reading , in view of the fact that only untreated timber was then regarded as an acceptable exception .
Regarding the definition of coincineration plant , it is unfortunate that we were unable to reach agreement on this beforehand .
After many discussions involving various Members and the European Commission , a simple solution , which may well be acceptable , has been found in the form of Amendment No 43 .
If waste were used as a replacement raw material , such as in the recycling of glass , the relevant process would fall outside the scope of the directive .
If , on the other hand , only part of the waste were to be used as a replacement raw material , then this process would fall within the directive ' s scope .
As for the recycling of energy , I would like to point out that , in November of last year , the European Parliament adopted a resolution on the integration of environmental concerns into energy policy , in which it was requested that special attention be given to the application and development of the best methods for energy recycling .
Consequently , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has made a recommendation that energy recycling by means of combined electricity / heat production should also apply to the incineration of waste .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has asked for ammonia levels to be measured .
It is wrong , however , that the standards for ammonia should not apply to all installations .
Accordingly , I have , for reasons of consistency , proposed an ammonia standard for cement kilns and for ordinary waste incinerators .
As far as the continuous sampling of dioxins is concerned , this appears to be quite feasible .
Belgium has started to use such a measuring technique in the wake of its dioxin crisis .
A cumulative sample is taken for a one-month period .
After this period , this sample is measured and the result gives a good indication of the levels of dioxin emitted during that month .
Needless to say , this is a more effective monitoring method than the random measurement method used twice a year .
According to experts , the costs are not higher since the measurement of cumulative samples is far cheaper .
As such , the cost of the equipment for continuous sampling is recouped within the space of a few years .
At first reading , considerable improvements were made to the Commission proposal thanks to a great deal of support .
It was at that stage that expectations were raised amongst the citizens .
I strongly urge MEPs to meet these expectations .
A consistent approach taken by the European Parliament will benefit our credibility amongst the citizens , especially those citizens living in the vicinity of plants which incinerate or co-incinerate waste .
Mr President , Commissioner , we feel that this directive is far from satisfactory because it involves a combination of two texts , one on the incineration of dangerous waste and the other on the incineration of non-dangerous waste .
This raises problems for us at several phases of the incineration process : the reception , processing and handling of the waste .
One might well ask what was the point of combining these two matters .
We can find the answer in Mr Blokland ' s report , which is violently opposed to the coincineration industry .
Paradoxically , however , by the same token , the rapporteur is in favour of mixing dangerous and non-dangerous waste .
What is the advantage of this for the environment ?
Our Group has no wish to favour either type of industry , since both are extremely useful to waste management in Europe .
The practices of each Member State must be taken into consideration , while maintaining the existing industrial balance and investigating how the environment can be better protected .
This is what the common position proposes .
Priority must be given to the emission limits for the most harmful substances , i.e. NOx , dioxins and furanes .
Moreover , the common position suggests an NOx limit value for the incineration of dangerous waste for the year 2007 . Such a thing does not yet currently exist .
As regards dioxins and furanes , the limit values have now been made mandatory for all types of waste .
Until now , they applied only to non-dangerous waste .
It is therefore unfortunate that the Blokland report is putting unrealistic solutions forward when it is known that a good many directives on waste management are not yet applied or are not properly applied by Member States .
If one wishes to go too far , one becomes counter-productive .
It is completely unrealistic to wish to review the limit values of this directive every three years , if one considers the considerable investment that the industry would have to make .
What the industry needs is legal certainty and reasonable time periods .
The real problem is that in Europe we do not have a proper definition of what waste is , resulting in ongoing confusion when we have to revise a text on waste or to present new proposals .
Commissioner , waste management in Europe must undergo complete reform as a matter of urgency .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Blokland on this report .
We know that waste incineration is a very difficult and highly technical area , but I think that a creditable piece of work has been done in connection with this report .
Unlike Mrs Grossetête , I think that the common position and Mr Blokland ' s report will , as a matter of fact , make a significant environmental contribution in connection with waste incineration , whether we are talking about hazardous or non-hazardous waste .
I believe that we are , in this way , obtaining a good tool for preventing and limiting environmental damage in connection with waste incineration and for preventing and limiting the associated risks to human health .
Moreover , there are also some good resources which are being put to use .
I shall certainly support the demand that proper waste planning be carried out , with waste being duly sorted , so that we have a situation in which waste incineration is linked to the EU ' s combined waste legislation , with the incineration problem correctly placed in the waste hierarchy .
I also think it is good that we should now be told very precisely which plants are covered by these rules and also which types of waste are thus exempt from them .
Regarding the very difficult question of defining coincineration plant , including cement factories - in connection with the handling of which there has been some quite aggressive lobbying - I want to say that I think we can support Amendment No 43 , which I think defines the common position well .
Finally , there is the absolutely crucial point about establishing emission limits in relation to air and water - whether we are talking about heavy metals or dust , ammonia , dioxin , sulphur dioxide or other hazardous substances .
I think that defensible levels have been identified in this connection , and a reasonable balance has been struck between incineration plants proper and the combined plants .
It is a balance that I hope will be maintained , including during the vote tomorrow here in the plenary sitting .
Again in contrast to Mrs Grossetête , I want , moreover , to say that the levels set here for emissions are realistic . They are technologically feasible and they are , in actual fact , already being applied in a number of the Member States .
The existing plants which do not at present fulfil the requirements are also to be given a good few years in which to be adapted to the new requirements laid down here .
I hope therefore that , by means of the vote tomorrow , we can make our contribution to solving the health and environmental problems involved in waste incineration so that the enormous quantities of waste which we produce every single day do not cause more serious health problems or greater damage to the environment than is absolutely necessary .
Mr President , Mr Blokland has carried out an enormous task .
This subject is incredibly involved .
Moreover , the lobbyists have been something else .
I should never have believed that there were so many of them concerned about waste in Europe .
You might have thought it was gold rather than waste they were talking about .
One never knows , but it perhaps bodes well for the future that a recycling industry is developing which possesses such competence and power in terms of financial resources and personnel .
Obviously , the EU must create a sustainable system for protecting air , land and water .
This is a common commitment and a common responsibility .
It clearly ought , too , to be regulated at European Union level .
But is this the right level at which to produce such very detailed technical descriptions as this Directive is attempting to produce ?
Ought it not , rather , to be the case that decisions should be made on permitted emission levels for various substances , on the measurement systems and on how the measurements are to be carried out and that , subsequently , the principle of subsidiarity should be applied ?
It is true that , when it comes to the ways in which waste is dealt with and is co-incinerated using large quantities of biomass fuels , there are really quite enormous differences between northern Scandinavia ( where the transport routes are also long ) and the densely populated areas of Central Europe where the problem is , quite literally , more one of waste incineration and of refuse collection and disposal than of , for example , generating combined power and heat .
I should like us at some point , but not now , to debate the opportunities for creating framework legislation in this area .

Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Mr Blokland on this report which will set Europe-wide standards for incineration , including for the first time emission standards for dioxins and furanes ; this should lead to more competition between different methods of waste disposal , and as a result help bring to an end the transport of hazardous waste across Europe in search of the cheapest waste operators .
With the predicted increase in incineration , it is vital that overall EU legislation on waste disposal and on air quality is consistent and comprehensive .
We must look at the whole hierarchy .
Incineration may increase as stricter controls are put on landfill , but it does not go hand in hand with recycling and environmentally friendly waste-disposal methods .
Building new incinerators is a costly and long-term venture which in turn has to have a long-term return for the investors , so it would be in their interests for waste to continue to be burned .
This means that there is a danger of over capacity which will lead to encouraging incineration for reasons of profit , rather than encouraging the reduction , recycling and safe treatment of waste , which is our goal .
This Parliament must protect the health and quality of life of the people that we represent .
There is no safe threshold for dioxin emissions and more research is being done on the effects of micro-particles on human health and the environment .
So we have to ensure that there is frequent testing and monitoring , that regular and detailed information is made available to the public , and that real action is taken against breaches of the rules .
Measuring emissions twice a year may give an early indication of what is happening in an incineration plant and in the air that the local community is breathing .
Measuring once every two years would not do that .
So we must set the highest possible standards and not make exceptions which will weaken this very important legislation .
Mr President , you cannot dispose of waste by dumping it in the sea , shooting it into space , or by simply incinerating it .
It has a habit of reappearing , often in a more harmful form .
Incineration can be the cause of illnesses , air pollution , climatic change and a rise in the sea level .
A great deal of waste is incinerated these days , but not , in fact , by these expensive installations equipped with flue-gas cleaning devices .
These installations are not being brought up to date .
In fact , they are closed down if it appears that it is cheaper to co-incinerate waste in the cement industry and in electricity plants .
This is why it is important that incineration should cost the same across the board and meet the same high environmental requirements .
It is a fact that left and right do not often see eye to eye on many issues - rightly and understandably so - both within and outside this Parliament , as they represent opposing interests and visions of groups in our society .
This issue , however , should form an exception .
Anyone , rich or poor , must be able to breathe , remain healthy and keep their feet dry .
Only a reckless short-term vision and the pursuit of quick profits can explain why attempts are still being made to weaken this directive .
Amendments of this kind reduce the directive to rules for those who would poison us and threaten the world with another flood .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left therefore supports the proposals made by Mr Blokland and hopes that destructive amendments will be withdrawn or rejected .
Mr President , waste management is now central to achieving the highest standards of environmental protection .
Regrettably , our consumer society is contributing to an increasing volume of domestic waste and there is also growing concern in relation to industrial waste .
Thankfully there is now an awareness among citizens of the importance of protecting the natural environment , and in my view the social and economic climate is conducive to achieving this objective .
In previous debates I referred to the need to reduce waste : here the manufacturers of food and consumer goods have an important role to play , particularly in relation to packaging in its various forms and the importance of using products compatible with recycling , which is of course my preferred option .
We are all conscious of the need to reduce the volume of waste now disposed of in landfill sites and every effort must be made to find more environmentally friendly alternatives .
In my view , we will not be able in the foreseeable future to totally eliminate landfill sites but we must not only reduce , on an ongoing basis , the volume of material going to landfill but must also be more selective as regards the materials disposed of .
While incineration is getting a lot of adverse publicity , and recent planning decisions in Ireland have certainly raised the crucial question of the location of incinerators , it is difficult to envisage a complete programme of waste disposal without incineration , particularly in relation to toxic waste , and in this regard consideration must be given to finding locations where the facility will not impact badly on the natural environment .
Finally , Mr President , it is obvious we need further informed debates in helping to allay the citizens ' concern on the health aspect of incineration , a matter which has been addressed through extensive research carried out in various Member States and through the experience gained in the many state-of-the-art facilities now in operation throughout Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur for his work .
The recommendation for second reading before us is an extremely important legislative resolution , not just for the environment but also for the economy of the European Union .
This can be seen from the many letters which we receive from environmental associations and from the economic sector , not least of course the cement industry , but also many others such as the wood-processing industry , the paper industry , the metalworking industry and so on .
I think that we must regard both sets of arguments as important , those of the environmental associations and also those of industry , because industry has also put forward arguments from a genuinely environmental viewpoint and not just from an economic viewpoint .
We should treat this seriously .
Not all amendments which are probably well intentioned from the environmental viewpoint are necessarily an improvement on the current situation .
I think this can be seen from some of the amendments which were put forward in committee with regard to coincineration and which now reappear as amendments in plenary .
We cannot in any way guarantee that in restricting coincineration we will actually achieve what we want environmentally .
Above all we want to save fossil fuels .
If we set up the hurdles wrong here , then we will not achieve the right environmental objective .
For this reason , our Group rejects the amendments which have been resubmitted by Mr Blokland , the Greens and others .
However , I think that there are still some amendments decided on in committee which we can support in good conscience in order to improve the common position .
For example , I tabled a motion in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy relating to NOx emitted during coincineration which , at least for new installations , is somewhat more ambitious than the Council ' s proposals .
I think it is realistic and , as the industry in question is saying the same , albeit with its hand in front of its mouth , we should be altogether more positive .
I think , therefore , that we are on the right track in accepting much of what has been decided in the committee , but certainly nothing which goes any further .
Mr President , unusually tonight I am not speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group , largely because I have some particularly strong views about this directive .
I do believe that Mr Blokland has produced the wrong report at the wrong time for the wrong reasons .
It is not so long ago that we addressed this issue and produced a set of rules that were appropriate to the situation , and which Mr Blokland was seen to be happy with at the time and did not complain about .
Given a task to do , Mr Blokland has produced a new and revised report that has certainly exceeded anything that we have done before .
We cannot say that it is all wrong .
Indeed there are many sensible proposals put forward in areas where the technology makes it possible to advance .
But quite frankly we cannot expect , having already given industry one set of rules to implement only a year or two ago , to hand them a completely new set of rules so quickly .
We have to expect that it will take time to implement this report .
Mr Blokland has also exceeded in many ways the brief he was given .
In particular , the scope of this proposal goes far further than previous directives and brings into its legislative fold a great many processes which require separate legislation , and need to be separately regulated because they are inherently different from the simple process of combustion .
If one is being kind to this directive one could describe it as being good in parts , like the curate 's egg .
Unfortunately , this is going to give environment policy a bad name .
We should not be constantly re-regulating incinerators .
We should be seeking ways to avoid incineration in the first place .
Parliament 's objective in waste management strategy is not to constantly tighten rules on existing incinerating plant , it is to change the role of waste management , to change the type of waste management that we do .
We would be much better concentrating our efforts in the next few years on recycling , re-use and other methods of reducing the waste heap .
If we do not , we will very soon find ourselves back with this problem again .
Mr President , I certainly agree with Mr Bowe 's final summary .
Although the common position places firm controls on permitted emissions from waste incinerators , I know that whenever proposals to build such an incinerator are made in my country , people rise in protest , they distrust the operator 's claims and I have a degree of sympathy with them .
So I and many of my colleagues will be backing most of Mr Blokland 's amendments because we want the highest possible standards .
I have no problem at all if these prove technically difficult to achieve - no problem , because Britain has a shameful record of having the lowest household waste recycling in Europe and great room for improvement .
Many of us believe that any government in our country will encourage the construction of waste incinerators as an alternative to encouraging the alternatives .
It would be a case of " throw it on the furnace " and putting it out of sight and out of mind which to my mind is a false approach .
We have to concentrate on reducing waste , recycling what is left and leaving incinerators as a last resort .
Mr President , I too would like to thank Mr Blokland for his report which strives to improve the Commission 's proposal , and the authors of the other amendments which do so as well .
But incineration has to be considered as a last resort and - as has been said already - waste reduction , re-use and recycling are the main things we should be striving for .
I just wonder about Mr Bowe 's statement about the need to reduce , recycle and re-use waste .
Will his position remain the same when he is debating the packaging directive ?
It will be interesting to see if he sticks to his principles there .
The only thing incineration does , as Mrs Evans has said , is to encourage the need for more waste .
It will not be economically viable if you do not have enough waste to keep the incinerators going .
We also must remember that waste does not disappear .
It is turned into dioxins and also toxic ash - what will you do with that ?
In Ireland , some operators are proposing using it in building materials .
What will be the long-term consequences of that ?
In Ireland , regardless of what my colleague Mr Hyland said , we have an appalling record on waste management .
We have one of the highest landfill records in Europe .
Now it seems the government are moving from landfill to incineration and it is being presented as the green option .
They say : " We are turning waste into energy - isn 't that wonderful ? " when in actual fact they are trying to hoodwink the public into believing that this is something that is ecologically sound .
The recent court case in Ireland which decided against the siting of an incinerator in an agricultural area was extremely important .
It is very important that we get our act right , that we look first and foremost at waste management .
For any government to propose that incineration should be introduced instead of landfill is completely misguided .
We have to look at the root causes of why the waste is there in the first place .
Mr President , the amendments by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy underline generally the high levels of environmental protection , and for that reason many of these amendments are acceptable .
There are differing infrastructures for the treatment and incineration of waste in different countries , however , and , as a result , the same provisions are not in fact the same for everyone .
In Finland and some other countries the sorting of waste in close proximity to where it originates is very advanced .
Thus , we do not incinerate mixed waste , as they do in certain countries .
The incineration of mixed waste is bad environmental policy .
Sorted waste can be incinerated effectively together with other fuels in a so-called coincineration process .
The amendments by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy unjustifiably lump together the incineration of mixed waste with parallel incineration .
That might have an adverse effect , as a result of its indirect economic impact , on levels of environmental protection in the countries that sort waste .
For that reason , Amendments Nos 14 , 17 , 18 and 27 should not be adopted .
Finally , I would like say that the cement industry lobby should not be put in a competitive position that is better than that enjoyed by the hazardous waste disposal plants .
Mr President , I find myself in agreement with Mrs Grossetête and Mrs Paulsen and - rather alarmingly for both of us - with Mr Bowe .
But I want to make a particular point in relation to an alarm which has been raised in the United Kingdom by the agricultural sector literally in the last few days .
A number of United Kingdom MEPs have been contacted by farming interests , who are very worried that the incineration directive will apply to all on-farm incinerators in the United Kingdom .
There are said to be several thousand of these , and the full effect of applying the controls outlined in the directive would be to put up the costs for each incinerator to operate by an estimated £ 200 000 .
Typically , such incinerators deal with animal waste from the agriculture sector and with the disposal of empty pesticide containers at a rate of less than 50 kg an hour .
Both processes satisfy the criteria of best practicable environmental option and are accepted by environmental inspectors in the United Kingdom .
No exception has been moved for these under Article 2 ( 2 ) and the closure of incinerators following the entry into force of the directive would pose enormous problems of cost and of disposal of animal waste for UK farmers .
My question to the Commissioner , which I hope that she will able to answer when she comes , is this : since we have not moved an exception to take account of these on-farm incinerators , is this the first time the European Commission has heard of this difficulty ?
Have they received any representations from United Kingdom ministers ?
Can the Commissioner say when an opportunity for revising the directive to introduce these exceptions - supposing Parliament would ever agree to them - might arise , and does it feel that such an exception for animal waste and for the burning of empty pesticide containers in on-farm incinerators would in fact be likely to gain acceptance ?
I have given the Commissioner notice of these questions .
Mr President , the treatment of waste and the whole policy on waste is becoming an ever more important part of EU environmental policy .
To be able to act sensibly and correctly we have to bear in mind something that has already been spoken of here , which is to say the waste hierarchy : the prevention of waste , recycling , the exploitation of its energy-producing potential through incineration , and its final treatment .
The Commission ' s proposal is not a total response to this idea , and is rather based on the notion that everything must and can be burnt .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy added the necessary amendments to promote the waste hierarchy to its common position in its second reading , and I hope that these points of view will also be adopted in tomorrow ' s vote .
I also hope there is support for the proposal that was very much endorsed by the Committee to facilitate the incineration of waste produced by the paper and cellulose industry at the production site .
This waste is an important energy source not only for the industrial plants themselves but also for the surrounding community .
As the waste hierarchy is implemented in very many different ways in different Member States and in most countries they burn both hazardous and non-hazardous waste in the same incinerator , very strict rules are required .
However , in those countries where the recycling of waste is reasonably well established , such as Finland , and where they know what is being incinerated where , tighter controls will not improve the state of the environment ; on the contrary , it might make it worse , as the incineration of waste will be prevented in small incineration plants and transportation will increase .
But , as regards impurities in the air , it would be necessary that exceptions to the strict standards would only apply when the party incinerating the waste can truly demonstrate that no more emissions are being released into the air than what the licensing conditions allow .
Mr President , the directive on the incineration of waste is well intended but I think those responsible for preparing it have gone into too much detail .
I am mainly worried about the so-called coincineration of waste .
Sorted community waste and , for example , the fibrous pulp sludge that is produced in forest industry processes serve as good fuel supplements for many heating plants .
The draft , however , calls for ongoing , expensive , to some extent impossible , and environmentally unnecessary monitoring of plants that are engaged in harmless coincineration .
The end result will run counter to the original aim : non-hazardous sorted waste , which is a valid form of fuel for heating plants , will have to be driven to a landfill site to add to methane emissions or it will have to be transported hundreds of kilometres to large incinerators , all the while polluting the environment .
There are many amendments in the report that are problematic .
I think the matter should either go back to the Committee or the Council ' s common position , at least its main features , should be adhered to .
Mr President , honourable Members , efforts to set limits for pollutants produced by waste incineration and to introduce specific control procedures are indeed a positive step .
It is unacceptable for pollution to be transferred from the air into water and the ground .
The directive makes some headway in that direction .
Nevertheless , the problems inherent in waste incineration still remain , since it is the actual burning process which produces toxic substances , including dioxins .
This applies even more to domestic waste which contains negligible quantities of toxic substances before it is burned .
Treating dangerous and non-dangerous waste in the same way therefore exacerbates the problem .
What is more , the cost of installing and operating incineration units is far higher than the cost of mechanical recycling or sanitary landfill .
In a nutshell , the legislative proposal under discussion will not solve the problems inherent in incineration as a waste management method .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Blokland for this report ; he has had a very hard job to do .
Drafting environmental legislation for the whole of Europe is a demanding task , as circumstances in Member States differ enormously .
I myself come from a country where we have already opted for a policy that corresponds amazingly closely to the EU strategy on waste .
Only Finland has already embarked on perfectly feasible practices , as you have heard this evening .
Therefore , it is tiresome to see that the same mechanisms that are needed to guide those countries that have been lax in their attention to the matter of waste disposal , are forcing the more advanced countries to take a step backwards .
This should not be happening .
Mrs Paulsen , was right : this is exactly where compliance with the principle of subsidiarity is needed .
If more stringent requirements regarding emissions are being illogically imposed on the use of waste as fuel than for other fuels , fuels classified as waste will cease to be used .
There are no alternative proposed uses for waste : it would be deposited in landfill sites .
That will add to the formation of methane , as a result of putrefaction of organic waste , and the greenhouse phenomenon .
This holds true especially for the incineration of harmless sludge produced by the paper and cellulose industry .
It is important that Parliament amends the proposal for the directive in this respect in accordance with the Committee ' s amendment .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy adopted some proposals that , if realised , would make it harder to practise ecologically justified coincineration .
For example , the limit values for emissions for fuel that is not waste in coincineration are required to be the same as for waste as fuel , even though the same material may be incinerated and give off higher levels of emissions , under EU legislation .
Another example is the call for the ongoing monitoring of the ammonia content of gas from chimneys .
That will add substantially to the costs of monitoring with no benefit to the environment , as the monitoring obligations have not just been imposed on those plants where ammonia emissions are generally produced .
Investments that do not bring a value added element with regard to the environment mean less investments that are of benefit to the environment .
Mr President , Mr Blokland , ladies and gentlemen , waste management is a complex task .
This is confirmed yet again by our discussions and the particularly powerful lobbying .
I therefore approve of the European Union ' s approach which is to adopt an overall strategy in relation to this major environmental and health issue .
Nonetheless , personally speaking , I have always been rather worried to see the incineration of dangerous and non-dangerous waste dealt with in the same legislation , and I expressed my opinion on this point at first reading .
The majority decided in favour of coincineration .
My opinion is that today we must fight to prevent the emission standards for dangerous waste being relaxed .
The volume of waste to be incinerated is going to be significantly increased .
The figure of 31 million tonnes in 1990 has been mentioned .
This year we are talking about close to 60 million tonnes , and waste incineration generates , as everyone has mentioned , the emission of particularly dangerous substances into the atmosphere and soil .
The debate has focused on coincineration .
I find the maximum standard of 40 % excessive , but I should like more especially to stress , just briefly , the fact that the increasingly widespread use of dangerous waste in coincineration units is liable to lead us to accept the production of this type of waste , with a particularly high risk of hearing , tomorrow , that serious investment has been made with a view to constructing coincineration units .
They therefore now have to be made to run profitably , leading to an increase in the volume of dangerous substances transported , with all the risks that this entails .

In conclusion , while mentioning that penalties must be applied in cases of non-compliance and perhaps also that support should be provided for the authorities modifying their household waste incinerators to comply with the standards , it is still essential to stress that our top priority is , and must continue to be , avoiding the creation of this type of waste and recycling as much as possible .
Mr President , we all know that disposing of waste in an environmentally friendly manner and utilising its energy by means of the latest technology is a requirement of our time and wholly appropriate .
The directive on the incineration of waste contains important starting points for introducing compulsory high environmental standards throughout the European Union which have already been in place in some Member States for a number of years .
And this is important and necessary .
The aim of the directive is to establish emission levels which ensure harmless and environmentally friendly incineration of both dangerous and non-dangerous waste in incineration and coincineration plants without presenting any risk to human health .
People are sensitised today and have fears of a high level of air pollution and the illnesses which can result and so the policy must also create completely clear framework conditions to limit the risk .
Nevertheless , I must say that Mr Blokland is proposing some regulations and stringent conditions for the directive which go way beyond the objective .
The operating conditions for incineration plants , as proposed in Amendment No 11 , are neither appropriate to the objective nor practicable but , quite simply , superfluous .
Science and practice have shown for some time now that such a measure does not prevent high emissions of hydrogen chlorides and dioxins .
In practice , Amendment No 11 would also mean that many halogenated substances , for example PVC , which frequently occurs in mixed domestic waste , would be excluded from incineration in waste incineration plants .
A further point is to ensure that the directive does not give rise to any protected markets .
Industries which use coincineration plants in their production process have , for many years , successfully concerned themselves with achieving high air purity standards in incineration .
Many companies are also dependent on the use of waste to retain competitiveness and jobs .
Millions have already been spent on measures to reduce energy consumption .
In my opinion , we should not disregard these efforts ....
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I should like to make two brief points which may well be relevant should this go to conciliation , as I suspect it will .
The first is the impact of this directive on the existing specialist toxic waste incineration industry .
These incinerators have to adhere to higher standards than the coincineration plants .
My concern is that the high calorific value waste will be cherry-picked for coincineration and this in turn will push up the cost of the specialist toxic waste incinerators which will mean that they will have to actually buy in fuel in many instances to achieve the high temperatures which are required to destroy things like dioxin .
We need the specialist toxic waste incinerators .
There are only three at the moment in the United Kingdom .
If we had fewer of these plants , it would mean that hazardous waste might well have to be transported for large distances , which is not acceptable for both political and practical environment reasons , and it would also push up the cost of incinerating this toxic waste .
The second point I would make is to underline the point made by Dr Jackson .
I come from a region in the United Kingdom with the highest density of pigs .
Now traditionally fallen stock has been disposed of by burial on the farm , but with these very large units this is just not a practical way of disposal , so many of the units have installed their own incinerators - small incinerators using less than 50 kg per hour .
If these incinerators are not used , people may well have to go back to burial .
I think this mix-up has been due to a misunderstanding between the Department of the Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture in Britain , who thought there were only sixty incinerators of this type when in fact there are several thousand .
This problem also applies to hunt kennels which feed fallen stock , and dispose of offal and - bizarrely - to pet crematoria , although I understand that human crematoria are not covered as dead people are not classified as waste .
In conciliation could I ask you to make allowance for these farmers who have invested in cleaning up the environment by installing incinerators , and for whom the cost would be excessive should they not be able to continue .
Mr President , first and foremost , I want to thank the rapporteur , Mr Blokland for the considerable commitment he has shown and for his well prepared recommendation for second reading .
Together with the Council ' s determination to arrive quickly at a common position , the report has helped with the efficient reading of the Commission ' s proposal .
The proposed directive on waste incineration goes to the heart of environmental legislation : the protection of public health .
The proposal will help reduce dioxin emissions from incineration by 90 per cent .
As from 2005 , when the directive begins to apply to existing plant , dioxin emissions from incinerators will be insignificant .
Together with the directive on waste deposition , the directive on waste incineration will put a stop to methods of treating waste which do not take account of future generations ' needs and interests .
Both directives constitute a firm basis for the sustainable treatment of the waste hierarchy , with improved preventative measures , better recycling and environmentally safe deposition of waste .
I should like to remind you that there already exists a directive on a waste hierarchy .
It is therefore obvious that , in this case , it is recycling that one should attempt , in the first place , to regulate .
Unfortunately , Mr Bowe , it has been 11 years since the technical requirements in these directives were last reviewed .
43 amendments have been tabled .
Of these , the Commission is able to approve eight in full , five in part and three in principle .
The following amendments are aimed at clarifying the Commission ' s proposal .
The Commission is able to approve them in part , in principle or in full : 4 , in principle , with the exception of the last section ; 6 , 8 , 9 , 10 and 11 , but only the elucidation of the two seconds ; 12 and 14 , second section ; 17 in principle , but not the requirement continually to measure the levels of ammonia and mercury ; 18 , first section ; 19 , 22 , and 24 in principle ; 25 : the figure of 500 milligrams for nitric oxides in new plant , together with the proposed new paragraph at the end ; 27 in principle , together with Amendment No 43 .
The Commission is not able to approve the first section of Amendment No 14 .
If the word " untreated " were to be deleted , it would no longer be possible to use mixed household waste in co-incinerators , something which would also apply to waste which had undergone extensive pre-treatment .
The second section of this amendment is , in principle , acceptable .
By introducing an explanation of the word " untreated " , the paragraph can be made less ambiguous .
The European Parliament ' s Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 7 , which are aimed at introducing provisions concerning the treatment of waste , cannot , for reasons of principle , be approved .
The Commission ' s proposal is aimed at introducing limits for emissions and at establishing operative conditions for all waste incinerated or co-incinerated , and this should not influence the legislation concerning the treatment of waste .
The Commission is not able to approve Amendments 5 and 15 which are designed to introduce links to standards of air and water quality .
Legislation of this kind already exists or is at present being prepared , for example the directives concerning air quality and coordinated measures to prevent and limit pollution , together with the proposed framework directive concerning water .
The amendments would involve the provisions in these acts being duplicated or becoming more ambiguous .
Amendments Nos 3 , 16 , 30 and 33-35 are not compatible with the directive ' s structure and cannot therefore be approved .
There has been a certain amount of confusion concerning Amendment No 13 where a number of language versions have been changed but not the English language version .
This amendment cannot , however , be adopted by the Commission .
Articles 12 and 15 of the proposal concern access to information and reporting .
They are now worded in such a way as to guarantee that all players have access to the information they require .
The Commission therefore considers that Amendments Nos 20 and 21 are unnecessary .
Amendments Nos 36-39 are designed to tighten up the requirements with regard to measurements .
The Commission is not able to accept these because they would place an additional burden upon those responsible and because no justification of their real value can be provided .
Finally , Annexes II , IV and V are , as you know , the heart of the Directive , establishing the limits for emissions in the cases of coincineration and incineration .
As I have already mentioned , the Commission accepts the proposed limit of 500 milligrams for nitric oxides in new cement kilns .
This is also justified from the point of view of cost-income analysis .
Any further amendment for the purpose of making the limits stricter or of removing from certain plants the right to be regarded as exceptions would threaten the delicate balance achieved in the common position .
The Commission cannot therefore accept Amendments Nos 23 , 26 , 28 , 29 , 31 , 32 40 , 41 and 42 .
With regard to Mrs Jackson ' s question about the incineration of dead animals on farms , I would provide the following clarification . The incineration of dead animals is not included under the directive , and this in accordance with the exceptions defined in Article 2.2 .
As I have noted previously , the Commission accepts parts of Amendment No 4 , which refers to Directive 74 / 442 and which indirectly makes it possible to exclude the incineration of infected animals on farms .
We consequently accept this principle .
The Commission is to investigate the possibility of extending the exception concerning radioactive waste also to include exceptions such as infected dead animals .
I understand that there is a debate going on in Great Britain , and perhaps in other places too , concerning the incineration of , for example , empty packages of insecticide etc .
It is not , of course , the intention that these should be incinerated .
That sounds dangerous . Nor does it sound as if one should be burning them at home in one ' s backyard .
I do not want to exclude our needing to review how the exceptions are to be worded once we have obtained more information and know exactly what types of plant are concerned .
There was a certain amount of confusion because we at first believed that we were concerned here with dead animals and infected dead animals , of which we thought exceptions should be made .
My understanding from the interpretation was that the incineration of dead animals is not covered by this directive under the terms of Article 2 ( 2 ) .
I am looking at Article 2 ( 2 ) and I cannot see that exclusion set out there .
It talks about vegetable waste and vegetable waste does not cover dead animals .
However , I will get clarification from the Commissioner personally .
Infectious animal waste is not covered by the scope of this directive in its common position form because it is covered by Directive 90 / 667 .
The adoption of Amendment No 4 to Article 2 ( 2 ) might give the Commission the chance to revise the text so as to include a specific exclusion for infectious animal waste .
As things stand all other animal waste is covered by Article 2 ( 2 ) ( a ) ( v ) of the directive and Directive 90 / 667 .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Ozone in ambient air
The next item is the report ( A5-0062 / 2000 ) drawn up by Mr Davies on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on a proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive relating to ozone in ambient air ( COM ( 1999 ) 125 - C5 - 0047 / 1999 - 1999 / 0067 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , given the importance of the directive on national emission ceilings to this report on a proposal for a daughter directive , it is a little surprising that the order of debate is as it is , because without reduction in the key trans-boundary pollutants we are not going to reduce ozone .
This report sets national targets for ozone levels and proposes action plans for dealing with local problems of exceedance .
To save time I am going to assume that the respiratory and other health problems associated with ozone are understood , and that every Member of this House will want to reduce them .
The disputes between us will be about costs and time-scales , and perhaps also about the accuracy of the Commission 's methodology and the achievability of the targets it has set in this directive .
Let me deal directly with the Commission 's core proposal , the setting of a target for 2010 of 120 mg per cubic metre for ozone , not to be exceeded on more than 20 days per year .
Commission proposals for environmental improvements need to be both ambitious and realistic .
These proposals are certainly ambitious but many governments dispute whether they are politically realistic , and having just come from a difficult - albeit ultimately successful - group meeting of my own , I know that many Members have doubts .
In particular , representatives of the Mediterranean countries point out problems resulting from the strong sunlight they enjoy .
I point out that the Commission 's methodology has taken full account of this but I look at their faces and still see a degree of scepticism .
I did wonder some months ago whether to table amendments , which would suggest a less ambitious outcome , but which would perhaps be more acceptable to Member States .
But the Commission 's 120 mg target is in line with World Health Organisation proposals , and who am I to suggest that they should be challenged ?
The number of days of exceedance could easily be adjusted , but that is something to negotiate only when necessary .
It is a good target and , if it is at all possible , then it should be retained .
The position I have taken in preparing this report is to say that those who want tougher targets than the Commission has proposed should have their views rejected .
But equally it would be wrong for us to water down the draft directive .
That is why I am sorry to see amendments tabled which reflect the Industry Committee 's position .
It seems to have been overlooked by many that these amendments , if carried , would leave the European Union in a much weaker position with regard to ozone targets than is enjoyed by the United States of America .
We are aware of growing problems of ozone across Europe , but if we are not even prepared to match the standards being set by the USA , one of our great commercial rivals , this would indeed be a great shame and a sorry reflection on our commitment to environmental improvement .
I ask Parliament to support my proposals , to give its backing to the Commissioner and to let her play her part in negotiating a common position which is both ambitious and politically realistic .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to put forward the proposal of the Industry Committee which was adopted by 40 votes to 4 and which deals with target values in particular .
There is absolutely no doubt that in tightening up or adopting the ozone directive we must find a reasonable compromise between the justifiable demand for improved air quality and the possibility for European economy and society to reasonably adapt in particularly polluted regions .
For this reason , unlike the Environment Committee which has responsibility in this matter , we have not taken on board the proposals of the Commission wholesale , but have modified them .
I know that the experts at the Commission will vigorously oppose this , but we think that we can propose a compromise given that the guide value of 180 µg / m3 is not disputed , nor indeed the critical value of 240 , only the target value .
We would like to propose for this a 30-year programme which , although based on the WHO value of 120 µg / m3 , provides for a phased reduction in the number of days on which this value may be exceeded : 40 days in 2010 , 20 days in 2020 ( which is the Commission ' s target for 2010 ) and no days in 2030 .
This is a concern in particular for the warmer regions of Europe , namely coastal regions , which have to cope with a particularly high external ozone penetration .
I think we have put forward a reasonable compromise here .
In any case , we are prepared to compromise with the Commission , particularly as we assume that only this type of compromise will also find approval in the Council .
For this reason we are venturing to re-introduce this proposal on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party , even though it was marginally defeated in the Environment Committee .
We hope that you will consent to it .
Mr President , Commissioner , I agree that the most important difficulty with this directive is the diversity of criteria with regard to the establishment of target levels and time-scales for the reduction of the ozone concentrations in the atmosphere : the famous items 2 and 3 of annex 1 .
We in the Group of the European People ' s Party consider it necessary to support the main lines set in the Commission ' s proposal , especially with regard to target levels , which coincide with the guidelines of the World Health Organisation on air quality and which establish the permissible concentrations of ozone at 120 µg / m3 .
Nevertheless , it seems to us to be inadvisable to accept the amendments which make 2010 the time limit , the only one in the short term , and set 2020 as the time limit for long term objectives .
In this respect , we think it is essential to allow for greater flexibility with regard to the periods of adaptation to the said target levels , given the real difficulty of controlling ozone concentrations when setting figures purely on the basis of the existence of previous data , as is constantly seen in certain climatic conditions , especially , as has just been mentioned , in the Mediterranean countries .
Our Group therefore vigorously defends Amendments Nos 26 and 28 , which establish a progressive and realistic achievement of the proposed objectives , by means of a progressive scale according to the number of days in a year the target levels can be exceeded .

However , we consider very positive the amendments on the countries which are candidates for accession to the European Union , so that they may participate as soon as possible in the achievement of the Union ' s objectives - and we congratulate Mrs Davies on this initiative - and it also seems important to us that the action plans are of a local nature and that the possibilities for reducing ozone concentrations are studied on a case by case basis .
I believe that a vote in favour of the amendments proposed by the European People ' s Party is a vote for progress in the control and monitoring of one of the most serious pollutants to date , initiating , in a decisive and homogenous way , in all the Member States , actions for its elimination as a threat to the health of persons and ecosystems , without deluding ourselves as to the real possibilities of completely eradicating it in the short term .
Mr President , I should first of all like to thank Mr Chris Davies for this report .
Adoption of the Commission ' s proposal and of Mr Davies 's report will mean a considerable improvement in air quality for Europe 's citizens .
I think there are two crucial points here .
The first is that the WHO ' s guidelines should be adhered to .
I think that this would be an important step towards preventing serious illnesses and premature deaths , especially among particularly vulnerable sectors of the population , including children .
The second thing I think is very important is that specific dates should be set , both for when in 2010 we are to achieve the provisional targets and for when in 2020 we are to attain the long-term objectives .
I think that setting dates is very important to our also in actual fact attaining the objectives .
In addition , I should like to make a couple of remarks on the amendments inspired by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy and which are intended to weaken the Commission ' s initiative by allowing much greater exceedances of the WHO 's recommendations and by significantly delaying efforts to achieve the targets set by the WHO .
The amendments would not only impair the Commission ' s proposal but also constitute a deterioration and retrograde step in relation to the situation of which we are now , in fact , aware in Europe .
As Mr Davies also mentioned , standards are , in actual fact , lower than those in the United States .
I do not know how one can call the proposals a happy medium or compromise , as Mr Langen did a moment ago .
I think they are completely incomprehensible and irresponsible .
They would involve serious health and environmental consequences for the people of Europe , together with a bill for Europe ' s health services to the tune of billions .
I would therefore very much recommend that we support the Commission ' s proposal , together with Mr Davies ' report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Mr Davies on his excellent report .
I would also like to thank the European Commission for its sound green proposals .
Back in July 1995 , Strasbourg was labouring under ozone smog .
On the initiative of the Green Group , the European Parliament then adopted a resolution to halve the ozone standard stipulated in the 1992 directive .
The European Commission ' s proposal has made a lot of headway in this direction .
Ozone smog is still on the increase .
It is now even permeating the southern European skies during the winter months .
It has paralysed the traffic in northern Italy over the past couple of weeks and , during the summer months , countries such as Denmark and Sweden also suffer with ozone smog .
Ozone smog is now to be found everywhere in Europe .
Ozone is always an aggressive substance .
There are no safe ozone levels , despite what the World Health Organisation claims .
This is why the Green Group proposes allowing just fifteen exceedances of critical loads per annum .
This number is slightly lower than the proposal made by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
My group can also support the twenty exceedances proposed by the Committee .
However , it cannot back the proposal made by the Christian Democrats and UNICE Employers ' Union of forty such incidents per annum .
This is far too many and thirty years is a ridiculous time limit , given the fact that the problem is taking on such proportions .
In order to reach this strict ozone standard , the NOx emissions from traffic , in particular , and the emission of volatile organic substances will need to go down drastically .
This is the topic of Mrs Myller ' s report .
In the case of an ozone alert , we also need to be able to take short-term action .
The Dutch Government makes so many concessions to the transport lobby that it fails to realise this .
For my group , the car is no sacred cow .
Mr President , I too wish to thank Mr Davies for the report he has prepared .
It is an extremely important report , especially from a health perspective .
Seen from an environmental point of view , it is also intimately linked to the next subject , namely Mrs Myller ' s report .
I am convinced that these two reports together provide a sound basis for positive developments in Europe in the fields of health and the environment .
During the short time I have in which to speak , I should like to try to scotch some of the flourishing myths which exist with regard to the ozone issue .
This especially applies to the situation in southern Europe .
The climate in southern Europe is often used as a reason for , or explanation of , the high levels of ozone which are often to be found in the summertime .
It is true that climates with long periods of high pressure increase the presence of ozone .
At the same time , research shows that the reasons why ozone affects cities such as Barcelona , Athens and Milan and many of the tourist resorts along the coast must be sought elsewhere .
The reasons have to be sought in traffic levels , in industrial processes and in energy production .
It is also these matters which we can influence by means of the Directives concerned .
It is therefore something of a pity that the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy should have such a detached attitude towards the present Directive and only see it in a perspective which favours industry .
Instead , we ought to see what happens when the limits set by the WHO are constantly exceeded and when people ( both residents and tourists ) are constantly exposed to a danger to their health .
We know that the risks are greatest for people who are in the open air a great deal , especially children .
We know that exceedance of ozone limits directly affects children ' s lung capacity .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy ought to consider this when the present directive is voted upon tomorrow .
Mr President , I want to begin by thanking the rapporteur and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for their support of the Commission ' s proposal and draft report .
Within the European Union , we have achieved a certain amount of success when it comes to improving air quality .
Nonetheless , ozone still constitutes one of the most serious environmental problems .
On more than 60 days every summer in a number of locations in Central and Southern Europe , ozone levels exceed the target values set by the World Health Organisation .
The Fifth Environmental Action Programme established the long-term objective of ensuring that these limits were not in fact exceeded .
If we are to be able to solve this problem , we need to take measures with clearly defined subsidiary objectives .
The Commission ' s proposal therefore for the first time establishes clear limits upon ozone levels which , as far as possible , are to be attained by no later than the year 2010 .
The target value in terms of protecting people ' s health means that the WHO ' s guidelines must not be exceeded on more than 20 days per year .
Programmes for reducing emissions are necessary in those cases where the target values are not attained .
The directive on national emission ceilings , which is the next point on the agenda , will lead to improvements in ozone levels so that the target values in question might for the most part be attained .
The proposal is nonetheless a clear expression of the political will that exists to attain the long-term objectives in the directive , too .
Attaining the World Health Organisation ' s target values is only the first step .
In reviewing the Directive in the year 2004 , we must therefore analyse how and when we can achieve the long-term objective .
The Commission is able wholly to approve Amendments Nos 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 13 , 14 and 15 .
Amendment No 5 , section two , is also acceptable in view of the fact that the Member States have to prepare emission reduction programmes before they can implement them .
With regard to Amendment No 9 , the Commission is also able to approve some of the changes in their entirety and the majority of them in principle .
We approve those changes relating to short-term measures which are to be implemented in each zone in which the threshold value is exceeded .
We also agree that the Member States should inform the public as to whether they intend to prepare and implement short-term action plans and , if so , in what ways , and that they should also inform them as to how often such measures have been taken .
We believe it is necessary for this information to be reported to the Commission . However , that issue is more at home in Article 10 .
We cannot , however , accept that short-term measures should only be taken at local level .
Nor do we believe that the Member States should be enjoined to analyse whether short-term measures are an effective tool in each individual case and in each individual place where the threshold value has been exceeded .
The Commission is able to approve the principles behind Amendments 10 and 11 .
We are going to redraft subparagraph 1c in order to take account of the idea behind the last section of Amendment No 9 and Amendments Nos 10 and 11 .
Amendment No 12 can be approved in principle .
The Commission believes that progress by the Member States ought to be presented in a form which permits direct comparisons between countries , if that is possible in practice .
The principle in Amendment No 16 is also acceptable .
The Commission agrees that climate changes ought to be emphasised .
This ought , however , to be done in a broader perspective and not only in relation to changes in fuel consumption .
Amendment No 2 advocates coordination between Member States and Applicant States .
This can in principle be approved , but some rewording is required if misinterpretations are to be avoided .
We cannot , however , approve Amendment No 1 .
Even if the Commission agrees that it is important to involve the Applicant States , there is no reason for reiterating this in a directive aimed at the Member States .
Nor is Amendment No 8 acceptable when it comes to predictions of exceedances of information thresholds .
The use of prognosis models is specified as a prerequisite of thresholds for alerting the public , something which would make the way in which the public is informed or alerted less reliable .
This is an issue on which practical considerations and the possibility of practical implementation must be taken into account .
Finally , we must reject the first and third sections of Amendment No 5 , together with Amendments Nos 17 and 18 .
In the present situation , we quite simply do not have enough information available to be able to predict when the long-term objective of not exceeding the World Health Organisation ' s guidelines can be attained .
In addition , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 28 .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will be taken at 12 noon tomorrow .
Atmospheric pollutants
The next item is the report ( A5-0063 / 2000 ) by Mrs Myller on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on national emission ceilings for certain atmospheric pollutants ( COM ( 1999 ) 125 - C5-0047 / 1999 - 1999 / 0067 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , the European Union has ambitious goals for the environment , which were set forth , for example , in the Fifth Environmental Action Programme and the acidification strategy presented in 1997 .
These programmes stated as their aim the protection of people and nature from the adverse effects of air pollution , meaning that critical ceilings in respect of nature and people would not be exceeded .
The Commission ' s proposal for a directive on national emission ceilings is an important step in achieving the aims the Union set itself : to protect its citizens from the adverse effects of air pollutants .
The legacy of past decades is going to take some time to put right , however .
We are still not even aware of all the technical potential for ridding ourselves of sources of emissions entirely .
For this reason , it is reasonable to proceed in stages , as the Commission has proposed .
The first stage is the Interim Environmental Objectives to be achieved by 2010 , which means cutting health-threatening ozone loads by two-thirds by that year .
We cannot be satisfied with just this , however , as , after this target has been met , there will still be too many areas where pollution counts exceed levels that are dangerous to people and nature .
Owing to this , I have recommended in my report a long-term goal , in addition to the interim one , and a final target for 2020 .
In that way , we would finally be able to reach a point where critical levels and loads are not exceeded and everyone will be protected effectively from all known health effects of air pollution .
In this connection I would like to draw your attention to my amendment , in which , owing to a translation error , there is a wrong word in your copy of the document .
In place of ' reached ' it should say ' exceeded ' .
I hope that this will be sorted out before tomorrow ' s vote .
How , then , do we achieve a situation in which air pollution does not exceed tolerance levels for humans and for nature ?
The Commission ' s proposal sets limit values for each Member State with regard to certain kinds of interrelated emissions , which cause acidification , increased ozone in the inner atmosphere and soil eutrophication .
Dealing with these problems and the emissions that cause them together has proved to be the most cost-effective way of tackling the causes of air pollution and bringing it under control .
The biggest disagreements in the implementation of the directive relate to the limit values , i.e. , the emission ceiling set for each country .
The UN Economic Commission for Europe has also examined the objectives for reductions in the same sources of emissions as in the proposal for a directive now under discussion , and , as a result of these talks , the so-called Gothenburg Protocol was signed .
There is a clear difference between this proposal and the Commission ' s .
If we were to accept the ceilings in the Gothenburg Protocol , we would never reach the targets that the Union has set itself regarding air pollution .
Comparing the differences between the Gothenburg Protocol and the Commission ' s proposal with regard to the effects on health , the annual reduction levels proposed by the Commission would save the lives of as many as four thousand people a year in Europe .
Although it is beyond dispute that the ambitious targets set for the environment have been found to be an essential ingredient in people ' s health and safety , there have been pleas for lower ceilings , on the basis that cleaner air costs too much for industry and communities .
It has to be said , however , that there is very considerable exaggeration with regard to the costs involved .
If , on the other hand , we calculate the benefits that better air quality will bring to people and the natural environment , as well as to buildings , we see that the economic benefits are four times greater than the costs .
We still have to work on the proposal for the directive so that , for example , the situation with regard to the applicant countries and those questions too that relate to the EU ' s neighbouring regions can be better taken into account .
Mr President , the industry committee , after much discussion and serious consideration , is overwhelmingly opposed to the Commission 's proposed ceilings , and this is across all groups and nationalities .
The UN ECE ceilings were agreed by all our Member States , by the applicant countries and globally , in a protocol signed at Gothenburg as recently as November 1999 .
Why did the Commission come up with these even stricter and substantially more expensive ceilings only one month later ?
I understand that the groups , the whole Parliament , are split on this issue , between supporters of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and supporters of the industry committee 's line .
Members of Parliament should be aware of the serious implications for our industries and agriculture , for our competitiveness , for jobs and - yes - for people and our constituents if the Commission proposal wins through .
The industry committee urges this House to vote in favour of the amendments which are tabled in my name and in the name of Mr Bowe .
These are the amendments passed by the industry committee .
The UN ceilings are quite ambitious enough for us to reach our internationally agreed targets in reasonable time .
The industry committee wishes to see these limits fully and properly implemented across the European Union and globally .
The Commission can then concentrate on ensuring this occurs , on perfecting the models that are used and perhaps come up with new proposals in two or three years ' time on the basis of much more convincing arguments regarding the relevant costs and benefits .
Support the Purvis amendments and the United Nations Gothenburg table of national emission ceilings .
Mr President , it has become universally acknowledged that environmental pollution , and certainly air pollution , are cross-border issues par excellence .
The present draft directive on national emission ceilings tackles the key culprits where atmospheric pollution is concerned .
It contains maximum emission levels for substances which are responsible for acidification , ozone forming in the troposphere and the eutrophication of soil .
As the topic is reasonably technical , I will only single out the salient points on behalf of myself and my group .
The directive ' s key goal is to reduce the emission levels of said substances to below the critical levels and , hence , pollution .
These goals must be met by 2010 , with an interim assessment of the national programmes in 2006 .
The most important - and you have heard so yourself just now - and most talked about component of the proposal is , of course , the table which specifies the permitted annual emission levels for each country .
The fact that , at UN level , 36 countries , including 15 EU Member States , recently agreed on less strict standards for the same substances played an important role in the discussion .
There are now Members who urge that this table , i.e. the European Commission ' s table , be replaced by the UN ' s so-called Gothenburg table , which permits a higher ceiling .
Mr President , I have to admit that this line of argument is rather weak .
Indeed , UN agreements are always less ambitious due to the fact that it is difficult for the situation in rich , prosperous and hence often more polluting countries to be lumped together with the situation in the developing world .
Moreover , it is incorrect that the European ceilings were established after completion of the UN negotiations .
Examining the proposal and the argumentation - as I assume other Members have done - I notice that , at the time when the European ceilings were being stipulated , the UN protocol was still being negotiated .
Add this to the fact that the environmental effects of SO2 , NOx and the volatile organic substances , in particular , directly affect our own continent , I - and the majority in our group , I think - can go along with the Commission proposal regarding these substances .
Mr President , I do have another problem , namely that concerning ammonia .
The Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats would like to see the present ceiling adjusted .
Looking at the nitrate directive , I notice that hardly any Member State meets the standard specified .
It seems to me completely unfeasible to go beyond the Gothenburg standard .
In addition , the effects of ammonia emissions are partly local and , as such , a lower threshold seems acceptable .
On behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats , I have tabled an amendment which , where ammonia is concerned , is based on the lower Gothenburg standard and defers definitively setting the ceiling until the year 2006 .
The reason for this is that I hope that , by then , the effects of the implementation and the pending European legislation on nitrate will be able to give us better indications .
I would like to conclude by making the following comment : legislation on ceilings is , in actual fact , the counterpart of legislation on large furnaces , for which I also happen to be rapporteur .
We completed the first reading even before last year ' s elections .
The Council of Ministers , however , is still putting a spanner in the works .
Could we be informed on the progress made ?
As a final remark , I would like to thank Mrs Myller , the rapporteur .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Mrs Myller for her report and her ambitious treatment of the directive proposed by the Commission .
Even if the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy appears rather as if it had been caught napping and has only just woken up , the fact may , at all events , be conveyed that the problem of acidification is scarcely a new issue . Instead , it has been with us for as long as industrialisation - for 100 years .
Research into the question has been going on for 30 years .
None of us ought to be in any doubt about what the sources of acidification are , nor about what we should be doing regarding this issue .
Some accuse the Commission ' s proposal , and also the report , as being excessive and far too costly to implement and say that the calculations that have been made are utopian .
This is , however , wrong because we know that the Member States themselves have contributed to the report which serves as a basis for the whole directive .
There is more justification for criticising the fact that we have not included the energy scenario we have emphasised elsewhere , for example in the Kyoto protocol , and which involves burning fewer fossil fuels in order also to solve the climate problems we are facing .
With all due respect to the Gothenburg protocol - and despite the fact that it has taken its name from my home town - I have to say that it is , in fact , just not on to compare this with the directive which we have to take a decision on tomorrow .
One might well wonder why the Commission ' s directive appears only a month later , rather like a punishment directed against this UN directive , but that has to do , of course , with nothing other than our own sluggishness in dealing with the issue .
If we had been a little quicker off the mark , the present directive would have been on the table - signed , sealed and delivered - long before the so-called Gothenburg Protocol .
The word " impossible " has been used about the directive . I should like to say , however , that what is impossible is the situation which we have at present .
The impossibility lies , therefore , not in the directive but in the current situation .
Mr President , my congratulations to Mrs Myller who I know has thought long and hard about this report .
It seems to me that the debate comes down to this : do we believe that the Gothenburg Protocol was the best Member States can realistically achieve ?
I recognise that the Commission and environmental groups believe that in practice much more can be delivered but nonetheless some Member States have committed themselves to significant reductions in air pollution - though that is certainly not true of all of them .
Some Member States seem to have gone into the negotiations with a few calculations on the back of an envelope and refused to compromise in any way to set themselves any realistic targets .
Others have not even used the same methodology , the same basis of calculation as others .
So the protocol in many ways is a nonsense .
It can give us no confidence whatsoever .
It is a messy political compromise and nothing more .
I do not know how much more the Commissioner can achieve but we should be seeking reductions in air pollution and we should be giving her our support in her efforts to negotiate them .
We should support this report and give her our backing .
Mr President , Mrs Myller has produced an excellent report , and our group too thinks we should go at lot further than the Gothenburg Protocol on this .
In all probability , drafting this directive was like a national auction , and the end result is very modest when we think what the real challenges are .
But , in any case , it is important that the European Parliament should now defend at least that policy which the Commission has chosen .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance proposes that even stricter goals should be set for 2010 than the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has recommended .
We want to emphasise that an integrated strategy must be adopted to reduce emissions .
We have to remember that , in any case , we have the implementation of the Kyoto commitments ahead of us , which will mean insisting on more efficient use of energy and simply using less of it .
So , in our opinion , this directive must take into consideration that added benefit is to be had from an integrated strategy as regards implementing its objectives .
We are very satisfied that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy included issues of shipping and air traffic within the scope of this directive , and we are convinced that the benefits to be gained from adhering to an integrated strategy are enormous .
Mr President , in order to meet the objectives for air emission levels prescribed in the Fifth Environmental Action Programme , we need this directive on emission ceilings more than anything .
If we want to combat acidification , manure pollution and smog formation , we need to reduce the emissions of sulphur dioxide , nitrogen oxide , ammonia and volatile organic substances .
The Council ' s conclusions concerning the EU acidification strategy have raised expectations which now have to be given substance .
This could even be done in a cost-effective way , as is evident from the explanatory note to the Commission proposal .
We all know by now that six months ago , higher emission levels were agreed at Gothenburg within a UN context .
These values , however , are the result of a political compromise between states , and the results of the model used by the Commission have been overlooked .
This model is sound and the results are well founded .
Also in view of the fact that , with these emission ceilings , the objectives of the EU ' s Fifth Environmental Action Programme still cannot be met , a relaxation of the values is unjustified .
The first step towards achieving the emission ceilings is undoubtedly a dynamic implementation and enforcement of existing directives , such as the Auto-oil programme .
In addition , we need to lay down new legislation in this field as soon as possible .
In this connection , I would once more urge the Council to produce a common position on large furnaces as a matter of urgency .
Finally , additional policy , for example in the field of volatile solvents used in paints and varnishes , as well as in car spraying , will continue to be necessary .
Mr President , Commissioner , firstly I too would like to thank the rapporteur .
Now to the issues : it is obvious that there are differing opinions in this House on whether the proposal of the European Commission is too ambitious .
Many are saying that it cannot be implemented using current technology or only at an exorbitant cost .
The Commission itself says that the proposal can be implemented cost effectively .
I find it interesting that the European Commission is assuming in this that energy consumption in the European Union will increase by 8 % in the coming years and that there will be no change in the proportions of energy forms used and therefore no reduction in the proportion of fossil fuels .
In my opinion this is not ambitious ; if anything , the opposite .
We in this House have always agreed that we must reduce the proportion of fossil fuels and that we must save energy .
If we do not achieve this , then this is a declaration of environmental bankruptcy .
If the perceptions of the European Commission as regards this basic assumption become reality , then there is no need for us to talk any further in this House about climate protection .

We must increase energy efficiency , improve energy saving and promote regenerative energies whilst , at the same time , recognising that nuclear energy produces neither CO2 nor SO2 nor NH3 , volatile organic compounds or NOx .
If we are honest about it , I think that the two ideas are not mutually incompatible and for this reason I would also like to expressly oppose certain Member States demanding exemptions under the directive if they renounce nuclear energy .
This cannot happen within the context of collective environmental responsibility .
All the same , I would like once again to stress the fact that the Commission proposal is not too ambitious , but if anything a little too unambitious .
I will support it tomorrow in the vote and I hope that the majority of the House will do the same .
Mr President , I certainly welcome this report and I gave it a lot of support in the Environment Committee .
I creates a proper framework in which we can work in the long term to reduce emissions .
The vast majority of the amendments I can support .
There are one or two that went through that I have some doubts about , particularly Amendment No 7 , which I cannot see as being environmental at all , or as contributing to the overall attempt to reduce the amount of ozone-depleting substances at ground level anywhere in the Union .
I want to come to the issue which Mr Davies has addressed , namely , where we should start from .
With what targets are we to start ?
Mr President , a series of quite practical and well-argued and debated figures were arrived at just before Christmas at Gothenburg under the UN / ECE protocol , and it seems to me that is the logical place to start .
It would not to my mind be the right place to finish , but it certainly would be the right place to start and it is the reason why I was convinced when I was there in the debate in the Industry Committee , as none of my colleagues from the Environment Committee were , that it was the right place to start .
It seems to me that the Commission figures are aspirational .
Yes , we could go there - we should be trying to go there , but I do not think we should be starting there .
We should be starting with the UN / ECE figures , with the Gothenburg protocol and revising them as is proposed by Mrs Myller in her report .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have , of course , nothing against the principle of the directive .
It is an important instrument for future environmental policy .
The Member States are given a clearer brief .
They know what they should be aiming for .
Upon examination of the table with the different ceilings for each Member State , however , I get the impression that there are double standards .
I note that , for example , my country , Belgium , has to meet the maximum possible level , rather than the economically viable level , but that , at the same time , areas in its vicinity which are just as polluted as my country can pursue a much laxer policy .
That is because a large country can use its better regions to offset its bad practices .
A small country is not in a position to do this .
I shall give you an example . From your statistics and maps , it appears that in northern France , which is just as polluting and polluted as Belgium , matters can be processed at a lower level .
According to your calculations , the implementation of this directive costs each Belgian EUR 103 per annum , compared to EUR 15 for each person in France , including northern France .
That is eight times less . This is partly due to the fact that we are a small country and we are surrounded by polluters .
One per cent of the GDP per annum is too much of a strain for my country .
I would therefore ask you to give me your backing for Amendments Nos 16 and 17 , in which I request that the Belgian Government be given the chance to re-evaluate the situation based on the annual reports .
Mr President , the biggest environmental problem in my own country is the acidification of land , forests , lakes and watercourses .
Acidification leads to the death , or reduced growth , of forests and causes fish to die and fewer plants to grow .
Acidified water also releases heavy metals which constitute a health problem .
The countryside in the Nordic countries is particularly vulnerable to acidification because these countries are largely lacking in means to protect themselves against it .
Acidification occurs due to acid rain , caused by air polluting emissions produced by the burning of fossil fuels .
In Sweden and Finland , we have taken extensive measures in order to reduce national levels of air pollution .
We are making major efforts to add lime to lakes and wetlands .
We are , for the most part , complying with the emission targets proposed in the now current directive .
However , more than 80 per cent of the acid rain over our country comes from air pollution not in our own countries but in other West European countries .
We are therefore appealing for your help .
Many North Europeans believe that it is only through environmental cooperation with other EU countries that our problems with acidification can be solved .
To the members of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy I want to say that the UN resolution in accordance with the Gothenburg Protocol is far from being adequate .
I am convinced that the EU can be better than the UN at solving the environmental problems in Europe .
The proposed EU directive against air pollution can , in fact , constitute an important step towards combating the acidification of the countryside , mainly in the northern area of the EU .
In addition , significant reductions in the percentages of unhealthy ground-level ozone , mainly in big cities in the southern part of the EU , can at the same time be attained .
We ought therefore to have a common interest in applauding the present EU draft directive .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a fair wind is blowing the way of the environment and the European Parliament welcomes this .
Indeed , by virtue of an unusually fortunate coincidence , directives on waste incineration , on limit values for national emissions of certain atmospheric pollutants , and ozone in ambient air all feature on today ' s agenda .
Previously , atmospheric pollution used to be associated with roads and traffic .
Today , however , on a large scale , it refers to the whole world , and on a small scale , it even means the house we live in .
In short , it means our whole ecosystem , and action must be taken . Setting emission limits for the four main pollutants is a sure way to help to reduce pollution , combat acidification and limit the harmful effects of these pollutants on human health and on plant life .
In its proposal for a directive , the European Commission proposes quantified national emission ceilings , which must be met by 2010 for the four pollutants I have just mentioned .
Furthermore , it estimates the costs for each Member State of complying with these limits .
I think that this is a good strategy .
Mrs Myller ' s excellent report makes a lucid evaluation of the European Commission ' s proposal and considers it to be balanced ; the report also seeks to strengthen the proposal in some areas .
In particular , the committee approved a compulsory review of the directive by 2004 , which will enable there to be a review of the limit values stipulated and measures adopted to ensure that these limit values are respected .
All of this seems quite reasonable .
Nevertheless , I must ask a question here .
Why should we not allow a Member State to prove that it is being treated particularly unfairly because of the way the directive is implemented , as a result , for example , of its geographical situation and its climate and the fact that these leave it at a major disadvantage ?
Would this not be wise ?
The EU system for combating atmospheric pollution is thus being extended , strengthened and refined .
EU environmental policy is becoming more and more the environmental policy of each Member State , with obvious advantages for all Europe ' s citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , the emission ceilings in the Commission ' s proposal are very ambitious , more so than those agreed in the UN Economic Commission for Europe under the so-called Gothenburg Protocol , and so they should be .
For my own part , I am ready to endorse the compromise prepared by the PPE-DE Group in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , according to which we shall comply with the Commission ' s proposal except with regard to the area of ammonia emissions , as the proposal will not cause great problems for my own country , Finland , or our neighbour , Sweden , as has become evident on many occasions in this discussion .
However , I also understand those views that advocate electing the ceilings proposed under the Gothenburg Protocol .
However the voting goes tomorrow , I believe the Commission should continuously monitor developments in all Member States , and promote action to help industry to make the necessary changes .
It is important that the environmental objectives are achieved as cost-effectively as possible throughout the whole Community .
Air quality in Europe has improved considerably in recent years .
Emission levels have decreased significantly , at least in the energy sector , in transport and in industry .
In recent years , there have been more and more EU acts in the area of the environment and new targets have been set for industry .
I think it is something of a problem that the targets are repeatedly changed before any proper assessment has been made of the effects , in practice , on the environment and the costs to industry of the legislative measures that have been adopted .
Before further obligations are imposed it is important to ensure that the action that has already been agreed is implemented in the Member States in every respect .
These two goals are not , in my opinion , mutually exclusive .
Finally , I believe there should be international agreements on ceilings for emissions for shipping and aircraft , and , at this stage , they should not fall within the scope of the directive .
Regarding long-term goals , I am of the opinion that there should be no strict deadline , but that Member States should endeavour , in accordance with their own goals , to meet the norms by the time stipulated or earlier .
Mr President , honourable Members of Parliament , we have made great strides in tackling acidification and also pollution in recent years .
I hope that this proposal will be another important step in this direction and that is why I especially want to thank the rapporteur Mrs Myller for her valuable work .
The Gothenburg Protocol is a step forward . However , it is nowhere near enough .
The protocol goes only halfway towards the goal for acidification already agreed by Parliament and the Council .
A substantial number of people will die early if we do not adopt the measures proposed by the Commission .
The protocol is the result of a process in which there is too little pressure on the reluctant to do what they should .
We cannot let this deflect the Community from agreed goals .
The costs of the Commission 's proposal must be kept in perspective , even on the Commission 's highly pessimistic estimate which would not take full account of Kyoto or non-technical solutions .
They amount to only 0.08 % of Community GDP in the year 2010 .
Member States will have to do some of the things that will let them meet proposed emissions ceilings more cheaply if they are to live up to their Kyoto commitments .
Saying that the ceilings are too difficult is dangerously close to ignoring Kyoto .
Let me now turn to the amendments .
The Commission can accept fully Amendments Nos 3 , 8 , 9 , 13 , 19 and 21 .
The Commission can accept in part the principle underlying Amendments Nos 1 and 2 .
We will draft a recital which does not appear to restrict the Commission 's right of initiative , for inclusion in our amended proposal .
We will also include a reference in Article 9 of the directive in order to make the new recital operational .
It follows that the Commission does not accept Amendment No 27 .
The aim of the Commission 's proposal is to leave as much flexibility as possible to Member States , but we cannot rule out further Community action if this would help Member States to meet emission ceilings more cost-effectively .
The Commission can also accept in part Amendment No 11 which would make further changes to Article 9 .
We agree that review of the legislation should take account of aircraft emissions , further emission reductions in regions bordering on the Community , measures taken in applicant countries and transport factors .
The Commission cannot however agree to bring forward the dates for reports to Parliament and Council .
In 2003 the Commission will have almost no data from Member States on which to report and base any decisions .
The Commission will not know in 2011 whether or not ceilings were met in 2010 because of the time that must be allowed for Member States to compile inventories .
We accept in part the principles underlying Amendment No 12 .
We will therefore redraft Article 9 ( 3 ) to incorporate much of the material in the proposed amendment .
The Commission accepts the principles of Amendment No 23 .
The reference to countries outside the UN / ECE process must be restricted to those who have supplied data and whose emissions are relevant to pollution in the Community .
The Commission accepts Amendments Nos 24 , 25 and 26 in principle , and will also take them into account when it redrafts Article 9 as part of its amended proposal .
The Commission has a great deal of sympathy with the concerns underlying Amendments Nos 16 and 17 .
Allowance should be made for the fact that smaller Member States have less room to spread the load .
However we are dealing here with transboundary pollution , so the Commission considers that adjustments to ceilings for individual Member States can only be made as part of a general review of ceilings .
We will therefore propose a new recital and changes to Article 9 , which will ensure that effects on smaller Member States are properly taken into account on review .
The Commission can accept that part of Amendment No 20 that would insert " an appropriate " into Recital 9 .
We do not accept the remainder of Amendment No 20 .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 15 , 28 , 29 and 32 .
They seek to replace emission ceilings that are designed to meet the agreed Community target for acidification , and to protect our citizens ' health , with the emission ceilings in the Gothenburg Protocol .
Gothenburg ceilings fall far short of what is needed as has already been said .
The Commission considers that , if Member States take seriously the Kyoto commitments , the emission ceilings that it has proposed will not be difficult to implement .
We may well be able to go further by 2010 , but this is something that can only be decided when we know how Member States will meet their Kyoto targets .
We cannot therefore accept Amendment No 31 .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments No 4 and 14 : under the principle of subsidiarity it is for Member States , not the Commission , to determine penalties for breaches of national legislation .
Furthermore , Amendment No 14 seeks to restrict the Commission 's discretion under the Treaty to decide when to bring infringement proceedings .
Amendments Nos 5 , 18 and 30 are also unacceptable .
The Commission is committed to pursuing long-term objectives for protection of the environment and human health , but we simply do not have enough information today to predict when long-term objectives might be reached .
The Commission must reject Amendment No 6 .
Emissions from international maritime traffic and cruising aircraft cannot be wholly controlled by individual Member States , nor even by Community action , and cannot therefore be included in national emission ceilings .
Action where appropriate must be taken in the International Maritime Organisation or the International Civil Aviation Organisation .
Last week , the IMO agreed to a proposal from the Community to declare the North Sea a sulphur dioxide control area .
The Commission will examine whether further such proposals should be made to the IMO , and whether international action is also needed on aircraft emissions .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 7 .
It is based on a misleading comparison with the solvents directive , where processes may involve high temperatures .
Non-volatile organic compounds are automatically excluded from the definition of " volatile organic compound " in these proposals since they are not found in the air in ambient conditions and do not contribute to ozone formation .
The proposed definition is identical in the Gothenburg Protocol .
We must maintain technical consistency .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 10 .
It would remove an essential obligation for Member States regularly to update emission inventories .
Finally , Mr President , we do not accept Amendment No 22 .
The Commission 's proposed wording on the key issue of public information is in line with agreements on the first two air quality daughter directives .
Finally , I should like to answer Mrs Oomen-Ruijten because she asked about the proposals on large combustion plants .
The answer is that the Council failed to reach a common position in December and the Commission is supporting the Portuguese presidency in its effort to make progress in parallel with the progress on this proposal .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Environmental legislation
The next item is the joint debate on two oral questions to the Commission on structural fund programmes in the Member States and national implementation of EU environmental laws ( B5 - 0014 / 2000 and B5 0208 / 2000 ) .
Mr President , I would like , on behalf of the committee , to move at least one of the oral questions .
First of all , I sympathise with the Commissioner 's desire to get better implementation of European Union law .
That is something which the committee as a whole is keen to see .
I want to quote from an article in the United Kingdom Sunday Telegraph this last Sunday .
The opening paragraph is " The European Commission has told Britain that it will lose up to 200 million pounds in grants for poorer regions unless it implements European Union laws to protect birds and their habitats " .
I would like to know if the Commission is making these threats and , if it is , whether it feels that it has an entitlement to do so .
That is a question which my German colleagues who are moving the other question want to follow up .
The Environment Committee is very interested in finding ways of incorporating environmental considerations into other policies .
The question is : is this a constitutionally viable way of doing that ?
What we are exploring here tonight in this crowded House is the question of linkage .
Linkage , in other words , using the threat of the withdrawal or withholding of funds to try to get better implementation of legislation in what may sometimes be a rather unconnected sector but in this case is quite a closely connected sector , is one that from time to time European Members of Parliament look at and then veer away from when they realise that it might affect the regions that they represent .
That is something which we find reflected in the views not only of some of the German Members here tonight but also in some of my British colleagues .
We need to ask to what extent the European Commission is prepared to use the provisions of Articles 12 and 41 of the general regulation on the structural funds to delay granting money where there is inadequate information on the impact of the projects which have applied for the money on the environment .
At its worst , we want to avoid the possibility that the aims of the structural funds and the European Union 's concern to protect its natural habitats may collide .
For instance , you may want to build a motorway across one part of the European Union in order to spend structural fund money and bring jobs to that part of the Union , but should you not be careful if that motorway is being driven through what should have been designated a protected site by the national government ?
Such possibilities have arisen in the past , especially in relation to major infrastructure projects .
We want to avoid that , but we believe that such collisions could result form the failure of the Member States to implement the habitats directive and the birds directive also , and in particular to submit to the Commission by as early as June 1995 a list of sites potentially of Community importance , either as hosting natural habitat types or representing the habitats of animal and plant species of Community importance .
We must ask : without such information , how can the Commission be certain that structural fund projects , which are usually large , will not damage sites potentially of European Union-wide importance ?
Future generations will not forgive us if we allow irreplaceable habitats to be destroyed , whose preservation we actually voted for eight years ago when we adopted our report on the habitats directive and then again in 1997 with the changes to the annex of the directive .
The fault lies with those Member States which have failed to observe the directive , and that includes my own .
If doubt hangs over their entitlement to structural funds , that is the fault of national governments .
That doubt has now fallen over the position of the United Kingdom and its entitlement to Structural Funds because the United Kingdom government has not fully implemented or complied with the provisions of the habitats directive .
It is in the power of the United Kingdom government , the German government and other national governments to remove that threat by complying with the habitats and birds directive .
In the United Kingdom , structural funding for counties such as Cornwall , which I represent and which has recently been granted Objective 1 status , faces a twin threat from government indolence on this directive and from government incompetence and meanness .
Even if the European Commission uses its best efforts in the United Kingdom there is no guarantee that the scrooge-like United Kingdom Chancellor will find matching funding .
Mr President , the FFH directive is an issue which has concerned us for some time now and we are currently experiencing a few teething problems .
However , to begin let me say the following : the FFH directive is an important directive and creates a new climate in Europe for the protection of nature , the environment and birds .
I would not want to change or spare anything in achieving this .
I also find it encouraging that the Commission is consequently taking care that EU legislation is being implemented .
All the same , in the case of the FFH directive the question arises as to whether the legislation which we have adopted is actually implementable and I can see obvious weak points .
As I see it , the FFH directive is an instance where the legislation is not matched to the feasibilities of the regions .
I see a problem in the various legal interpretations in the Member States due to the partially unclear definitions in the EU legislation , whilst , on the other hand , there is a lack of strong subsidiary aspects and approaches .
Revision of the FFH directive , including the current difficulties in implementation , should not , I think be excluded .
Alongside this general criticism of the FFH directive , however , I also see a particular problem with the amalgamation of the EU environmental and structural policies .
Article 12 of the structural funds regulation adopted on 21 June 1999 provides for the possibility of sanctions in the event of violations in the following areas : implementation of environmental legislation , breaches of public contracts and failure to observe equality between men and women .
To date , the Commission has only threatened sanctions in the case of the FFH directive .
Does it also intend to initiate sanction mechanisms in the other areas ?
In my opinion , this is a very problematic course of action .
The EU has a quite different means of enforcing sanctions , i.e. the European Court of Justice .
The possible cutting or withholding of money from the Structural Fund is a form of sanction whose effect on the regions concerned cannot just be disregarded .
What will happen with projects which are already under way and what will happen , above all , in those cases where a region does not receive any money from the Structural Fund ?
What sanctions will the Commission then impose for non-implementation of EU environment law ?
That the Commission is also totally unsure is shown by the fact that it initially wanted to include the entire state in the sanctions , then only a region , as you pointed out to Environment Minister Trittin , Commissioner .
I would ask that we make this point absolutely clear here .
Mr President , hearing the debate unfold and watching my colleagues and the clock , I am not sure what I want any more : protected areas for fauna , flora and habitats or protected areas for ecologically minded delegates .
At the moment , I am more interested in protected areas for delegates , but that is another matter .
Our question to you , Commissioner , has another purpose .
I would have liked to hear your answer first , but you have chosen to speak at the end of the debate .
We are discussing something here of which most know the history .
The fauna-flora-habitats legislation should have been implemented by 1994 - it is now the year 2000 .
The European Union list of the relevant nature conservation sites should have been ready in 1998 - it is now the year 2000 .
The Member States should have notified the Commission of their sites by 1995 - it is now the year 2000 .
Many Member States , including my own , did not do as required .
Germany , for example , implemented the legislation in 1998 instead of 1994 - only four years late .
But what does it matter ? !
As a result , the European Union list is obviously not ready .
And how could it be ?
Many Member States and many regions have not announced their sites .
Now Mr Schnellhardt has even suggested that perhaps we made a mistake with the fauna-flora-habitats directive .
Perhaps , Mr Schnellhardt , you are right that it wasn ' t totally practical , it wasn ' t perfect , it wasn ' t quite right .
Unfortunately , however , it is not the procedure in the European Union that if you don ' t like a piece of legislation you don ' t bother observing it .
If that were the case , then there would also be areas and matters which you and I would not like .
But we do have this unfortunate system in the European Union - what you call legal certainty .
We do have this unfortunate system - it is what you call legislation , which has been adopted in this European Parliament with the consent of the Member States .
It must be observed !
It might perhaps be a bit too strict and too legalistic , but that ' s the way it is : we are living in a European Union with a legal system .
Mr Jarzembowski is the one who supports this most of all because he comes from Hamburg which is one of the few regions of Germany to be nominated , along with Berlin , my own area , although as city states we have it particularly easy , I think I can say with some justification .
However , I do not want to pass sentence on Mr Schnellhardt , who comes from one of the new federal states who do not have things quite so good .
That is an internal German problem which we will resolve at another time and in another place in the House .
Today , Mr President , we are talking about the fact that Europe is losing its countryside and about the fact that Europe must observe legal certainty .
I shall come to my final point : Commissioner , it you do not succeed in going to the European Court of Justice and bringing to account those Member States which are not properly implementing legislation , you will lose your authority and your legitimacy .
You must do it !
If you think the legislation is no good , let us revise it .
If you think it is sound , go to the European Court of Justice , and be quick about it !
Mr President , it is a pleasure to face the Commissioner for the fifth time today at this unearthly hour .
I congratulate her for her efforts in trying to make sure that the habitats directive and associated directives are properly implemented .
I wish her well .
I have heard that some in the Commission believe that they have managed to squeeze more out of Member States in the past six months than they had in the previous six years .
If that is the case then it is good news indeed .
But the Commissioner is riding between two horses : one seeks to protect endangered species , the other seeks to assist the poorest parts of Europe .
In fact , it is a position in which I too find myself to some extent .
Some simple questions : how long is the Commissioner prepared to perform this balancing act ?
Just how much must Member States do to meet her requirements ?
Is she really prepared to tell people such as those whom I represent in Merseyside and the North-West of England that they must lose Structural Funds because their governments have failed to comply with the habitats directive ?
That is the balance I suppose .
Fundamentally and finally , is she prepared to compromise to find solutions , if the undertakings being given by government or the work being undertaken by governments takes longer than we would wish ?
For example , if a Minister goes down on his knees , cut his wrists and writes a pledge in letters of blood that he will deliver the habitats directive in full within an agreed timetable , is she prepared to assist the region and provide structural funding in such circumstances ?
- The question on how the Structural Funds respect our environmental legislation is a critical one and I appreciate the interest expressed in this matter by Mrs Jackson , Mr Poettering and Mrs Schnellhardt .
We had a discussion on this subject in the Commission meeting today particularly as regards the link to the habitats and the birds directives .
The main principle is clear : the actions cofinanced under the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund should contribute to the protection and improvement of the environment in the European Union .
This is confirmed in the new regulatory framework for the Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund and in the Commission 's related guidelines .
We should remember that both the Cohesion Fund and the Structural Funds finance important investments into environmental infrastructure such as waste water treatment facilities or waste management systems .
Let me make one thing clear first to avoid misunderstandings . The general regulation on the Structural Funds states that ' operations financed must be in conformity with the provisions of the Treaty , with instruments adopted under it and with Community policies and actions ' .
Contrary to the suggestion in one of the oral questions , this does not represent a new obligation on the Member States .
In fact , it is based closely on the previous framework regulation on the Structural Funds for the programming period 1994-1999 .
The Structural Funds Regulation has been approved by the Member States and the Council .
With regard to protection of sites under the habitats and birds directives , it is important that we do not give money to measures which adversely affect sites deserving protection - paying out money with one hand and maybe fining a Member State with the other hand .
This is what we confirmed in the Commission this afternoon , and Michel Barnier will set out our decisions in a letter to the Member States in a few days .
In this regard , the Commission intends to use all the possibilities offered by the new regulatory framework for the Cohesion and Structural Funds .
In following up the letter sent to Member States by Commissioners Wulf-Mathies and Bjerregaard on June 23 1999 , the Commission will insist that , in the programming documents for the period 2000-2006 , there must be a firm and irrevocable commitment guaranteeing that the programmes are consistent with the protection of sites under Natura 2000 .
Member States will be required to notify sites if they have not already done so within an agreed timetable , and to guarantee formally that they will not undertake action leading to the deterioration of potential Natura 2000 sites .
The Commission will then use all the means at its disposal to ensure that commitments entered into the programming documents are fully respected .
It intends to monitor the situation in the Member States , including the use of on-the-spot checks .
The Commission 's representative in the monitoring committee for each programme will also seek to ensure that Member States ' obligations with regard to Natura 2000 are fully respected .
In addition , should a Member State not honour its commitment to provide the lists under the habitats and birds directives within the timeframe set in the programming documents , the Commission will take immediate action .
This includes in particular excepting specific situations and with respect to the principle of proportionality - possible recourse to the provisions of the Structural or Cohesion Fund regulations in relation to the suspension of payments .
Of course , all this is in addition to the ongoing infringement procedures against a number of Member States for their failure to implement these directives .
In summing up , what we decided in Commission today is that we will insist that Member States send us their Natura 2000 lists : they should already have been sent , as has been stated many years ago .
We will use the means at our disposal to ensure that they honour the commitments that they have entered into .
Without the lists neither the Member States nor the Commission can ensure that we protect important nature sites when carrying out Structural Fund operations , for the simple reason that we do not know where these sites are .
One more word on the habitats directive . The Commission does not agree that there is a lack of clarity in this directive .
The directive is intended to establish a frame of reference which , in accordance with the subsidiarity principle , leaves the detailed implementation to the Member States .
While the Commission has no plans to revise the directive , its services are ready to provide guidance to the Member States on its implementation and we are finally starting to move on this .
The only sites which the Commission takes into account under the habitats directive are those put forward by the authorities in the Member States .
So-called shadow lists can only help in efforts to identify sites inside the Member States .
At Community level , they can contribute to scientific reference material in the creation of inventories of natural habitats and existing species .
Thank you for clarifying that matter , but we are still rather distressed at the statement you have just made because we were under the impression that the previous Commission was working on the simple principle of ' no lists , no funds ' .
You are now going back on that principle ; you are going back to the Member States to ask them to provide the lists .
They are seriously late .
They have completely failed to meet the requirements of the European directives .
So , today , it is still not clear to us whether you intend to utilise the technical , legal and political means available to you in order to enforce European directives .
As a result , I can see the Member States laughing their socks off at this new position because , in the final analysis , once again they have gained a little more time and it is nature conservation which is going to suffer .
From reading the various reports of the European Union , and the European Environment Agency , it is clear that environmental damage is still continuing .
The question I am asking , then , is as follows : today , when accepting the draft Community support framework for Portugal , did you demand the list of protected sites under the terms of the directives ?
Mr President , my first report as an MEP was on precisely the same topic as that which we are discussing here today : the environment and the Structural Funds .
And , of course , I came to the basic conclusion that projects financed by the Structural Funds should not , under any circumstances , damage the environment of the Member States and , to that end , greater consideration should be given to the environmental dimension at all levels when programming and implementing the relevant Union policies .
I still believe this today ; our main objective must always be sustainable development , i.e. development which respects and promotes the environment .
Therefore , Parliament should take this line and call on the Commission , in its vote , to implement the Structural Fund programmes in a way which takes account of Community environmental legislation , particularly with regard to directives on the preservation of natural habitats and wild birds .
At the same time , however , we should avoid over-reacting .
We should not suspend all the programmes or refuse to approve any of them just because we cannot guarantee that the odd regulation will be upheld .
This reminds me of a Greek proverb : you cannot chop off your head just because you have tooth ache .
I am not suggesting that we contravene legislation .
Rather , I am suggesting that we go ahead and implement the programmes and , at the same time , monitor the implementation of legislation and ensure that the Commission keeps Parliament informed .
It is important to remember that very important measures and projects are financed under the Structural Funds in the most problematic countries and regions of the Union , countries and regions which desperately need help in their endeavours to develop and converge with the more developed Member States .
We should also bear in mind , Mr President , that measures promoting the environment are often financed by the Structural Funds .
If we were to suspend all the programmes without exception for the reason given by a number of speakers here , we would be doing our environment more harm than good .
Mr President , there is no disagreement on the fact that we want to comply with this piece of legislation .
I was surprised to see you quoted in my press as threatening to cut off European funding .
I consider that to be a disproportionate action for what we are trying to achieve .
You will know that in the case of the UK , at a moderation seminar , the Commission agreed a timetable to allow for review and inclusion of additional sites .
In Paris a timetable was set to allow for a revised list to be presented in July with another moderation in October 2000 .
We are determined , after years of foot-dragging by the previous Conservative Government - Mrs Jackson 's party - to meet our requirements in the UK , in good faith , to follow the proper legal and proper consultation to ensure this directive is complied with .
This process is ongoing and I have no reason to believe that any plans submitted for regional funding breached the EU habitats and wild bird directives at this stage .
Therefore , I fail to understand or accept the linkage that is trying to be established through this resolution .
But let us be clear . Any refusal by the Commission to approve the programme - for example , in Merseyside - thus undermining £ 2 billion worth of investment , or any other Objective I area , including Cornwall , involving 5 million people in the UK , would actually breach - you said this Commissioner - the well-established Commission principle of proportionality , namely the obligation to pursue the least restrictive way of ensuring compliance with EU legislation - in this case the habitats and wild bird directive .
We therefore need to have a balanced relationship between means and ends .
In the final analysis any breach of EU legislation must actually go the European Court of Justice .
I cannot accept that such a balance means the cutting off of vital lifelines of EU funds to the poorest and neediest regions .
Commissioner Barnier probably said to you today , Commissioner Wallström , that all European programmes should be able to start without undue delay because it can be extremely difficult to make up for lost time later on .
I therefore ask the Commissioner to take collective responsibility for ensuring that Structural Fund programmes are implemented in time .
That is your responsibility as a member of the college .
Unlike the last speaker I would like to congratulate you , Commissioner , on your threat to cut off European funding .
It should not just be an idle threat .
You should carry it out if Member States do not act responsibly .
I come from a Member State which benefits from European funding but I am appalled at its track record on the implementation of the wild birds directive , on the habitats directive and many other directives .
We are , per capita , the worst country as regards complaints .
It is about time the European Commission took action and decided that if you are not willing to abide by the rules then the funding has to be cut off .
If this affects my own country , then so be it .
Member States have to comply with European regulations .
Former commissioners wrote to the Irish Government saying : " If you do not have on your list habitat areas to be protected then when you put in your national plan how are we going to assess whether it is in compliance with European directives ? "
You must stick to that .
If Member States are not willing to comply with the directives , cut off the funding .
I would support you one hundred percent .
- ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are too many projects and programmes funded by the EU that do not comply with the objectives of sustainable development and nature conservation required by the Treaties and by secondary legislation .
It is easy to demonstrate this : on the one hand , we allocate almost half of our resources to agriculture , but we nevertheless continue to fund an intensive form of farming designed to achieve high levels of productivity , whatever the cost , ignoring the support available for organic farming and extensive farming .
On the other hand , we spend a third of our resources on the Structural Funds , but the projects funded under those funds are the first to contravene directives on habitats .
Portugal is a perfect example of what I have just been talking about , and as it is a perfect example , it merits a thorough explanation .
In Portugal there is not only no definitive list of protected sites of Community importance for inclusion in the Natura 2000 network , but even though it is compulsory , there are no plans , rules or mechanisms for the management and protection of sites that have already been selected .
In other words , the Portuguese sites that already form part of the Natura 2000 network are completely at the mercy of unscrupulous groups of financiers and construction companies , because of the lack of instruments to protect them .
The most serious case is that of the tourist development that has been approved for the Abano area of the Sintra-Cascais national park , and I call on the Commission to intervene in this as a matter of urgency .
In Portugal , however , it is the state itself that is currently preparing to carry out projects , some of which are being funded by the Structural Funds , for sites which have been or will be classified by the EU as part of the Natura 2000 network .
Unfortunately , what is happening in Portugal is not unique - it is merely a good example .
I therefore hope that the Commission will bring its legal authority to bear and refuse to approve any funding for the third Community support framework until Member States send in their lists for the Natura 2000 network .
Mr President , what is at stake in this debate is whether the EU 's commitment to sustainable development in theory , actually means something in practice , whether when push comes to shove , we are prepared to make some very difficult decisions .
Sustainable development is supposed to be about integrating economic development with environmental concerns .
That is what the EU has signed up to in countless treaties from the Rio Earth Summit onwards .
That is what Article 6 of our own EC Treaty obliges us to do - to integrate those policies .
At the heart of this debate is the issue of economic development coming right up against environmental constraints .
We are going to be increasingly faced with hard decisions on this .
It will be a very good test of what our commitment to sustainable development really means .
At a recent plenary session , we talked a lot about coherence in EU policies .
Members from all over this House were rightly emphasising how important policy coherence is , yet here we have an outstanding example of policy incoherence .
That is why the Greens are supporting very strongly this resolution from the Environment Committee .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have listened to your address very carefully , but I have not fully understood it .
I will read the communication from the Commission very carefully , but perhaps you can help me to understand matters .
Are you of the opinion that the Commission can block entire approvals for plans , or is it just payment of funds for individual projects ?
That was not at all clear .
Let me say two or three things .
Firstly , I think that Community law must be seen as a whole .
Community law provides that if a Member State fails to implement legislation , or implements it incorrectly , the State will be brought to justice .
You should do that !
You should not try to achieve through the back door , through the non-payment of money , what you are unable to achieve through legal action and orderly process .
This is something which I do not think is quite right .
If you are saying that Member States are contravening Community law , breaching Community law , then bring these Member States to justice !
But to fail to do this in favour of the back-door approach of trying to stop the payment of money in order to indirectly force the hand of the Member States is something that I quite simply consider to be wrong and even cowardly !
Secondly , Commissioner , the Structural Funds are not given out to damage the countryside .
They are given out to create jobs and to kick-start the regions .
We must not therefore , in order to achieve another objective , obstruct or abandon the original aim of supporting disadvantaged areas .
What is more , it should not be the case that one Commissioner sets himself up as some sort of Supreme Commissioner who can then dictate to the other .
None of us want anything for the environment to be left undone .
But it isn ' t on , Mr President , Commissioner , that regions might suffer because Member States are failing in their duties !
Here too we must watch out !
- ( PT ) Mr President , following the words of my colleagues which prove how necessary the resolution we are discussing actually is , I should like to use my speaking time to condemn two particularly damaging cases which affect my country , Galicia , but which could equally be taking place in other European countries .
In Pontevedra , practically within the city limits , and occupying a particularly sought-after location by the sea , the huge industrial chemicals complex built by the public companies ENCE and ELNOSA , which produce cellulose pulp and chlorine , is contaminating water and air with the connivance of the Galician and Spanish authorities and in spite of the continuing protests of the local population .
In Vila Garcia de Arousa , repositories have been installed in a wharf financed by the ERDF to hold 80 000 cubic metres of hydrocarbons , which pose a serious threat to fishing and related activities which provide jobs for 18 000 people , if these hydrocarbons are handled on a regular basis or if accidents with transporting vessels occur .
Mr President , I believe the issue of ensuring integrated and correct implementation of the Community ' s environmental policy is perhaps the greatest challenge facing the Member States today .
Unfortunately , however , the requirements of environmental policy are not being respected and are not being properly incorporated when programmes and projects are formulated and approved in the Member States .
The problem is in fact much worse ; in addition to the fact that environmental legislation is being contravened in projects and programmes which have received Community approval and funding , it is also being contravened during the implementation of projects and programmes in receipt of private or national funding .
I should just like to draw your attention to paragraph b and point 3 and 8 of the resolution which takes account of precisely this issue .
It is absurd for EU environmental legislation not to be applied or respected for all projects in the Member States , irrespective of whether they require Community or some other type of funding .
We should make it quite clear to countries which contravene environmental legislation that the Commission , which is the guardian of primary and secondary Community law , will ensure that the environment is not damaged when projects are constructed .
This flagrant violation of our basic environmental laws must not be allowed to continue .
We need , once and for all , to come out and say what is happening in the Member States , because transparency , courage and the truth are the best policy .
And the truth is that the directives for the Natura 2000 network have been inadequately implemented both in my country and in other Member States .
For example , despite the fact that the Maliakos Gulf and the wetlands of the Sperkhios river have been designated as conservation areas under the Natura 2000 network , there are proposals to bridge the Maliakos Gulf , in violation of Community law , despite the fact that an alternative solution could be found .
I therefore insist and we call on the Commission to ensure that EU environmental legislation is properly implemented and respected in all projects and , if need be , to take recourse to the European Court , as another speaker has suggested , and propose huge fines and take a strict line .
Mr President , I cannot resist starting by saying it is well-known that my Irish colleague across the way lives in the capital city of Dublin where these sites will not be troubling her too much .
Having said that I support the thrust of what is before us here today and the ability of the Commission to use as a carrot-and-stick approach the Structural Funds to encourage in perhaps the most effective way recalcitrant Member States such as Ireland , to get their house in order in relation to the Natura 2000 sites .
No Member State has fully met the requirements of the habitats directive , for example , let alone met them within the legally-binding timetable .
Commission procedures are under way against nearly every Member State - 12 Member States in fact - under the habitats directive at the moment .
Twelve European countries are before the European Court .
The wild birds directive is little better with 13 countries currently facing a legal challenge for failure to comply with the directive 20 years after it was agreed .
It looks as if there are six countries currently at risk for delays or rejections of proposals for the use of Structural Funds , including my own , the UK , certain German Länder , France , Sweden and Belgium .
Only last December I raised this issue in the Irish Senate and cited all the various directives - mainly environmental directives - we had failed to transpose within the timetable or years after the deadline for transposition had taken place .
Constitutional challenge is often quoted in Ireland as one of our reasons .
Indeed our written constitution with protection for property rights has proved very difficult for the government to get over many of the issues in relation to designation of sites .
But with the principle of proportionality well respected , proposals to use the structural funds in this regard will help countries like Ireland to focus on what they actually need to do .
In this regard I have proposed tomorrow two amendments to item 2 and item 3 , adding a word : " to ensure that EU-funded programmes do not cause ' unauthorised ' damage or destruction to actual or potential protected sites " .
Perhaps you will take those on board in items 2 and 3 of the motion .
Mr President , Commissioner , implementation of the flora-fauna-habitats directive is causing quite a stir in many regions and also running into major difficulties .
Vaguely formulated application criteria are also the cause of the nine-year plus delay in implementation .
In my home region , a dialogue was begun prior to identification of the FFH sites .
The process brought the following problems to light in particular . Small and medium-sized agricultural enterprises are experiencing a restriction in the utilisation and cultivation of arable and grazing land as a result of the directive .
This means indirectly a reduction in the value of this land .
In municipal areas the directive in its current form is leading to the obstruction of important infrastructure measures .
The threat of withholding Structural Funds in the event of non-implementation is an attempt by the Commission to put pressure on the Member States and is undoubtedly the wrong approach since stopping the payment of Structural Funds due to non-implementation also carries the risk that on-going projects may be jeopardised , thereby stopping or jeopardising the economic development of a region in general .
Without any doubt , this cannot be in the interests of the Commission .
It would be sensible to re-examine and revise Directive 9243 to provide more certainty and clarity .
Citizens have the right to know the consequences which they can expect .
Before notifying a site an owner must know which conservation objectives will be achieved using which measures .
For this reason , I ask that you support the amendment which I have tabled jointly with Mr Schnellhardt .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make a few final comments .
This is not about the implementation of the habitats directive .
Remember that the directive is not an effort directive , it is a result directive .
This is about meeting our obligations under the Structural Funds regulation and without these lists we cannot ensure that we protect important natural sites during Structural Funds operations .
That is what this is about .
If for example in a country which we have discussed today there are 40 projects currently under way that would affect sites to be protected , how can we check that if we have not got the lists ?
It is the obligation of the Commission to ensure that these sites are protected .
So does this mean that we will not approve the operational programmes to answer your question ?
We are reasonable .
We do not want to delay the process of approving the operational programmes under the Structural Funds but the programmes must include a firm commitment by the Member State that they will send us their list by a certain point in time .
That is a clear timetable .
If they do not do so , we will launch the procedure for suspending payments without delay .
That is the decision we have taken today .
To make it very clear also to Mrs Isler Beguin that means that what was written in the common letter by Mrs Bjerregaard and Mrs Wulf-Mathies is still valid .
We have to understand that this is an opportunity for us to live up to our obligations under the regulations for the Structural Funds .
This will be a very important tool .
Of course , we hope that this will not be necessary because the Member States will provide us with their lists .
That is what we have to hope for and maybe pray for too .
I have received one motion for resolution pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 12.09 a.m. )
Mrs Maes has the floor for a point of order .
Maes ( Verts / ALE ) .
( NL ) Mr President , Parliament has been informed of some correspondence between Mr Prodi and Mrs Fontaine , in her capacity as President of this Parliament .
In his letter , he levelled heavy criticism at our Committee on Budgetary Control regarding the way it carries out its function .
We have not received a reply from Mrs Fontaine yet , but you will understand - and your presidency will feel the same - that this letter has caused a great deal of consternation , to put it mildly .
Mr Prodi has also written a letter to Mr Söderman in which he criticised the way in which Mr Söderman thinks he should exercise his duties .
Mr Söderman has replied to this letter , and we do have this reply .
We would like to know how the presidency has dealt with this correspondence .
Mrs Maes , the issue you have raised will be studied by the Presidency and the Conference of Presidents immediately .
50th anniversary of the Geneva Convention - humanitarian law
The next item is the Council statement on the 50th anniversary of the Geneva Convention - humanitarian law .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , just a few months ago we marked the 50th anniversary of the Geneva Conventions on the protection of victims of armed conflicts .
Fifty years ago , 63 countries signed the four conventions and two protocols which still provide a basis for international humanitarian rights today .
It is worth remembering that these international legal instruments were established during the period immediately after the Second World War and at that time reflected the major concerns felt at international level following the devastating effects of that conflict .
Events since that time have demonstrated that those who considered it essential to strengthen the rights of individuals in war zones , including civilians and military personnel not directly involved in the conflict , were totally justified .
A new code of ethics has accordingly come to be applied to the actions of parties to conflicts , in terms of strengthening the dignity of human life , which has increasingly become enshrined in international law in various other areas .
Unfortunately , in reality , it has become evident that the binding nature of the conventions and the way in which they are enforced by no means meet the requirements of the situations in which they are intended to provide protection .
We are still continuing to witness acts of war marked by barbarism and a total denial of the rights of civilians and of military personnel outside combat zones . The behaviour of many states and many parties to armed conflicts fails to reflect any principles whatsoever and is characterised by an " end justifies the means " approach .
And it is not unusual for civilians to be the particular target of military action , either in the form of terrorism or as an instrument of political pressure .
On the other hand , the unusual nature of certain conflicts , in particular those fought on a civil war footing , is increasingly being taken as an excuse for more serious crimes which are often carried out under cover of a shortage of information to the outside world and a kind of scorched earth policy intended to secure victory at all costs , and even at the cost of genocide .
In cases of this kind , acts affecting more vulnerable social groups take on a particular importance and are even more shocking .
Such indefensible acts ultimately expose children and the elderly to all kinds of inhumane actions , so that they are today the main victims of certain types of conflict , and sometimes even seem to be singled out to set an example .
The question of humanitarian organisations comes in here too , as their scope for action is frequently affected by the intolerable behaviour of certain parties to conflicts who are cynically trying to win time to seal their victories or to take retaliatory action affecting populations at risk .
It is important to carry on strengthening these organisations ' freedom of action and the protection of humanitarian workers .
In this context , I would particularly like to draw attention to the International Committee of the Red Cross , whose reports demonstrate that specific action is needed to improve the way in which the Geneva Conventions are applied .
And if it were not for the media and the new role they now play in spreading awareness of conflicts - not to mention these conflicts power to shock and mobilise the international community - the situation that we are witnessing today in certain war zones would be even worse and the level of impunity would be even greater .
Mr President , the European Union , which advocates and practises a set of values which we are proud to say is at the forefront of the international community , has been emphasising the vital importance of observing the Geneva Conventions .
In the context of its external relations , the Union promotes these values and seeks to implement them at all times through its political actions .
We are therefore alert to any risk of weakening the principles that unite us in this area , and we have always denounced any violations through our common foreign and security policy .
In such cases we seek to use the instruments available to us to exert pressure in a timely and effective way .
We are aware that in many cases we have not achieved everything we might wish , but we firmly intend to continue in future with the same determination .
Mr President , despite the gravity and the frequency of human rights violations that the Geneva Conventions and their protocols attempt to prevent , I do believe that the new millennium gives us some cause for hope .
This hope is primarily founded on gradually establishing an international set of values which means that it is already becoming difficult to take refuge behind spurious criteria such as cultural differences and national traits .
Although it is a slow process , there can be no doubt that we are already on the way to establishing this new international set of values and that the process of information globalisation is assisting in this and helping it to take root in our societies ' collective consciousness .
Our citizens need to take this process on board in order to establish a mechanism for reacting to actions which show a lack of respect for the fundamental principles which should nowadays be regarded as our common heritage .
In creating international tribunals like those now dealing with the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda , we have taken a step forward in making life more difficult for people who encourage acts which infringe the values of the Geneva Conventions .
These people must start to realise that the world is no longer a place where impunity is the rule .
If we can get this message across , we will certainly be helping to strengthen human rights and to give the principles which the Geneva Conventions and their protocols aim to protect the credibility and effectiveness that they need .
I congratulate the President for domestic reasons .
I would now like to speak , on behalf of the Socialist Group , in this debate which follows what we consider to be a satisfactory statement from the Council on the Geneva Convention . I will begin with an initial comment explaining the reasons why my Group tabled a resolution on this same subject during the last session of Parliament in 1999 .
This resolution was never debated for reasons which we will not go into here .
It seems to us highly appropriate to speak in the European Parliament of regulations which have enriched humanity ' s legal heritage and we should take every opportunity to recall and strengthen the validity of those instruments given the protection they offer and the rights they safeguard .
Another reason for adopting a resolution such as the one we are tabling is the fact that much of the work of the European institutions is aimed at finding balance and equality , and these are concepts which are almost completely incompatible with armed conflict .
The main victims of conflicts - children , women and the population in general - are the first to be threatened and to suffer and we must make their protection one of the priority objectives of our action .
The more we do to prevent violations of international humanitarian law , the more we remind other states - by means of all the opportunities which our foreign relations offer us - of the need to ratify and respect the Geneva Convention and the more we will be doing to protect these weakest groups .
The more suffering we prevent , the less action we will then have to take to repair the great damage caused by war .
What more can be done therefore to increase compliance with international humanitarian law and thus limit the suffering of the victims ?
For example , we can spread the knowledge of this law , particularly throughout society itself , amongst young people , within mass organisations and also in the armed forces and security services .
Above all , we must , through education , instil a passion for peace amongst our citizens .
In this respect , the European Union must be a prime agent for peace , but it must also provide strong support for the efforts of those organisations which the international community has entrusted with the responsibility of protecting the victims of conflicts and defending their rights .
Amongst these organisations , we should highlight the International Committee of the Red Cross .
All the institutions of the European Union must decisively support the work of the ICRC , because their role is quite simply indispensable .
Lastly , I do not consider it acceptable to say , as the Commission did in its response to my question a couple of months ago , that it does not have the competences nor the resources for actions aimed at promoting international humanitarian law , thereby demonstrating that its approach is basically bureaucratic and that its sensitivities are very different from those expressed by the Council in reply to another question in which I expressed a concern of this type . It is also different from the sensitivity demonstrated today by the Council in its intervention .
In this area , the institutions of the European Union - including the Commission of course - have a generic responsibility , because this is a question of spreading and promoting essential values which , furthermore , are the same as those which underpin our European project .
For all these reasons , Mr President , I ask you to support the resolution tabled , which contains all the main elements of the proposal presented by the Socialist Group at the end of last year .
Mr President , 12 August 1949 is a day which the ancient Romans would have said should be marked with a red stone .
It signified a great step forward for mankind - and yet in the fifty years since , although our own half-continent has lived in peace , more people have died in armed conflict than died in the whole of World War II .
We have failed to spread the lessons and values learned from that conflict .
Too often our own Member States have been parties to conflict , either through the production and sales of weapons , through the production and distribution of landmines or through the temptation - in the words of a great Victorian statesman in my country - to prefer their wars to be fought at a distance and wherever possible in the name of God .
We have failed to educate against the glorification of combat in our own communities .
We have failed to educate against the problems and the scourge of racism and xenophobia .
Yet , thanks to global communications , we have a constant reminder now on our television screens of the terrible effects of man 's inhumanity to man , and of course to woman and child .
We have seen recently in the former Yugoslavia , and now in Chechnya , the terrible effects of armed conflict and we see , furthermore , the effect of governments ' efforts to suppress independent media comment on such conflicts , and the development towards totalitarian government .
If the European Union is to become a community of values - if we are to play a true role in the new global governance , then we need to be promoting the values of the Geneva Conventions not only to our own soldiers and security forces , but also to people in our civilian societies .
We need to be pushing for the creation of a permanent international criminal court and urging our own Member States to sign and ratify the Convention .
We need to be working hard to combat racism and xenophobia .
Liberal Democrats in this House are proud that three of the authors of today 's reports , Mrs Malmström , Mrs Haarder and Baroness Ludford have grappled with these issues and given the House these reports today .
We live in hope that the twentieth century , which Europe has soaked in blood , can give way to a twenty-first century in which the power , the genius and the enthusiasm of humankind can be applied to the construction of a more just , peaceful and sustainable world .
Mr President , I am in sincere agreement with what was said in the previous speech .
Yesterday , we were talking about a Charter of Fundamental Rights ; today we are speaking of human rights .
Yesterday , in one excellent speech , someone said that we have a moral obligation to defend and develop democracy and human rights .
What this moral obligation actually entails and the extent of our efforts and commitment will , however , come to light in the context of that wretched reality represented by wars and armed conflicts .
Over the last century , these have totally changed in nature .
Humanitarian law is that yardstick by which we can show whether that moral obligation is just some kind of rhetorical stimulus for us or something that leads to deeds and action .
Today we are hearing the case of Albin Kurti , of Kosovo .
The Geneva Conventions are a vital part of this minimum level of action .
We also have to ensure that both the Ottawa Convention against Land Mines and the Charter for an International Criminal Court are ratified .
Mr President , in response to a question put to him during a radio interview on 20 January last , the Russian Ambassador to Paris declared that what the Russians were doing in Chechnya was fighting terrorism and that Europe and the whole world would subsequently thank Russia , when they understood the issue .
Personally , I cannot see any reason why the European Parliament should be thanking Russia .
On the contrary , I feel that it is necessary for Parliament to condemn Russia more emphatically and clearly than before , and that not only the Community institutions , but also the national governments should join us in doing so .
It was with sadness and regret that I learned of the feeble , unconvincing protest at Russia ' s treatment of Chechnya and subsequent embrace and encouragement given to Mr Putin by Tony Blair , a man held in high esteem throughout the world , during his official visit to Moscow a few days ago .
At a time when we are celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of a great landmark in humanitarian international law , the Geneva Convention , we cannot ignore that fact that all the points of the Geneva Convention are being violated on our doorstep , even though the Russians may say that this is not a state of war but a state of emergency .
Mr President , a European delegation returning from Chechnya a few days ago reported terrible sights .
If we genuinely want our action to have any effect , we must send a delegation from the European Parliament to Chechnya and the governments must undertake to abide by paragraph 6 of the Resolution , which we may shortly be voting on , in which Parliament calls upon the Council to ensure that cooperation with third countries is dependent upon reports on their application of human rights .
We must ask for some consistency between the countries of Europe if we want to make a genuine stand for human rights .
Mr President , I would like to start by apologising for the absence of Lord Bethell , our first speaker .
He must be held up somewhere for he is usually very conscientious . As he was not here this morning , I will , in effect , be taking over his task of first speaker .
Mr President , I would like to thank you for the declaration by the Portuguese presidency and also for the Commission ' s declaration .
I would also like to congratulate the Portuguese presidency because once again , it appears that it attended virtually all important debates this week .
Not all presidencies do this but the Portuguese do , and I think , therefore , that they deserve a compliment for this .
Mr President , the Geneva Convention is more topical than ever , especially in light of the events of the past couple of years .
In Kosovo , hundreds of thousands of people have been forced out of their homes because they belonged to the wrong ethnic group .
The same has happened in the rest of former Yugoslavia since the early nineties .
Serbs have been driven out of Croatia , Croats out of Serbia , Serbs and Croats out of parts of Bosnia and in Bosnia , the Muslim population was forced to flee , all of this with the help of military units of the respective Member States .
This image has been etched in the minds of each one of us because this took place in Europe , and not least because it reminds us of the abject conditions of the 30s and the dreadful war which followed .
Never again .
This is what politicians decided in post-war Europe . And this is how European cooperation and the Geneva Convention came about .
For a long time , we thought that Europe would remain spared of this kind of adversity and that we had sufficient instruments in place to prevent this kind of brutal disaster .
This appeared not to be the case .
Yugoslavia proved that Europe will remain vulnerable as long as the Union limits itself in scope to Western Europe .
The task of the European Union is therefore to extend the system we have created to the whole of Europe , above all with a view to keeping the peace .
It is just as important to look at the world around us .
Take Chechnya , where the population is the victim of a battle between the Russian army and terrorists .
Or Asia , Burma , in particular , where entire groups of the population are being driven out of their traditional areas with military force .
Indonesia , Timor , but also the Moluccas , where hundreds of thousands of people are forced out of their homes with the active backing of the army - yet again .
Sudan , where the southern population has been on the run from the northern rulers for years and where martial law is ignored .
The Great Lake areas in Africa where the fight between the Hutus and the Tutsis , an ethnic battle if ever I saw one , has forced millions of people to flee .
They are increasingly beleaguered rather than being protected by the national army units .
Then there are the border areas in Ethiopia and Eritrea , a kind of forgotten war , where governments are fighting over a specific border and where , meanwhile , nearly one hundred thousand Ethiopians have been driven out of Eritrea and vice versa .
Nobody seems to be taking any notice of this problem .
This is only an outline of the problems , both within Europe and elsewhere , which occasioned the drafting of the Geneva Convention .
The fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva Convention has actually been written in blood if we consider these fateful events .
At the same time , the Geneva Convention is also a beacon because we now have a tool by means of which we can expose inhumanities and because we can also report on positive developments .
One of these positive developments is the European Union itself where - to quote President Mitterrand , who spoke here - after 400 years of war , we have enjoyed more than 40 years ' peace .
Prominent politicians , some of whom , in fact most of whom , come from within our circles , have helped to bring this about .
So there is a solution to all these humanitarian issues which are referred to the Geneva Convention , and this solution is co-determined by us on a daily basis within our European Parliament , where 15 nationalities cooperate in a peaceful manner .
We should not turn a blind eye to the suffering around us but we should also be grateful for being able to live in peace and prosperity here in Western Europe , hoping that this peace and prosperity , as well as an end to all violence , will reach all corners of the globe : in Eastern Europe , South-Eastern Europe , Asia , Africa and anywhere else in desperate need of this .
Speaking today on the 50th anniversary of the Geneva Convention on the protection of human rights , both during and in the aftermath of war , I deeply regret finding myself in the difficult position of having to say that this Convention ' s downfall has come about on the continent of Europe itself .
Everything which has taken place in the Balkans in recent years , to use the words of a leading Greek poet , ' without caution , without shame ' , has been in a bid to correct one wrong with myriad other wrongs and has simply turned this Convention into a well-turned piece of literature with no teeth .
We recently witnessed a huge humanitarian disaster brought about by a supposedly humanitarian intervention .
We saw a huge wave of refugees and , at the same time , we watched hospitals and embassies being bombed and unarmed civilians becoming the war targets , while the Balkan peninsular will pay the price and suffer the painful consequences of the ecological disaster caused by the bombings for years to come .
As for the second section of the Convention , and in particular Articles 13 and 14 , which refer to protection from the effects of war for the wounded , the sick , the aged , children and expectant mothers , here it really is worth pausing to consider Kosovo and the findings of the relevant UN report .
Nearly 50 % of infants born prematurely die .
The children being born are underdeveloped due to malnutrition .
There has been a dramatic increase in the number of abortions .
Women are dying due to a lack of rudimentary medical care in clinics which have no electricity , heating or water .
The best way , therefore , of celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Geneva Convention is to strengthen the democratic and political facets of the Union , so that it can play a more decisive role on the international stage and solve any differences using peaceful means which respect human rights and , more importantly , respect everything set out in this truly wonderful Geneva Convention .
Mr President , the symbol of the Red Cross / Red Crescent movement brings hope to battlefields worldwide .
Perhaps I could be allowed a special reason for celebrating these conventions , as one of my family members founded the British Red Cross movement .
Article 1 ( b ) of the relevant Convention forbids the taking of hostages .
Article 23 of the Universal Islamic Declaration of Human Rights says that no one shall be forced to leave the country of his residence or be arbitrarily deported therefrom .
Millions of people are suffering worldwide .
Speakers today , from Graham Watson onwards , have made those points earlier .
But let us think just of a few people in order to bring home the horror and suffering .
We recall that on 20 August 1990 Iraq invaded Kuwait in a unilateral act of aggression that was universally condemned .
Nine years later , more than 600 prisoners of war are unreleased and unaccounted for by Iraq .
Iraq is a formidable enemy .
UNSCOM has destroyed 38 000 chemical weapons munitions , 690 tonnes of chemical weapons agents , 3 000 tonnes of precursor chemicals , 48 Scud missiles and a biological weapons factory designed to produce up to 50 000 litres of anthrax , botulism toxin and other agents .
Her strength and power for evil purposes is matched only by her determination not to find the missing prisoners .
After nine years she has only provided information sufficient to close three files .
This afternoon , when we debate Iraq , do not forget the missing Kuwaiti prisoners of war .
Do not lift economic sanctions while their fate remains uncertain .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , members of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I can only applaud the Council ' s presence in this debate . I echo without hesitation the encouraging words which the President-in-Office has just spoken .
However , I need to get something off my chest .
Maybe the President-in-Office of the Council is not aware that this is not the first time we have debated humanitarian law in this Parliament . We actually hold a topical debate every Thursday afternoon , which , unfortunately , is poorly attended by the Council .
This , I deeply regret .
However , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to use this opportunity to bring to your attention once more the fate of the Kosovar prisoners in Serbian prisons .
Parliament has brought the fate of these prisoners to the public ' s attention three times since our appointment in July and has also asked the Council to act in this matter .
The situation in Kosovo has got considerably worse , not least because the Albanians are concerned about the fate of their fellow countrymen in Serbian prisons .
The situation in Serbia is becoming more and more absurd .
Last Monday , the Albanian student leader , Albin Kurti , was sentenced to fifteen years ' imprisonment , simply because he had organised first-aid courses after the bombardments .
This was considered helping the UCK !
Surely this is too absurd for words !
Meanwhile , the population remains very concerned about the fate of those in prison .
There are reports of torture .
The Milosevic regime is also stepping up the repression of Serbia ' s own opposition .
Mr President-in-Office , could I ask you once more to act upon the resolutions which this Parliament has adopted three times and may I ask you what you intend to do ?
Mr President , human rights are individual rights which have found their way into national constitutions and international agreements as universal and inalienable rights or standards .
They include the right to personal and political freedom and basic social and economic rights .
The idea of human rights is one of the most exalted ideas which mankind has ever had and has its roots in the concentration camps and gulags of the last century .
It appeals to everything which makes man a human being and which makes him aware of his dignity , uniqueness , freedom and equality with other men .
The way in which human rights have spread illustrates the fact that this human image has huge powers to project and concern for human dignity is at the core of any human rights policy .
50 years after the general declaration of human rights , there is still a huge gap between what we claim and what is real .
It is true that more people than ever live under a democratic system and that the awareness of human rights has grown , but on balance the degree to which human rights are implemented or respected is still quite inadequate throughout the world .
Respect for human rights is extremely important on both moral and political grounds .
Political prisoners , violation of basic women ' s rights , child soldiers , too many poor people living below the poverty line , economic exploitation , the destruction of the environment which robs many people of their means of subsistence and massacres of civilians in armed conflicts are just some examples .
There is a vicious circle .
Lasting economic success is impossible without respect for human rights and without the guarantees of the rule of law and the constitutional state .
Failure to respect human rights brings the threat of both strife and economic and social decline .
And if the development spiral turns downwards , then human rights are dragged down with it .
Respect for human rights is fundamental if conflict is to be prevented and peace consolidated .
Trampling over human rights today paves the way for conflict tomorrow .
Governments held to democratic account generally take more trouble over the welfare of their people .
Here the promotion of democracy is the first rule , combined with principles of tolerance and pluralism ; not a pluralism which is free from values , but a pluralism geared precisely towards these human rights .
It makes no difference if people are destroyed in the name of a race or a class .
There is no political excuse for oppressing people , be it from an extreme right-wing or an extreme left-wing point of view .
In a globalised world , human rights are no longer an internal affair and the general acknowledgement of the globalisation of human rights therefore needs to be strengthened further .
Human rights are indivisible .
The universality of human rights shows that the degree to which they are applied has become a measure of progress , civilisation and culture in politics and society .
As a global actor , the European Union must take greater account of human rights , both at home and abroad , in the form of a stronger human rights policy .
It must prove itself to be a community of values .
It must act preventatively within the scope of its foreign and security policy and its development policy and must react by applying sanctions , for example , by suspending assistance .
In this respect , a global human rights policy is increasingly becoming a central aspect of foreign policy .
But more responsible human rights policies need to start at home .
Democrats who gear their actions towards human rights , who want to include basic rights in their constitutions and apply them , must show that they are prepared to fight right-wing and left-wing extremism on the political battlefield so that there is no cause whatsoever for human rights to be infringed and I think that , here too , we must make it clear to all sides that , for us , human rights cannot be used to justify a specific political system to a greater or lesser degree , and that it is the individual rights of the people which are at stake here , that it is human dignity which is at stake here and that , for this reason , political motives are no excuse for infringing human rights in any manner or at any stage of development .
This means that democrats must stand together in fundamental consensus against any form of extremism , not only against right-wing , but also against left-wing extremists .
Mr President , President of the Council , I welcome the statement of the Council this morning and while I endorse the sentiments expressed by the President , we should ask the question : what are the EU and its Member States doing to give expression to these laudable principles ?
I agree with Mr Martínez when he stressed the importance of providing adequate protection and support for victims .
However we must also take action to ensure that there are fewer victims in the future .
The one sure way to achieve this is to send a clear message to those who are guilty of crimes against humanity that they will be brought to justice for their evil deeds .
The tribunals in which those guilty of atrocities in the Balkans are currently on trial send one clear message .
Furthermore , although it ended in something of a fiasco , the Pinochet case in the UK had positive aspects to it .
The groundbreaking ruling by the House of Lords illustrates one way in which concerned countries can demonstrate to those that commit crimes against humanity that there will be no hiding place for them .
However welcome some of these developments may be , more needs to be done .
They must be built upon and the establishment of the International Criminal Court was a significant development in the field of human rights .
However , it will symbolise little more than a statement of platitudes and empty rhetoric unless its Statute comes into force .
Ratification by sixty Member States is required to achieve this and of the seven that have done so I regret to say that only one is from the EU , namely Italy .
I would say to the Council and I would say to the presidency this morning : if you want to ensure that those who commit violations of humanitarian law are brought to justice ; if you want to send a clear message ; if you want to prevent more victims in the future , you should use your presidency to start a campaign at least among EU Member States .
They must ratify the Rome Statute and you should use whatever influence you have elsewhere in the world to achieve that magic target of sixty to ensure that the statute of the International Criminal Court comes into force .
- ( DA ) Mr President , I completely support the Council ' s statement to the effect that the Geneva Conventions have been a very important stage in the development of humanitarian legislation .
I also agree that the conventions are just as necessary today as they were 50 years ago .
Allow me to take this opportunity to express my full recognition of the major humanitarian work which the International Red Cross and other humanitarian organisations carry out in regard both to spreading knowledge of the humanitarian principles as expressed in the Geneva Conventions and to providing aid to war victims throughout the world .
In my view , there are at present two main problems connected with the Geneva Conventions .
First of all , there is a gulf between the principles and their observance and , secondly , there are crucial states of affairs which are not covered by the conventions .
Allow me to illustrate the constantly widening gulf that exists between , on the one hand , the principles contained in the conventions and , on the other hand , current observance of these by pointing out that , in conflicts in the course of the last decade , 10 times as many civilians have been killed as soldiers .
That is essentially the reverse of the situation during the First World War .
The widening gulf between principles and practice is due , in my opinion , to the fact that the character of wars has changed during the last 50 years .
More and more wars are fought under conditions of anarchy in which there are no stable structures and in which the areas hit by war are not controlled by any government .
The world has also witnessed a growing number of wars in which weapons have deliberately been aimed at civilians and the purpose of which has been to annihilate specific groups in society .
In these situations , humanitarian aid to victims is naturally unwelcome , and this leaves the world in a terrible dilemma .
The second problem is that the Geneva Conventions do not adequately deal with the activities of those who intervene for humanitarian reasons .
Even though the Geneva Conventions contain provisions concerning the right to provide humanitarian aid in crisis situations , it is also laid down that this right requires the consent of the government in the country concerned .
This is especially the case if it is a question of internal conflicts .
The principle of humanitarian access or the international community ' s right to protect , and provide aid to , those in distress if a State is unable - or unwilling - to do so itself is not , therefore , being universally applied .
This is a serious breach of the humanitarian principle and is , in some cases , a fatal shortcoming which is responsible for many war victims .
It was precisely this question of providing normal access to humanitarian organisations that was the focal point of my visit to Chechnya at the beginning of February .
In my view , the question of to what extent circumstances require a revision of the Geneva Conventions , and what form this should take , is now an important one .
I believe we have two options which are not mutually exclusive .
The first is to change the conventions so that they are better placed to tackle complex contemporary crises , for example by establishing the right to provide humanitarian aid to those in need .
The other option is to ensure that the humanitarian principles established in the Geneva Conventions are in actual fact observed , for example , by improving the mechanisms for enforcing them .
The first option - that of reconsidering the content of the conventions in order to close all the loopholes - is a complicated and risky option : complicated because the way in which war is conducted is constantly changing , and risky because the possibility cannot be excluded that , as a result of opening the conventions to renegotiation , no new agreement might be reached .
But allow me to say clearly that I am wholeheartedly in favour of establishing the principle of humanitarian access in all situations and of reinforcing the right of those in distress to receive humanitarian aid .
With regard to the other option - that of securing better observance of the existing principles - I think that prosecuting offenders is one of the most promising options to be pursued .
The obligation upon States to proceed against war criminals is established in the Geneva Conventions , but that is clearly not enough .
I therefore wholeheartedly support the demand for prompt ratification of the statute of the International Criminal Court .
This demand has also been put forward here today .
On behalf of the Commission , I want to give my support to the view that we ought to work together on bringing this task to a satisfactory conclusion and turning it into legal reality .
Thank you very much , Mr Nielson .
I have received 4 motions for resolutions in accordance with Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Human rights , racism , xenophobia and antisemitism
The next item is the joint debate on :
the annual report ( A5-0060 / 2000 ) by Mrs Malmström , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on international human rights and European Union human rights policy [ 11350 / 1999 - C5-0265 / 1999 - 1999 / 2002 ( INI ) ] ;
the annual report ( A5-0050 / 2000 ) by Mr Haarder , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on respect for human rights in the European Union ( 1998-1999 ) [ 11350 / 1999 - C5-0265 / 1999 - 1999 / 2001 ( INI ) ] ;
the report ( A5-0049 / 2000 ) by Mrs Ludford , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on countering racism and xenophobia in the European Union [ COM ( 1999 ) 268 C5-0310 / 1999 + C5-0015 / 2000 - 1999 / 2205 ( COS ) ] ;
the report ( A5-0055 / 2000 ) by Mr Belder , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission : " Countering racism , xenophobia and antisemitism in the candidate countries " [ COM ( 1999 ) 256 C5-0094 / 1999 - 1999 / 2099 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , it has now been 50 years since we adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
After the horrors of the Second World War , many surely felt a strong sense of hope for a better world and a more humane future .
Unfortunately , these hopes have , in many respects , been dashed .
A large proportion of the world 's population is still living under oppression , with many deprived of their basic rights .
We read daily of gross violations of human rights on grounds of gender , religion , ethnic origin , political views , sexual orientation etc .
The European Community was formed in order to prevent the atrocities of the Second World War from occurring again .
The EC became more than just an economic union ; it became an important common value-system based precisely on the respect for human rights .
Both internal work and foreign policy rest on this principle .
The European Parliament has always considered the promotion of these rights to be one of its most important tasks .
This work has become even more important as time has gone by .
No one can fail to appreciate the commitment found , for example , in this House .
In many respects , the EU has a good policy on human rights but , unfortunately , it is much too ' straggly ' and incoherent .
The EU is therefore in desperate need of a coordinated , strategic and consistent policy in this area .
The Council 's report that came out in October last year was a good first step .
This was a welcome report which Parliament had waited many years for , and which we hope to see more of .
It is important , but it contains several deficiencies and needs to be supplemented .
In my opinion some of these deficiencies are linked to structural barriers and precisely this lack of a common strategy within the EU in the area of human rights .
We need increased coordination , not just between the institutions of the EU , but also between the EU and the Member States .
Human rights must be integrated into the EU 's activities naturally : in aid , in trade , in economic , cultural and political cooperation .
We need a consistent policy that is credible and predictable .
The EU must speak with one voice and give consistent signals to the countries that violate human rights .
There must be no doubt about what the EU stands for .
Certain basic rights are universal .
Violations of these can therefore never be excused on grounds of religion , culture or tradition .
Serious violations , which are specified in international conventions cannot - must not - be treated as internal matters .
Therefore , I want to encourage the Council to draw up a strategy for improving the work and making it better defined and hopefully more successful .
A few suggestions that may be included in such a strategy are , for example , that the Council could develop its own human rights indicators that could be used in connection with trade agreements .
These clauses can be used constructively , but they need to be more closely defined with respect to application , implementation and sanctions .
We could also form an advisory group containing representatives from the different EU institutions .
They could meet on a regular basis to discuss the promotion of human rights in the short and long term .
There ought to be experts in the EU 's delegations in third countries .
We must work more systematically to collect and evaluate data , information and background material .
We need an early warning system for violations of human rights .
We also need a web site where we can present the work being done with regard to human rights , showing , for example , who is doing what and what results have been achieved .
The web site could also contain links to different organisations .
I would also like to say a few words about women 's rights , an issue that I have chosen as a special theme in the report .
The Commission declared 1999 to be the year for combating violence against women .
It was a praiseworthy initiative , but the campaign was discreet to say the least .
We need long-term work , not occasional campaigns .
Women 's rights are being systematically violated throughout the world .
Reports abound on violence in the home , rapes , ritual violence and maltreatment in prisons .
During the 1990s , rape was used systematically as an act of war in many armed conflicts .
This can now be a matter for examination in the International Criminal Court .
Rape is at present the world 's most common crime of violence .
Reports from the UN claim that , every year , more women die from the effects of violence in the home than as a result of traffic accidents , malaria , cancer or war put together .
The trade in women and children is increasing at an alarming rate .
In certain countries , the governments are employing a pure apartheid policy against women .
Thousands of young women suffer genital mutilation every day .
Violence against women is a global issue which needs to be high on the international agenda and which must assume a central place in EU policy making , particularly in relations with offending countries .
The issue must be dealt with in diplomatic relations and raised with the candidate countries in the course of the negotiations relating to the enlargement of the EU .
The countries of the EU must ratify the report of the proceedings of the International Criminal Court as soon as possible so that it can start work .
The EU can play an important part when it comes to encouraging countries to ratify different international conventions for the protection of human rights .
Allow me to conclude by saying that the reports that will be discussed after mine show that there are also violations of human rights within the EU .
Obviously we need to deal with this .
If we want to be credible internally , we also need to have a sound policy externally .
Mr President , human rights are not something we have simply pulled out of the ether , nor have we taken them from party manifestos .
They are universal , that is to say indivisible and independent of countries and parties .
They are concerned not with opinions but with actions . They provide protection against injustice and discrimination .
They should be clear and comprehensible and not consist of idle talk .
We are to build upon firm ground when we talk of human rights , and we should therefore especially build upon those conventions to which the countries concerned have acceded and upon the legal practice which the Council of Europe ' s Court of Human Rights has developed in such a distinguished way since the Second World War .
The EU should not be changing or reinventing things .
Instead , the EU should have the status of a legal person , it should accede to the human rights conventions and , in that way , guarantee that human rights are respected , including in countries where the EU has jurisdiction .
The aforesaid legal practice is not static .
Fortunately , it is developing the whole time . Think of the latest judgement on homosexual equality , which has caused Great Britain to change its legislation , and the same will hopefully happen soon in Austria .
I also hope that there will soon be a judgement ensuring that citizens are not only entitled to form trade unions but also to be free to join them .
The conventions too are constantly being supplemented .
We have obtained conventions on bio-ethics and on the protection of personal data and private life , but I should especially like today to draw your attention to two new conventions from 1995 and 1998 concerning national minorities .
I think that Bosnia and Kosovo have taught us all that national minorities constitute the most potentially explosive factor in the Europe of the future .
We must demand of the candidate States , including Turkey , that , if they want to be a part of the Community , they have to guarantee that national minorities are able to lead their daily lives in peace , using the language they have always spoken in the area concerned .
The new Member States should not only comply with these requirements at the present time . They should also guarantee that they will do so in the future and should therefore sign and ratify the conventions , as they would also wish to do , if they have not already done so .
But so too must the present Member States .
Let us therefore urgently entreat those countries which have not ratified these conventions on national minorities to see to it that this is done straight away .
After five years , two Member States have still not signed the Convention for the Protection of National Minorities . They are Belgium and France which otherwise , of course , show such a keen interest in the situations in other countries .
Now , I think , they should put matters in order in their own countries and get these conventions signed .
The demands we impose upon others we must also impose upon ourselves .
We must say to all fifteen governments : go home and get the conventions signed and ratified .
Remember , too , the Charter for Regional and Minority Languages and remember the Convention for the International War Crimes Tribunal , which only Italy has ratified .
We must all ratify this , for the only means of combating the vicious circle of revenge and people ' s taking the law into their own hands is to have war criminals brought to justice and sentenced .
I also want to mention the Convention against Torture , which Ireland has still not ratified . Likewise , Belgium , Ireland and Great Britain have yet to recognise the United Nations Committee Against Torture as being competent to deal with individual complaints .
I could talk at length , partly about the conditions to which asylum seekers are subject in our Member States .
If only half of what is stated in the reports by Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch is correct , then the situation regarding the treatment of asylum seekers is indefensible .
I could also mention children ' s rights , which are a huge problem , including in a number of candidate States .
I could mention the continued discrimination against handicapped people , and I should also like to emphasise , further to Cecilia Malmström ' s speech , that , when it comes to women ' s equality , we constantly fall short , in the Union ' s Member States too .
Finally , I want to say that we should perhaps have certain new tools for monitoring human rights , and I would point out that , when it comes to national minorities , it would perhaps be an idea if , in conjunction with the Monitoring Centre for Racism and Xenophobia in Vienna , we were also to have the treatment of national minority languages monitored . I would also mention my proposal that we should have a supervisory body responsible for monitoring effectively the protection of personal data and the right to private life .
Technology is developing and so too , therefore , must our instruments for the protection of human rights .
Mr President , this report builds on previous excellent work in the European Parliament and other EU institutions .
Its starting point is the European Year Against Racism 1997 but the context has moved on significantly .
I very much welcome the positioning of the fight against race discrimination firmly in a human rights context by placing it in this joint debate because that is very much the approach taken in this report .
The first theme highlighted is that in the last year we have established two facts in law and in practice .
The first is the legal competence of the European Union to fight racism .
The second is the fact that race discrimination is a breach of a fundamental right and European Union law .
This is reflected in the confirmation through the accession process , not least the Commission communication on which Mr Belder has reported , and I congratulate him , that respect for racial equality and minority rights falls within the Copenhagen criteria .
Could I just say as an aside that the ELDR amendments to Mr Belder ' s report amplify rather than conflict with his report and were tabled because , unfortunately , the Citizens Rights Committee opinion was not voted on in the Foreign Affairs Committee .
The second theme emphasised in my report is to positively welcome diversity as a source of social vitality , economic prosperity and international influence .
European identity is not a homogenous white culture and it can , and must , expand to encompass the experience and culture of minority communities .
Thirdly my report notes that racial prejudice and discrimination poisons our whole society , including for white people .
Surveys show that racism has increased and there is an increase in racist violence and support for extremist parties .
On the other hand there is also progress , however bumpy , and some regions and cities in Europe are becoming at ease with a multi-racial and multi-cultural way of life .
I would cite London , which I represent , as the multi-racial capital of Europe .
Certainly I believe we need to talk a lot about racism and diversity and identity , not sideline the issues or talk in code .
Some may find the language in my report blunt and it is certainly intended to be clear and unambiguous .
This report stresses a rights-based approach and particularly welcomes the prospect of EU anti-discrimination legislation based on Article 13 and other legal measures such as enhanced rights for third country nationals .
But that cannot be the end of the story and there are measures proposed in the field of education , media and politics , and justice in policing , immigration and asylum policy , which would be aimed to back up the implementation of legislation .
Could I just address three aspects which I understand caused some difficulty for some Members of the EPP-ED Group .
The first is the mention of Austria and the entry of Haider ' s party into government and recalling the Parliament ' s decision in February .
I have to say that it would be perverse to discuss the European Union ' s strengthened response to racism without referring to recent developments which have been a landmark in establishing that the European Union is a community of values based on respect for human rights .
The second area where there are apparently EPP-ED hesitations is regarding enhanced rights for legally resident third country nationals of which there are around 20 million in the Union .
My understanding is that there is nothing in this report that the EPP has not been able to accept in the past .
The third area which I understand creates some problems for the EPP-ED Group is the belief that this report breaches subsidiarity by mentioning matters like education and policing .
But as I said in opening , the combination of Articles 6 and 7 , Article 13 and Article 29 of the Treaties have established that the combating of race discrimination is an objective and a competence of the European Union including the area of policing .
There are a few of the EPP-ED amendments which I can accept although it is perhaps a pity that they did not make more input at committee stage .
Could I appeal to Members of that group to deal with their points of disagreement by making explanations of vote .
I believe this report will get majority support here in plenary .
It was adopted by a large majority in committee and some of the supporters of the Conservatives and Christian Democrats may not appreciate their failure to be part of that majority .
Could I just finally say that I can accept some of the amendments from the Green Group and the GUE , particularly the one which I welcome to replace the term " holocaust " by " Shoah " .
There is some confusion from the GUE Group about the purpose of ethnic monitoring which is simply to collect statistics on the progress of ethnic minorities so as to be a basis for future policy .
It is not in order to identify discrimination and I hope they will understand if I reject their amendments on that .
I hope very much that the report will get a large majority when it is voted on later .
Mr President , racism , xenophobia and antisemitism are completely incompatible with the European Union ' s political principles .
Please allow me to make a direct reference .
These evil and harmful human phenomena are also completely at odds with the Bible .
Indeed , the word of God repeatedly and emphatically speaks of hospitality and mercifulness to strangers , as well as true charity as a consequence of our love for God , the Creator of all mankind .
Meanwhile , the day-to-day reality is disappointing .
Racism , xenophobia and antisemitism are realities in Eastern and Western Europe alike .
However , this situation should not lead to debilitating mutual recriminations or imputations .
Quite the opposite , in fact : a common social threat requires a common , political effort .
Hence the expediency of the Commission ' s communication in May last year and the present report by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
The European Parliament sets great store by countering racism , xenophobia and antisemitism in the candidate countries , as is evident from the report and opinions .
This kind of attention also requires us to look into our own hearts .
Mrs Ludford ' s report bears witness to this .
Indeed , the European Union ' s moral standards for newcomers apply just as much to the Member States themselves .
With regard to manifestations of racism , xenophobia and antisemitism , the Member States are by no means holier than thou .
In fact , extreme-right movements from Western Europe are looking to establish contact with like-minded people in Central and Eastern Europe and are fanning the fire of doom there , the fire which was once kindled by the secret services of the former communist regimes no less .
The enormity of the issues affecting the Roma people in Central and Eastern Europe stands out for two reasons .
Quantitatively , because it affects several million people and qualitatively , because the very existence of this extremely diversified people is at stake .
This is the Roma issue with all its intricacies in a nutshell . For example , how can the Roma break through the social barrier and widespread discrimination whilst maintaining their identity ?
How can they be galvanised into social involvement and into achieving the much-needed change in mentality ?
Fortunately , such profound questions are heard - officially and unofficially - within the candidate Member States .
They have led to well thought-through and promising initiatives and projects at national level , but these absorb a huge amount of funding .
In a nutshell , the EU ' s future Member States are making a direct appeal for solidarity to the current EU Members .
Or does the Western expert ' s razor-sharp criticism levelled at the European Union for its dismissive attitude towards Roma asylum-seekers cut ice after all ?
I quote : " On the one hand , the Central and Eastern European countries are pilloried on account of their policy of structural discrimination etc. and on the other hand , most EU countries are banishing the Roma collectively on account of them being economic migrants " .
The latter injustice should certainly not be missed out from the trio of racism , xenophobia and antisemitism in the candidate Member States .
In the wake of the holocaust , the systematic mass murder of millions of European Jews , antisemitism has still not disappeared from Central and Eastern Europe .
Extreme left and extreme right did not - and still do not - shrink from using this execrable and pernicious political instrument of battle .
Indeed , antisemitism does not appear to bear any relevance to the numerical presence of Jews .
For example , demagogues will take pleasure in pointing out the Jewish background - founded or not , as the case may be - of their hated political rivals .
And this is also borne out by the umpteen reprints of the notorious antisemitic protocols of the Wisemen of Sion , this fictitious account by the tsarist secret service dating back to 1897 , of the Jewish grasp for world domination across the entire region .
Still less credible are the conspiracy ideas cooked up by the ultra-nationalist grouping where the so-called traditional enemies , i.e. the national minorities in various candidate countries , are systematically associated with Jews .
In this light , Jews and Hungarians are seen as traitors of the mother country in Romania .
The same goes for Jews and Germans , and for Jews and Czechs in Czechoslovakia , Jews and Germans in Poland and Jews and Turks in Bulgaria .
Paragraph 32 of the draft resolution should be read against this dark background .
The European Parliament has called for constant political and social vigilance towards , and for stricter constitutional prosecution of , the unabating antisemitic comments expressed within the various candidate countries , bearing in mind that latent antisemitic feelings and thoughts are fairly widespread .
Thanks to the fruitful and probing discussions held within the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , and also the opinions presented by the rapporteurs of the other committees , this report now lies before you in this form .
The amendments have been carefully weighed up within the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , and quite a few have been honoured .
Mainly to avoid duplication , I will only partly support the newly tabled amendments .
All in all , the present report requires , in my opinion , regular follow-ups or continuous re-assessment .
It would mean a great deal to me if this were to be accomplished .
Mr President , I would like to welcome the passion with which Mr Belder has delivered his report on the Roma and on the East European situation .
It is the most extreme versions of racism on the edges of Europe which we are disturbed about .
When the debate about Austria - which has many elements , many complexities - was unfolding we realised that on the edges of Austria there were significant candidate countries which , while they were making progress in economic , progress in social aspects , represented a real problem with regard to their treatment of minorities .
In Slovakia , the Czech Republic and Hungary there were significant problems with the treatment of the Roma .
What we must realise is that , as we enlarge Europe , we have a significant responsibility for ensuring that any country that wishes to join the European Union must also reform the way that it treats minorities and the way that it treats the whole question of race discrimination .
I would make two or three other very simple points .
What the Roma situation shows , what Mr Belder 's report shows , is that an extreme version of discrimination clearly exists throughout the European Union , otherwise we would not be discussing this issue .
There are many questions we must discuss : How strongly will we push the question of Article 13 ?
Do we really want race discrimination protection throughout the European Union ?
The answer is yes .
We must have it quickly and we must have comprehensive legislation .
If we look around the European institutions and Parliament , we realise there are very few faces from ethnic minorities .
That situation is improving , but ultimately we have institutions which are bereft of representation .
It is representation and other similar issues that we must now tackle .
Racism is a complex issue .
We have begun to discuss it adequately but we have so much further to go .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Malmström on her very balanced and illuminating report .
From the relevant debate within committee , it appears that Parliament supports the human rights principles unanimously , which I can only applaud .
I also back the rapporteur ' s decision to deal extensively with the women ' s rights issue .
With the sharia on the up in various parts of the world , this issue is more topical than ever .
The situation remains extremely alarming in Afghanistan , where , since the Taliban have taken over power , women are no longer allowed to go out to work , are beaten in public for wearing indecent clothing and have hardly any access to medical care .
According to reports which reached me over the past couple of days , the number of suicides among female intellectuals has risen dramatically over the past couple of weeks .
The example of Afghanistan illustrates that discrimination against women is not a cultural but a political phenomenon .
Moreover , Afghanistan is not the only country where the rights of women are violated on a massive scale .
Millions of women throughout the world are still being circumcised or married off .
In many African countries , women are not allowed to own any possessions or open a bank account without the permission of a man .
Other practices , such as polygamy or the inheriting of widows , have become untenable in an AIDS era .
It is hardly surprising that in Africa , more women than men are infected with the AIDS virus .
We must condemn all practices which lead to the mutilation or death of women .
Within the European Union , female circumcision must be made a punishable offence .
This is not a matter of tradition or culture , it is one of the basic human rights .
But the atrocities in the rest of the world should not blind us to the atrocities in our own countries .
Domestic violence is still a huge problem within the European Union .
We must take a firm stance against this , which also involves prosecution .
Just as serious is the problem of white slavery : 500 000 women and girls per annum are imported to Western Europe alone .
A business which is estimated by the UNDP to be worth USD 7 billion .
A powerful and concerted effort is needed from all Member States to fight this outrageous form of trafficking in human beings .
Mr President , this report sends a powerful message to the Council and Commission .
I urge both institutions to turn it into something tangible , something concrete , and to do something constructive with it .
In any case , we will judge them on their actions , not their words .
Mr President , Commissioners , I would like to heartily congratulate the rapporteurs Mrs Malmström and Mr Haarder on excellent , systematic and innovative reports .
They provide the Commission , the Council , and also Parliament , with many ideas to really improve and guarantee human rights .
One example of this is Mrs Malmström 's suggestion of a special representative to protect those fighting for human rights .
It is also the duty of Parliament to examine the question of human rights in the candidate countries in a systematic way .
We have the knowledge , but we need to coordinate it and ensure that it is put to use so that we can influence the enlargement of the Union in such a way that human rights are respected .
I am also very pleased that Mr Haarder took up the rights of minority groups .
It will be an historic moment if we adopt Mr Haarder 's report and call attention to the crimes and the lack of respect for the rights of minority groups that are found within the EU .
It is time to put a stop to the contradictory messages we have been giving out in this regard and which have meant that we have required more of the candidate countries than we have of ourselves .
In actual fact , I have no hesitation in saying that it will be an historic moment when we adopt Mr Haarder 's report because it would not previously have been possible .
Finally , I would like to mention another matter that is close to my heart , namely aid for the Commission 's work for children 's rights as expressed in Cecilia Malmström 's report .
The Commission needs this aid .
We ought also to give aid when it comes to allocating budget funds to work for children 's rights .
I also believe that , in this area , we need to guard against children ' s becoming a commodity .
There is also a lack of respect for the rules of the Hague Convention and , as far as this is concerned , we also have very , very serious problems in the candidate countries .
Mr President , we have before us an exceptionally high standard report on human rights , and I am now speaking of Mrs Malmström ' s report , and what is also gratifying about it is the fact that it was drafted in close cooperation with independent NGOs .
Without civil society we are living in a vacuum .
We cannot breathe unless we are motivated from outside , from grassroots level .
The report contains a number of excellent and well-considered proposals .
I would like to draw your attention here to just three , regarding which my Group has been active .
They are : the need to act when independent journalists are attacked , the need to protect conscientious objectors and deserters , and the need to develop smart sanctions , which do not make conditions wretched for vast sections of the population , but which are targeted at the political tyrants that have amassed riches .
This is a precision weapon , which must be utilised more .
Speaking more generally , as Mrs Malmström herself also said , we have to develop a strategic approach to all the problems we are speaking about today .
It must be a dynamic one and one that can penetrate the reality of the situation at all levels .
We cannot go about correcting obvious wrongdoings by merely resorting to rhetorical commitment .
The Finnish writer Samuli Paronen wrote : " big crimes need many accomplices , millions - all those who do nothing " .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think these reports speak for themselves .
Racism and antisemitism are on the increase in the European Union and beyond .
Our first act must therefore be not only to refuse to accept this situation but to publicly denounce it .
Due to its clear-sightedness , Mrs Ludford ' s report actively contributes to this approach .
Denouncing racism , including racist talk , does not mean censoring the freedom of opinion as some would have us believe . Racism is not an opinion .
It is a crime against human dignity . It is antisocial behaviour which can include physical attacks on individuals .
This has recently been seen in El Ejido in Spain and it also happened with the attacks on the homes of Turkish workers in Rostock and with the death of young Ibrahim Ali who was killed in Marseilles in 1995 by billposters of the French National Front .
On each occasion , people were given the ideological arms to carry out the attacks .
There is also another type of racism which involves daily harassment and humiliation .
This can be seen in the discrimination applied in access to housing , leisure facilities and employment .
You will all be aware of the example , recently reported in the French press , of a young man from Strasbourg who sent two completely identical curricula vitæ to the same company .
The name on one was foreign-sounding and the other was typically French .
You can guess which ' applicant ' was invited for interview .
We cannot nowadays simply defend those described as minorities . Instead we must get them out of this ghetto .
Rather than concentrating on protecting minorities , we should be building the concept of European citizenship involving common values . We should be concentrating on building a common future for everyone and a society in which everyone can develop and which totally rejects any hint of submission to barbarism .
Throughout its history Europe has been capable of the best and the worst .
The best is the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Geneva Convention . The worst is colonialism , the Shoah , Stalinism and nazism .
We must teach our children about all of this .
We must clearly embrace everything which can strengthen Europe and reject anything which weakens it . At the same time we must send a clear message about the type of society we want to build .
I will say plainly that those who regard as acceptable an alliance with extremists in order to win elections will be swept up and dumped in the dustbins of history . An alliance with the likes of Haider or Le Pen is like supping with the devil .
You need a long spoon which will never be long enough . I would also remind those who advocate an ethnic concept of the nation that Clémenceau said that patriotism is the love of one ' s country whereas nationalism is the hatred of others .
These people have clearly chosen their side .
All these fine words must now lead to concrete action and practical legislative steps .
Legislation against racism must be harmonised . The words must take on real meaning .
Equal opportunities means allowing all children born on European soil to become European citizens and to enjoy the right of nationality of the country in which they are born .
Equal rights means being entitled to vote and fighting against all forms of discrimination , whether spatial , geographical , social or racial .
This is how we can positively support the values for which we are fighting .
Mr President , as I stressed yesterday , I feel it is significant that we are confronting the issue of human rights here in France , for , along with North America , France could be called the birthplace of these universal principles .
However , it appears that we are not always completely sure which rights we are talking about and that we are introducing or we want to introduce rights which are not provided for in the Conventions or the international Treaties .
For example , the right to immigration does not exist .
Of course , an immigrant coming from outside the Union has the right to enjoy his rights , but imposing limits or controls on immigration cannot be classed as racism or xenophobia , for the very reason that there is no mention of a right to immigrate in any text .
Moreover , the idea of completely uncontrolled immigration is unimaginable , if only for reasons of space and numbers .
And , in addition , there are duties which should sometimes be remembered as well as rights .
For example , we have been talking about the Roma .
Of course , the Roma have rights and should not be discriminated against , but many of them , and I am not saying the majority , but certainly a large number of them , as has been statistically proven , do not live lawful lives .
Many of them abuse their women and , more importantly , their children .
Ill-treated , ragged children are often to be seen on the streets , and this is a conscious situation calculated to arouse the pity of passers-by and to induce them to give them some money .
Sadly , the authorities often turn a blind eye to this , in the same way that they turn a blind eye , or two blind eyes , to the other unlawful activities perpetrated by certain parties who do not pay taxes and who are not fully integrated into our society .
Moreover , there seem to be free zones within our communities when it comes to some violations of human rights : for example , certain types of genital mutilation are very frequent and there needs to be more of a crackdown on them .
Now then , it is right for an immigrant to have rights , but it is also right for him to abide by the rules of the country in which he finds himself , for it must not be forgotten that European civilisation , which is a Christian civilisation , an enlightened civilisation , even though it is welcoming and open to other cultures , does have its own roots and must not be overwhelmed .
We must take care that we do not become a minority ourselves , and that we do not become victims of discrimination here , in our own home .
Mr President , the 1998 / 1999 annual report on respecting human rights within the EU has gone far beyond its own brief .
Too much attention has gone into developing European powers in the field of human rights , of which , by all accounts , there are high expectations .
Asylum policy has been dealt with extensively , so has the heading " life styles and types of relationships " .
The rights of homosexuals have been given more attention than is necessary , and all kinds of requirements have been imposed on the Member States .
What is remarkable , however , is the deafening silence when it comes to those who really are the weaker parties amongst us : the elderly , babies and the handicapped .
And where does the right to life come in ?
And what about the protection of the family ?
In a nutshell , the report is full of good intentions but is dogged by a view of man and society which is too individualistic . Nor does it do enough justice to the fact that life itself is worth protecting .
Racism , xenophobia and antisemitism must be stamped out .
I fully share this view , which is expressed in the Ludford report .
But in contrast to what is stated in the report , we cannot prevent racism and xenophobia by adopting a unilateral , positive approach to the multi-cultural society as a " source of social vitality " .
This notion smacks of a naïve kind of intellectualism .
The Netherlands has adopted such a policy over the past couple of years , aimed at bringing about a multi-cultural society .
This did not turn out to be a success , as is evident from the " multi-cultural drama " which we now find ourselves in .
Many immigrants have , as a result of this policy , ended up in a sub-class of society , with all the consequences that entails .
Rather than putting our own culture into a multi-cultural context , I am in favour of developing a sound , realistic awareness of our own culture , taking both the positive and the negative aspects into account , which can lead to improved relations with each other and acceptance of the cultural differences on both sides .
Finally , racism , xenophobia and antisemitism , have , I am sorry to say , existed throughout the world since time immemorial .
With this in mind , we should take the century-old Biblical commandment " love thy neighbour like thyself " to heart .
Mr President , having been alarmed at how the 14 Member States have prejudged Austria , it gives me satisfaction to acknowledge the Haarder report , which gives Austria full marks , even in comparison with the other Member States , when it comes to human rights , something which is self-evident , in my view , for this country at the heart of Europe .
In so doing , he has confirmed my contention that this action by the 14 lacks any justifiable basis , Mr Schulz .
The report also criticises the fact that Austria has not yet ratified the 1998 European Charter for Minority Languages .
I should therefore like to point out that the ratification of the Charter for Minority Languages referred to is indeed an element of the government ' s programme .
The coalition has undertaken to table this before the Nationalrat ( National Assembly ) by January 2001 , and the highly criticised government is continuing to burnish Austria ' s already excellent image in the field of human rights .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , it is as a pseudo-rapporteur for the PPE-DE Group that I will comment on the human rights report to be voted on by this House . I will therefore simply set out the principles and analysis of our Group .
We have several basic principles .
The first is not to take account of issues falling outside the time framework of this report which relates to 1998 and 1999 . Any comments on the current political situation must therefore be avoided .
The second is to prevent this report , as far as possible , from simply being a collection of objectives , pious hopes or conclusions based on false premises as these are not specific and verifiable rights which can be effectively exercised in the Member States .
Our third principle is in line with the unchanging beliefs of the PPE-DE Group .
Although we do not want to be less generous or less open to others than the rest of the groups , nevertheless we do not believe that the identified rights are truly appropriate . This has caused us to vote against certain rights which , although we consider them to be completely legitimate and worthy of support , are not appropriate in a report on the state of human rights in the European Union .
We have also wanted to avoid , where possible , countries being mentioned or highlighted when the report on human rights for this year does not contain a systematic analysis of each country .
This issue must also be viewed in the context of subsidiarity in that it is the responsibility of the Member States to ensure the protection of human rights and it is up to the national courts to punish any infringements .
Finally , we would like the report for next year to take account of the preparation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights . In this way , from next year , we will have a report in line with the real situation which will allow a country-by-country and right-by-right analysis to be carried out due to the simultaneous preparation of this Charter .
The next report to be put to the vote should be awaited with even more trepidation and should clearly show the interest which our Union takes in human rights within our Community .
Mr President , in this great debate about human rights it is surprising how infrequently we hear children mentioned - the people who are least able to protect themselves in relation to human rights .
Children are actually invisible in the EU Treaties .
Animals have rights , children do not .
Yet children are affected by the laws that the EU passes and the single market .
The electronic revolution seems to have given more freedom to exploiters , the paedophiles and the pornographers , than to industrialists .
In a twenty-first century where we regard ourselves as civilised there is still a slave trade in which children are bought and sold for sexual exploitation throughout the world .
We have problems in the candidate countries .
We have a scandal at the moment in Latvia which allegedly goes to the very heart of the government .
We have pictures on our TV almost every day of child soldiers fighting in conflicts throughout the world .
And of course , we have familiar tales of child labour .
We have to take tougher action .
We have to bring children up the agenda .
This is not to say that the EU should start to be responsible for children 's policy but we could start by ensuring that EU laws are child-proof .
We should ensure that measures developed by the Commission have a specific children 's dimension .
We should ensure that there is somebody in the Commission with responsibility for child matters .
In 1998 my own government appointed a child rights expert from Save The Children to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office to develop strategies and practical projects in relation to children 's rights .
Why can we not do the same ?
We also have in Great Britain a Children 's Select Committee able to investigate child abuses and to interrogate expert witnesses .
Why can we not do the same ?
Can we make sure that the Charter of Fundamental Rights has a section relating to children ?
I know we have communications .
We have action plans and conventions but what we want is action , not good intentions .
Mr President , why are human rights so far behind human progress ?
Science , technology and communication have broadened man ' s knowledge and expertise and abilities beyond belief .
Yet , the world is still being plagued by human rights violations on a massive scale , mainly due to war , poverty and misuse of power .
We should therefore concentrate all our efforts on these human rights .
But cultural value patterns underlie these violations too .
Mrs Malmström was therefore right in asking , in her special report , that the position of the woman be given special attention .
In a great many societies , the woman is still suffering at the hands of men as a result of institutionalised and sometimes legalised misuse of power .
Not collective habits but the effects on the individual must be the overriding factor in our judgement .
This means , for example , that we should not respect female circumcision as an old tradition but should fight it with all civilised means .
European foreign policy is too easily thrown off course by purely economic interests .
It is high time that human rights were given the priority they deserve , not only in theory but also in practice .
In this way , Europe can make a substantial contribution to progress , progress of civilisation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in view of our discussion of these reports on human rights inside and outside the European Union , the time is therefore right to consider the cross-influences between the ' inside ' and the ' outside ' .
Clearly , the Union ' s best tool for disseminating its human rights model is the experience of migrants .
Yet our greatest failings in human rights involve these very people .
I can give you two examples of this .
Firstly , there is cause for concern about the shape being taken by the readmission agreements which directly threaten fundamental rights such as the right of asylum or the right to live as a family .
The Union has confirmed its attachment to the Geneva and Dublin Conventions by establishing the anti-deportation principle .
It is therefore unacceptable that the readmission agreements can allow a third country national to be returned to his or her country when we know that this country more often than not does not guarantee respect for human rights and democratic freedoms .
It is just as unacceptable to see families torn apart with children sometimes being left alone following the expulsion of their parents who have no right of residence , even though some have lived and worked in Europe for nearly ten years .
What image of human rights do you think they will take back to their countries given their experiences of questionable living conditions , humiliating body searches , insults , endless forms and interrogations in police stations and detention centres ?
After all this , we then just end up sending them back to countries which they are legitimately seeking to leave , often for political and economic as well as humanitarian reasons .
These readmission agreements are dangerous for asylum-seekers , for the dissemination of human rights throughout the world and for the international stature of the European Union .
If the Union wants to be taken seriously on the issue of respect for human rights , it must immediately stop these expulsions . It must legalise the situation of all these men and women who are deprived of all rights , including the right to live as a family and the right of free movement , and who are currently kept in a situation of official illegality .
Another flagrant attack on human rights concerns foreigners and citizenship .
How can we expect third country nationals to integrate and their children to respect the law and to believe in the reality of democratic rights when they are not allowed to exercise these rights ?
At a time when the Union is considering the definition of a Charter of Fundamental Rights , why are we creating second-class citizens ?
This really is a case of fundamental rights .
How can we allow some people to be excluded ?
How can they believe in the reality of the Declaration of Human Rights ?
On human rights , the Union could take pride in being the first in history to define citizenship according to a principle of residence instead of establishing discrimination based on nationality .
Mr President , this debate is taking place at an important moment for this Parliament .

The excellent reports by Mrs Malmström , Mrs Ludford and Messrs Haarder and Belder offer us Europeans the opportunity for analysis and , above all , self-criticism .
This year is especially significant .
A year after waging war against Yugoslavia in the name of human rights , we have remained passive in the face of an even greater violation of these rights on the part of Russia in Chechnya .
Two weeks ago , with the support of the United States , Spain and Great Britain allowed Pinochet to evade his responsibilities to face justice for his very grave violations of human rights .
This year we have also seen a racist and xenophobic party enter government in Austria , and in Spain we have also seen an outbreak of racist violence in El Ejido .
We have seen the mayor of that city receive 75 % support in the elections there .
This has also been the year in which the Catholic Church has issued a mea culpa on violations of human rights committed throughout history .
To this end , we in the European Union could develop a more constructive attitude .
I therefore propose five points , which are the contributions of the GUE / NGL Group to the various reports .

Firstly , to abandon all hypocrisy and treat all countries in the same way ; secondly , to commit ourselves to defending , at all costs , human rights everywhere , including in the economic field , in factories ; thirdly , to show a special concern for human rights throughout the world , in Latin America ( in Mexico , in Argentina , in Peru ) etc . ; fourthly , to accept unreservedly the cause of human rights for women ; and lastly , to recommend the ratification of the International Criminal Court .


I am obliged to destroy the good humour of this House , for 25 years ' experience of intense discussion and analysis of human rights shows that good intentions combined with massive ignorance of the reality involved produce some terrible results or , to put it in ordinary plain language , " Everyone talks about the weather , but no one does anything about it " .
It is not so much a question of what is said , and the more talk there is of human rights , the worse are the abuses .
I want to make three small points .
First of all , I completely agree with my fellow countryman and rapporteur for the report , Mr Haarder , when he says that , where the protection of minorities is concerned , we should make the same demands upon ourselves as we make upon the candidate States .
This is something which the EU ' s institutions should have thought about in 1991-1992 when , in contravention of the rules applicable to the protection of minorities , they recognised firstly Slovenia and subsequently Croatia and , in the process , added fuel to the flames of what subsequently became the Balkans disaster .
The second point is an extension of yesterday ' s debate .
To insist on incorporating the Charter of Fundamental Human Rights into the EU ' s constitution - or , rather , into the EU Treaty - would not merely entail a number of huge and insuperable constitutional problems , especially in a country like Denmark , but it would also make the EU Treaty into a genuine constitution incorporating fundamental rights .
It is said that the more rights we have , the better , but rights are part and parcel of a complicated interplay of systems .
The result of an EU Charter would be an endlessly complicated morass of legal and constitutional problems .
Which is the decision-making authority ?
Are the rights guaranteed under the Convention on Human Rights better than those guaranteed under the EU ' s Charter ?
Is the latter , again , better than the national constitutions ?
That is a question which has no meaning .
Finally , my third remark is a compliment to the rapporteur , Mr Haarder .
It is with satisfaction and much interest that I see that paragraph 61 emphasises the collective right to trade union membership .
However , Mr Haarder ' s old hobbyhorse about the individual ' s right not to join a union is not included as a recommendation .
I want to congratulate Mr Haarder on the new political insight on his part which is evidenced here .
Mr President , the report contains important conditions for future candidate countries , thereby granting human rights problems the same status as economic conditions .
We particularly welcome the fact that the problem of religious freedom was mentioned , as some countries , especially the Czech Republic , have already passed very restrictive laws against religious minorities .
The passage on the human rights situation within the EU is also interesting and gives the EU no cause whatsoever to take the moral high ground vis-à-vis new candidate countries .
We Austrians now find ourselves in a situation , ostensibly in order to safeguard human rights , in which we no longer know whether to laugh or cry .
A few weeks ago , taxi drivers in Brussels were refusing to take Austrian passengers .
Austrians were thrown out of hotels and restaurants in Belgium and France .
Our assistants ' French teachers declared that they no longer wished to teach Nazis and school exchange programmes were cancelled .
Austrians working abroad had their cars vandalised , stones thrown at their houses and their children were threatened at school .
Today it was revealed that the Austrian entrant in a show jumping competition in Grenoble had his invitation withdrawn .
The town council in Grenoble held lengthy discussions on whether or not the horse was welcome but , in the end , its invitation was also withdrawn as it had not expressly distanced itself from the Austrian government .
Perhaps we shall soon see Mozart banned from international opera houses .
Who knows where it will all end .
Whoever takes political responsibility for this anti-fascist Punch and Judy show here in the House and in the EU countries in question has cause to be proud .
I can assure the previous speakers , who call me Satan ' s sidekick , that I am not hiding a cloven hoof beneath the benches .
If this irrational collective hatred against an entire nation can be so readily called upon in the EU , we are a long way from being in a position to dictate to other countries .
If only all these good people who take the floor here had lived sixty or more years ago , just think what Europe could have spared itself .
Mr President , there is something rather pathetic in our determination to link human rights to the European project whose very logic questions and even threatens those rights .
In our opinion , human rights cannot be envisaged without a political society and , in particular , without this supreme form of the peaceful political society which is the nation , in terms of both civil peace and balance between nations , and therefore international peace .
Yet Europe is trying to build itself without this basic element and even to destroy this through its two fundamental aspects , namely res publica and sovereignty .
It is not by chance that the Declaration of Human Rights coincided in France with the affirmation of national sovereignty .
De Gaulle rightly said that the first human right was national sovereignty for the simple reason that there is no point in having rights without a political society which is free from feudalism and empires . This society must therefore enjoy popular and national sovereignty which is precisely what the European project is slowly but surely destroying .
We also consider it impossible to combat racism , antisemitism or xenophobia without making people into citizens and without detaching them , at least in political terms , from their membership of ethnic groups , or minorities to use the current term . We are seeing the re-emergence of this minority concept , not only in various reports of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , but also , very dangerously , in our own policies , such as that conducted in Kosovo .
If the concept of ethnic groups and minorities is re-established , this will take us down a dangerous road towards individual membership rather than political and national membership .
This Pandora ' s box will ultimately destroy our continent which is why we feel it is pathetic to crow about human rights in a Community which is threatening , some time in the future , to take us into the worst decline .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I read the Ludford report with great interest and I would like to compliment the rapporteur on her remarks on Austria and the Austrian situation .
However , I would stress that these remarks are out of place in a report on human rights .
When we hold a debate on Austria , when we draw up a document on the Austrian situation - if Parliament judges it appropriate so to do - then we might even be able to give Baroness Ludford the task of drawing up a document which we will debate together .
These remarks have no place in a document on human rights , as they should not be using up the time allocated to the Baroness ' s report , and so they have acquired the bitter taste of political exploitation of a very serious issue such as human rights .
I would like to say something else on the subject of this report , regarding the right of Europeans to their own identity .
Throughout the document , the identity of Europeans , of the European nations , is not once referred to in a positive sense but always as a possible framework for xenophobia and racism .
I am a practising Christian who is sure of his beliefs : now , is this a reason to accuse me of xenophobia ?
On the contrary , xenophobia is more likely to be caused by a decline in religious convictions . Religion per se is a factor which promotes fraternity .
I am a staunch Italian patriot , so , according to paragraph O of this document , I could be accused of xenophobia .
This seems to me to be indicative of a cultural attitude which encourages xenophobia , for it encourages fear of globalisation , which prompts many local communities to become inward-looking and refuse dialogue , dialogue which takes identity into account .
We must make it clear that Europe does have a cultural identity , based on our Greek and Judo-Christian heritages and on enlightenment , which enters freely into dialogue with other identities .
A multicultural Europe which does not include European culture would lead to disaster and its decline .
This is not a not a question of black or white cultures : there is no connection between colour and culture .
Culture is based on values , not colour .
There are many issues related to xenophobia and racism , but these must be dealt with by the local communities .
It is not our place to define labour market quotas , or police or any other labour market quotas , and if we were to do so we would hinder integration , not encourage it .
Lastly , are we really of the opinion that all those who are not in favour of completely uncontrolled immigration are racist ?
And do we really think that the Constitutions of all of our nations are racist because their criteria are different from those espoused by Baroness Ludford ?
These aspects of the report need to be evaluated carefully and many of them changed , or we will find it hard to obtain a general consensus in this Chamber .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by offering my congratulations on Mrs Malmström ' s report to Mrs Malmström herself and to everyone who contributed to it .
It seems to me to be a very comprehensive report and to make some very striking points .
I would like to draw the House ' s attention to three key points concerning human rights as I see this issue at present .
One of these is the issue of water .
The World Water Forum is about to take place in The Hague , at the end of this week to be precise .
At this event , water will be treated as a rare economic commodity .
This is serious , as whilst it may be true that water is becoming ever more important in economic terms , it is also true that the right to water is a human and social right for everyone .
I would therefore like to draw honourable Members ' attention to precisely this issue , water , which is going to be one of the most hotly debated subjects this year .
The situation is becoming ever more critical , but the right to water also has to be seen as a human right .
The second point that I would like to mention today , very briefly , is the situation in Angola .
The report says that attacks on human rights in Angola have been treated with too much diplomatic discretion .
I believe that this is exactly what has happened - a veil of silence has been drawn over events in Angola , a country which has been in a state of permanent war for 40 years and at civil war for 25 years .
We need to have a clearer and better informed view of events in Angola , as I said in this House when we were discussing the issue of attacks on journalists ' rights .
But what worries me most , and what worries me most in Angola , is the issue of the rights of children forced to take part in the war by both sides , and the rights of women , who are the greatest victims of this ferocious war .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have taken the floor to explain the reasons why I am going to vote against the motion and my concern over two issues , which were included in the resolution at the request of some Members , who , I feel , are trying to exploit the credibility of the European Parliament in order to further their own interests , which conflict with the general interests of the Community as a whole and Italy in particular .
I refer , Mr President , to point 38 and points 41 and 42 of the Haarder report .
Point 38 , which was amended for the worse by Amendment No 22 , cited again today in the Chamber , imposes on Italy - and who knows why Italy should be singled out - in order to guarantee the impartiality of judges , not the separation of judicial and political authorities , as advocated by Montesquieu , but the separation , within the judiciary , of the careers of judges responsible for giving rulings and investigating magistrates .
The consequence of this absurd step is that , as is the case in Italy , anyone who is part of the judiciary as an investigating magistrate will become dependent upon the decision-making authorities , with the genuine risk that it will not be possible to conduct inquiries into corruption and the abuse of political power without fear of political pressure .
With reference to points 41 and 42 , I appreciate the fact that no citizen , not even a male descendent of a former ruler , can be deprived of the freedom to enter the country of which he is a national , but I do not understand why this only applies to Italy and Austria : there are other Community States which have rulers and sons of rulers living abroad .
In particular , with regard to Italy , to lay down a period of not more than six months within which to apply the sanctions would be against the Italian Constitution , which , in fact , provides for the adoption of a constitutional resolution .
Mr President , the annual reports on human rights , racism and xenophobia give the House an excellent opportunity to make a critical or , to be more precise , a self-critical appraisal of the countries in the European Union .
Candidate countries and their Members of Parliament , and I am thinking of many a member of the Turkish parliament , have a great deal to learn , such as how independent representatives of the people act and must act when it comes to human rights in their own country .
We have to admit , however , that we still have a lot of homework to do .
Self-criticism is not enough .
It does us credit , but alone it does not suffice .
Although , in our reports , we condemn cases of torture and maltreatment of detainees or prisoners by the forces of order or officials in charge of executing sentences , we must admit that so far little has been done about it by those in a position of responsibility .
The same applies to the way in which many refugees are treated in many Member States .
How many more times do we intend to debate the conditions in numerous detention centres as a problem of which we are aware but which has yet to be regulated ?
If we want to win the people in the detention centres over to our society , then we must admit that most European detention centres are not at present suitably equipped for the task .
We are right to criticise human rights violations and discrimination in candidate countries such as Turkey or some of the Eastern European countries when it comes to the Roma and other minorities , but that is precisely why we must set an example when it comes to human rights in the European Union .
In this sense , thank you .
Mr President , these reports are heading in the right direction but we cannot accept the self-satisfaction of the recitals in the current treaties .
To be effective , the fight against discrimination requires broader and , in particular , more specific measures .
Therefore , any restriction linked to nationality for access to civil service jobs must be abolished .
The institutions of the Community and Member States must lead the way in this .
In the same way , full citizenship implies giving third country nationals resident in the European Union the right to vote in all elections .
As long as these third country nationals are refused political rights , they will be the target of demagogy and discrimination .
If their status as taxpayers justifies their access to this right , why limit this to the local and European levels ?
Finally , in Europe the situation of all illegal immigrants must be legalised in order to fight against the traffic in labour and the xenophobic hatred which has recently been seen , in Spain , for example .
This would mean breaking with the provisions of the Schengen , Amsterdam and Dublin Treaties which are real insults to the right of asylum .
We believe that the fight against racism does not really require a legal arsenal , however good this may be , but rather specific measures to eliminate unemployment and exclusion . This is where we expect to see progress .
Mr President , we can write all we like about human rights and we can report and discuss the issue , but unless we follow through on our intentions and the reports , they are meaningless . They gather dust on the shelves of the Commission and in the offices of well-meaning people and governments .
We must show leadership as must the media , educational institutions and the churches ; they have not shown such leadership in the past .
Shame on us for ignoring Mozambique for so long and doing too little , too late .
We are a continent that is sending USD 2 billion worth of weapons to drought-stricken Ethiopia and we cannot find a couple of helicopters to send urgently to save people drowning in Mozambique .
It is a real shame on us and the other European institutions that we cannot respond to these kinds of disasters .
Shame on us for allowing the children of Iraq to die at the rate of 5 000 a month .
Half a million have died since the introduction of sanctions .
There continues to be a barbarous war in Iraq .
Bombing continues ruthlessly and unreported .
It is a war against children and the innocent citizens of that country .
We should intervene with the Security Council individually and collectively to ensure that medicines are delivered to the people .
Shame on us for allowing the sale of arms and weapons to the Great Lakes region .
Shame on us in the European Union for not stamping out racism and xenophobia which are endemic in my country and in the EU in general .
Racism is a crime - a crime that is not pursued in the Union , an offence against a law that is not enforced in the Union .
It is something we have a great responsibility to do something about .
We are not doing anything whatsoever about it .
The citizens of this Union are our judges and juries .
Unless we show them leadership and a sense of purpose , a sense of direction , they will make their judgements in the coming years .
We will have failed them unless we tackle racism and xenophobia in the European Union .
I want to say to my government that we must do the same at home in Ireland .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Belder on his sound report which deals with the fight against racism , xenophobia and antisemitism in the candidate countries .
This all revolves around the kind of philosophy on man and society people take their inspiration from , and Mr Belder has presented his in no uncertain terms .
The report is based on the notion of the unity of the human species , a Christian teaching which forms a firm barrier against any lapses of a racist nature .
Man could be seen as being created in the image of God .
This should make it impossible to see one ' s fellow man as a threat or to harm his dignity .
Mr Belder quite clearly does not pursue the ideology , which is termed conservative by some , which defends the identity of communities against cultural influences from outside .
An ideology of this kind , which overestimates the sense of community , contains insufficient guarantees against tendencies towards discrimination .
I condemn such a conservative ideology .
The candidate Member States expect the European Union to be a constitutional community based on the common acceptance of values which are mostly of a Jewish-Christian origin .
It is only logical that we should observe these values .
This does not always accord with their and our gut reactions but that is - like it or not - the trademark of sound principles .
They do not always turn out to be to our advantage .
People have to overcome their fears and short-term interests .
We need to help the candidate Member States in a critical , yet constructive , way and not be afraid to call a spade a spade .
The Belder report contains a few concrete pointers in this respect .
Churches , trade unions , women ' s organisations , occupational training courses and other educational institutions , in particular , play a decisive role in this .
My Group did not have any reason to table any more amendments .
With regard to Mrs Ludford ' s report , I belong to a minority in my Group who do not consider the report ' s shortcomings serious enough to vote against it .
It is true that proposals on voting rights for foreigners do not fit in at all in a report on xenophobia , but we do agree on the principle of drafting a recommendation in this respect .
I have subscribed to this practice in the Netherlands for some 25 years , starting with the South Moluccans .
I have no problem at all with providing them with government jobs .
This may not be an ideological issue for me , but if you have a look at the EU delegations abroad , they are teeming with foreigners in EU service , even in sensitive functions .
Governments do well to give ethnic minorities a visible presence in police forces , for example .
In my opinion , it is extremely impractical to restrict the options in this respect , and I certainly do not want to see this become a requirement .
What interest would be served in doing so ?
If the Ludford report is not changed for the worse by amendments , the minority which I represent here will vote for this report .
Mr President , I have two brief comments to make to the previous speaker , my esteemed colleague Mr Oostlander .
I am pleased that that he wishes to vote in favour of the Ludford report , but I am not so pleased at his contention that the European Union is a community of Christian values and I should like to correct that directly .
Christianity contributes to the catalogue of values of the European Union , but there are also other currents which have found their way into the catalogue of values of the European Union and I think it is important that we establish this once and for all .
As far as the debate on the Ludford and Haarder reports is concerned , allow me to make a few technical observations on behalf of my Group .
Mr Haarder submitted an excellent draft report to the committee and the committee tabled 170 proposed amendments and 22 compromise amendments , making a total of 192 amendments .
The committee spent days discussing them and then voted on a largely amended report and now we have another 69 proposed amendments here in plenary .
There is nothing dramatic about this per se , but nearly half the proposed amendments are from the group which calls itself TDI : the Technical Group of Independent Members .
This is the combination of Mrs Bonino and Mr Le Pen , in itself a sensational combination , but this club never takes part in debates on technical work .
These ladies and gentlemen are never present in committee .
They never take part in detailed discussions of the problems .
Why then do we always have these proposed amendments in plenary ?
The answer is in their speeches , which we have already had the pleasure of here today .
They want to use this forum to bring their platitudes to the attention of as wide an audience as possible throughout the world .
Technical work , no thank you .
Simplified rabble-rousing , yes please .
That is the political strategy of the extreme right in this House .
The second point which I wish to address is this : when we discuss the human rights situation inside the European Union , then , as Mr Ceyhun rightly said , what we are discussing is the introspection which we are obliged to engage in if we wish to discuss human rights violations in other parts of the world and if we want to tell candidate countries that we are critical of ourselves , that we get out our own measuring rod when it comes to respect for human rights at home .
This is important , because only those who are critical of themselves have the right to criticise others .
That is why these reports , both Baroness Ludford ' s antiracism report and Mr Haarder ' s human rights report , pave the way .
The annual debate on these matters paves the way for the basic political orientation of the European Union .
And when I learn that these reports are being abused for prosaic domestic policy considerations , then those who practise this abuse are ill-advised .
I refer to Article 38 of the Haarder report on separating the careers of judges and investigating magistrates , on which Mr Cornillet , who is present here , has tabled an amendment which , basically , is about the careers of judges and investigating magistrates in Italy .
I just wonder what that has to do with human rights .
Anyone who abuses a human rights report in order to make national domestic policy has missed the point completely .
As far as the fuss in points 41 and 42 about Savoyard princes being allowed to enter Italy is concerned , I fail to see exactly how human rights are being violated .
Anyone who wants to hold a serious discussion on human rights in the EU should talk about human rights and not abuse these valuable and excellent reports for tactical domestic policy games .
( Applause )
Mr President , although the debate is not yet finished , I would nevertheless like to take the opportunity to thank my colleagues for their comments and support and also for the fruitful cooperation we have experienced in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy while working on this report .
Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , after this debate , it should be crystal clear that the issue of human rights is not just something to talk about on Sundays while wearing your Sunday best .
Human rights must be integrated into all political cooperation that the EU is involved in .
We need consistency , patience and a well thought-out strategy for turning noble words into concrete action that leads to results .
I hope that the message has got through and that , in this House , we will soon receive specific proposals from the Council on how we can take this work forward together .
Mr President , although we are moving in the right direction , not everything in the garden is rosy .
For example , some States do not respect the basic right to education and the use of one ' s own language .
In the Basque Country , where , despite the problems we face , we can choose the language of our children ' s education , the Spanish Supreme Court has declared that it is illegal for local authorities to join together to promote the development of the language , in a clear example of how legal interpretations can be forced through as a result of political intentions and of how not all rights are respected here and now in the European Union .
How can we justify our habit of talking about human rights in places thousands of kilometres away while at home we do the opposite and vary our positions according to commercial and political interests ?
Chirac speaks of the rights of the Inuits in Quebec , but ignores linguistic rights in France .
He condemns Jospin for calling Hezbollah by its name while he pontificates about other types of organisations and prides himself on his anti-terrorist cooperation with Spain .
The Spanish Prime Minister speaks of Chechnya as if it were an internal affair , thereby clearly allying himself with the extermination of the Chechen people .
This approach to politics , based on pure hypocrisy , is entirely unacceptable to us .
Finally , for the Basque citizens whom I represent , there can be no excuses based on internal affairs or on political opportunism .
For us there are simply , here and elsewhere , people , citizens , with unalienable rights on which we wish to base our coexistence .
The Italian Constitution solemnly bans the former kings of the House of Savoy , their consorts and male descendants from entering or residing on Italian territory .
The Italian Constitution is the result of the great historical agreement between all the democratic forces which fought against fascism and to liberate Italy during the Second World War .
It is intolerable that the European Parliament should ask us to breach the provisions of this Constitution , which is one of the most democratic and advanced Constitutions in the world .
In this regard , it should be remembered that the House of Savoy not only welcomed the fascist dictatorship and supported the fascist attack on democratic Spain and the fascist imperialist war against Ethiopia , but that it also permitted the alliance with Hitler ' s racist regime , going so far as to apply the shameful anti-Semitic laws in Italy .
Once Italy and the whole of Europe had been caught up in the catastrophe of the Second World War , the royal family fled from Rome and shamefully abandoned the Italian troops to their fate , leaving them without orders or leaders at the time of the armistice with the allied forces .
Moreover , the House of Savoy has never acknowledged the sovereignty of the Republic or the irrevocable nature of the decision to create a Republic , which is enshrined in the Constitution .
Mr President , we have no hesitation or uncertainty in rejecting the request , which is unexpected in this context , to breach the Italian Constitution .
We have no hesitation in reiterating that there is no room in my country for the descendants of the former kings of Italy .
Mr President , the Ludford and Haarder reports clearly show the vigour with which some people seem to be trying to mimic the United States of America in its less useful contributions to the development of society .
I have identified three particularly characteristic points .
We are invited to achieve a more ethnically diverse workforce which will require , in the first instance , all staff to be identified by ethnic origin .
I , for example , am of Parisian origin and I am concerned about how we can be sufficiently represented in the EU bodies and about how we can practically establish records on ethnic origin which will allow this ethnic diversity to be monitored .
We will have to establish controlled records or , in other words , conduct a policy of racial discrimination of the masochistic type known as positive discrimination .
We are also invited to recognise all the new religious communities and to afford them the same rights and the same existence as the religions of the Bible .
This unfortunately echoes a decision taken yesterday by the Court of Justice of the European Communities in Luxembourg which gives the Church of Scientology the satisfaction of being treated like all European religions .
Finally , it is suggested that we give homosexual couples the same rights as families .
You are forgetting that families obtain their rights from the State and from the nations clearly because they allow the State and the nations to continue in existence and because they have a common interest .
Mr President , as usual each spring , between the flowering of the plum and cherry trees , we are treated to a fashion show of the latest moral and intellectual campaigns in the fight against Satan , his vanities and his works or , to use the accepted expression , against xenophobia , racism and antisemitism .
As an academic , a teacher of the languages and civilisations of the Far East prior to my entry into politics and the former dean of a faculty where twenty-eight foreign languages and civilisations were taught , I do not regard myself as a xenophobe .
Yet I must say that all this supposedly antiracist talk has some common features , the first of which is intellectual invalidity and the second the destruction of liberty .
This talk is intellectually invalid because the terms used are not even defined .
What are racism , xenophobia , nationalism and extremism ?
What do these concepts cover ?
What are their philosophical origins ?
What doctrines do they involve ?
Do those accused of these acts deserve this opprobrium ?
No one knows or wants to know because , if these terms were defined , this would weaken their real purpose which is to paralyse hearts and minds by constant repetition of the same generalisations and by the threat of demonising those not stepping into line .
The aim is really to fraudulently make patriotic sentiment seem to be expansionist nationalism , the legitimate refusal of migration policy to be xenophobia and the desire of nations to preserve their identity to be racism .
This is completely absurd .
Racism is the desire to achieve the domination of one race over another .
Who is racist in Europe nowadays ?
Xenophobia is the rejection of a foreign presence .
You can morally condemn this but , politically speaking , you should consider that , in its literal meaning , xenophobia is the source of all the national liberation movements which we have praised at other times .
As for antisemitism which is apparently re-emerging in Europe , why not ask the real questions ?
The proposition made in a book by the left-wing philosopher , Jean ­ Paul Sartre , according to which the Jew is basically an artificial creation of the antisemite is clearly false , like the rest of this philosopher ' s thinking . However , could the opposite proposition not be true , namely that certain Jewish circles need antisemitism in order to exist , to strengthen their identity and even to assert their moral , political and even financial authority ?
This is exactly what is stated by certain intellectually honest and courageous Jews who go so far as to deplore the perverse reminders of the only persecution of the Jews during the Second World War , known globally under the vague and religious term of ' Shoah ' . These daily , obsessive , exclusive and sometimes frenzied reminders of this persecution are for political and financial purposes which no longer have any connection with the worship of the dead and their remembrance .
Yet the problem with this supposed antiracism is not its search for truth or even its support for migrants ...
Mr Schulz , my family never accepted any German capo . This will not start with you ! ...
It is rather a question of nipping in the bud any vague desires which nations might have to oppose the destruction of their identity .
The religion of antiracism has its dogmas , its priests , its inquisitors and its witch-hunts .
History will roundly condemn the protagonists of this shameful ideology which we are proud to fight at any time .
The English philosopher John Locke once said that a country without law is a country without freedom .
Fifty years after the signing of the European Convention on Human Rights , twenty years after the Helsinki Final Act , ten years after the collapse of the Berlin Wall and one year after the coming into force of the Amsterdam Treaty , there are constitutional provisions remaining in the heart of Europe which belong to the medieval age - provisions which have no place in a modern Europe .
For instance , Victor Emmanuel of Italy was forced to leave his native Italy as an uncomprehending nine-year old child , and for fifty-three years has been unable to return .
If he sails from his home in Corsica in the direction of Italian territorial waters , coastguards are mobilised using modern satellite technology instructing him with loudspeakers to turn back .
His twenty-eight-year-old son has only been to Italy once when his plane was diverted to Milan airport because of bad weather .
The plane was surrounded by police guards and he was told not to step off the plane .
What has he got to do with what his great-grandfather did during the Fascist era ? 80 % of Italians in a recent poll believe these people should be allowed to return without restrictions .
Neither represent any conceivable threat to the Italian State .
This is not , as some have tried to claim , an issue affecting only a few people ; it goes to the heart of the European Union 's commitment to respect the Convention on Human Rights , to its own Treaties and to the rule of law .
There is much talk of a Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Such talk will ring exceedingly hollow if this Parliament does not first do all it can to address existing Treaty violations .
I speak as someone with a deep and abiding love for Italy and its people , but I say here to you today , and to President Ciampi of Italy , that Italy had neither the moral nor the legal right to sign the Treaty of Amsterdam until it had removed this most blatant violation of the Convention from its own constitution .
This is also the case for Austria where Otto von Habsburg was required to deny his own identity and renounce rights belonging to him and to members of his family to enter Austria .
The rights under the Treaty are not conditional in my view .
The Treaty does not discriminate against individual families and the Treaty is therefore violated .
The right to enter , live and die in your own country are fundamental , sacrosanct rights and I hope that this Parliament will uphold them .
I therefore commend paragraphs 41 and 42 to this House .
Mr President , respect for human rights is one of the European Union ' s cornerstones .
That is what it says in the Treaties and that is what we keep reminding each other of .
It is therefore to be welcomed that every year , the European Parliament issues a report on respecting human rights within the European Union itself .
Although I did not join the European Parliament until last year , I happen to know that the handling of this annual human rights report has , over the past couple of years , always met with a great deal of political commotion and confusion .
The commotion is justified , given the nature of the topic , but the confusion is not .
I am therefore particularly delighted that this year , a report has been produced which is very well balanced and to the point , except for one single industrial accident which Mr Schulz has already mentioned and with regard to which we are having to sit and witness some rather despicable displays at times .
Fortunately , we can show our disagreement by drumming our fingers on our tables .
Apart from this , I would like to extend warm thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Bertel Haarder , for the huge commitment he has shown and the constructive cooperation which I have received from him as shadow rapporteur for the socialist group .
Thanks to our discussions , I have gained a much deeper insight into the complexity of the matter and I would especially praise him here in public for his openness .
As far as the content of the report is concerned , I would like to outline a few topics .
Is it not rather ironic that it is precisely asylum and migration issues , which are at the very top of the political agenda in Europe , that have been echoed so clearly in this report ?
Should , in fact , the European policy on asylum and migration not lead to fewer human rights violations in this field ?
To ask the question is to answer it .
It is wise to remain vigilant when it comes to observing human rights of the extensive minorities in Europe .
People from these groups , more often than not economically vulnerable , run the considerable risk of becoming victims of discrimination .
The reality is that millions of people live in poverty in our rich and privileged Europe .
The report quite rightly describes this issue of poverty and disadvantage in terms of human rights , and this seems to be a step in the right direction .
The report also devotes attention to the issue of the equal treatment of men and women and the equal treatment of different types of relation and life styles , more so than in previous years .
Free choices which people make in their private lives , and which do not harm anybody , should be honoured , with respect for diversity and with a guarantee of the principle of equal treatment .
As is evident from the amendments , the battle is not over yet , not by a long shot .
Mr President , there are still many people , some of which are in this House if this debate is anything to go by , who would like to give preferential treatment to marriage and family and , as such , openly insult and discriminate against anyone making a different choice in their private lives .
My Group , on the other hand , considers the principle of equality sacrosanct .
After all , human rights are there for everybody .
Mr President , I should like to express my thanks for the broad support given to the main features of this report .
Human rights are , of course , indivisible and independent of political parties and national borders . It is therefore important that we in this Parliament should obtain broad agreement on this issue , for a right cannot , of course , be universal if half of Parliament is opposed to it .
I should especially like to thank Mrs Swiebel , both for her friendly words today and for the intense collaboration which we have had and which has naturally given her considerable influence .
I should like to tell her that I am also delighted to vote for the further amendments which she has tabled and which we shall be voting on tomorrow .
I should also , however , like to thank Mr Pirker and Mrs Palacio .
I should like to express my gratitude for the broad agreement we have obtained in connection with this report .
I think this is commendable , especially this year when human rights have been so high on the agenda of the European Union .
Finally , I would say to Mr Krarup that he must withdraw his expression of delight at the change in paragraph 61 , because this was an error pure and simple .
There are ten words missing from the Danish version .
If he reads the English version , he will be able to see what the wording should be .
Mr President , in the present report China has been subjected to criticism .
I agree with this criticism , despite the fact that , as chairman of the Delegation for relations with the People 's Republic of China , I risk receiving yet another protest letter from Beijing asking whether the European Parliament is waging a hostile campaign against China .
Based on the reports from Mrs Malmström and Mr Haarder I can answer emphatically : " No , we are not waging a campaign against China , but for human rights - everywhere " .
The reports direct criticism towards twenty or so countries outside Europe and towards almost all EU and candidate countries .
In fact , I am considering sending the reports to the EU committee of the National People 's Congress in Beijing and suggesting that they do something similar .
How about a self-critical report from the National People 's Congress on human rights in China and a report on human rights in the world and in the EU , as seen from a Chinese point of view ?
In actual fact , of course , we do need to discuss human rights with China .
Then the Chinese will have to discuss and not just protest .
Mr President , what concerns us in particular is the hypocritical and selective manner in which human rights are applied during the exercise of the European Union ' s external policy , especially as a pretext for justifying intervention , including military intervention .
At the same time , the European Union turns a blind eye to situations in which human rights are being savagely violated when , of course , it comes to protecting its imperialistic interests .
Its attitude towards the Turkish regime is a blatant example .
The recent and continuing invasion in Kosovo , using the rights of minorities as a pretext , and the unbelievable demands being made on Yugoslavia are a typical example of how military intervention is being advanced as a general principle of international law at the expense of the principle of national sovereignty .
Furthermore , the policy being exercised by the European Union at home basically violates a series of fundamental human rights .
Political and social rights are being hit and individual rights and democratic freedoms are being trampled underfoot .
The results of this policy are already visible in the support being given to extremist , racist , Fascist powers , and not just in Austria .
And yet the report on the fight against racism does not demonstrate that the necessary conclusions have been drawn .
We call on the people to step up their fight to stop their self-proclaimed saviours trampling on the rights for which they have fought hard and made sacrifices , and to reverse the current trend , which only serves the interests of those who are exploiting them .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Haarder whose excellent work I would describe as well-balanced , measured and well thought out .
Furthermore , since I have had the honour of working with him on previous annual reports on human rights , I know how difficult it is .
I hope that he receives the broad support of this House that he has asked for .
He deserves it .
Mr President , at the beginning of his first intervention , Mr Haarder said that Europe did not invent human rights , and that is true .
However , what does characterise Europe is the fact that , having moved them from the private realm into the public realm by making them actionable , it has made human rights the flag , the distinguishing mark which characterises us as Europeans .
We have talked about the defence of these human rights and I would now like to insist that if we proclaim human rights , it naturally follows that we must ensure that those rights can be exercised .
I support all the points that have been made and I would like to add another . I am talking about those people who cannot exercise their rights because they are under pressure from certain quarters , certain organisations .
I will give just one example .
Recently , the members of the Foro de Ermua [ Ermua Forum ] visited us and I would like to remind the House that these members come from all sections of the political spectrum , ranging from left to right . They are intellectuals , they are men and women who live in the Basque Country and who cannot exercise their rights , their right to freedom of expression , because they constantly feel under pressure from Herri Batasuna , the political wing of ETA .
Just one more example : last Sunday the Basque people received an intimidating invitation not to turn out to vote .
Fortunately , Basque society voted en masse , displaying the courage which is so essential in that environment .
Mr President , I will end as I began : this House must state loud and clear that the most important element of respecting human rights is the defence of the exercise of those rights - in full - in all cases and particularly in the face of those forces and organisations which hinder freedom of expression .
Mr President , I want to speak for a few moments on the Ludford report on countering racism in the European Union .
This is a very important topic .
It is crucial for the construction of a peaceful and harmonious Europe , a Europe united in its objective and at ease with itself and its citizens .
That is certainly what we , on this side of the House , believe .
That is what this report aims to do .
But the EPP it seems , and others opposite , clearly do not want that .
We heard a few moments ago a disgraceful speech from Mr Gollnisch on behalf of his party .
Mrs Palacio , who is just leaving , has said that human rights are needed in a public place and at the core .
And yet , by their amendments to the Ludford report , they seek to divide Europe and to make millions of our brothers and sisters from the ethnic minorities second-class citizens .
That is the clear aim of the amendments in the name of Mr Hernandez Mollar and his colleagues and this is consistent throughout all the amendments on behalf of the EPP - the so-called European People 's Party - which actually reveals itself in its amendments as a party for some of the people but not all of them .
The EPP 's amendments seek to divide families .
They object to family unity .
Their Amendment No 12 seeks to delete reference to the need for family unity in Europe .
The EPP , it seems , do not accept that ethnic minorities feel alienated from the electoral process .
They do not feel that the European Parliament and national parliaments should reflect Europe 's diverse ethnic nature .
That is the aim of Amendment No 13 .
It deletes that from the report .
They are against ethnic diversity and they do not accept the benefits given to our society by all its people .
They do not accept that everyone has a part to play in the electoral process .
We cannot complain about what is going on in the candidate states if we have amendments like this being put forward in the European Union .
Nor , it seems , does the EPP believe that ethnic minorities should be encouraged to vote .
Their Amendment No 21 deletes the call for encouragement to the ethnic minority to take part in elections to vote or stand as candidates .
Is that what we want ?
I do not think it is .
We , on this side of the House , reject that position completely .
We will publicise the EPP position and their amendments whether they are passed or not .
We deplore the line that Mr Hernandez Mollar and his colleague have put forward .
We urge the Liberal Group to dissociate themselves from their links with the EPP over the amendments because it has shown itself to have racist instincts in its party .
Should the EPP amendments to this report be adopted we will oppose the whole report .
The EPP amendments weaken the report and would make the position of this Parliament worse than at the moment .
It would make it so weak that it would be one that we could not support .
It would be a retrograde step .
So , I urge all colleagues to reject the amendments put forward by the European People 's Party and their colleagues on the far right .
Mr President , I thank all those who have spoken on my report .
I should just like to clear up a few misunderstandings .
Firstly , nowhere does this report say that fighting racism means you should have no immigration controls .
It says that such controls should not be racially discriminatory and should avoid fuelling xenophobic attitudes or hostility to ethnic minorities .
The references to enhanced rights for third country nationals means , of course , rights for those who are legally resident .
Secondly , on religion and identity , there is an assertion that there is no exclusivity .
I agree with Mr Schulz .
Christianity has been an important contributor to European values but it does not hold a monopoly on them .
Thirdly , reference has been made to quotas .
Nowhere in this report are quotas mentioned .
As a liberal I am opposed to quotas .
Fourthly , on Austria , the assertion is made that we should not mention Austria because of the time-frame of the report .
This report is the annual debate on racism in the year 2000 .
It refers to where we are now .
I welcome the remarks of Mr Oostlander , and I welcome his support for the report .
As a gesture of goodwill I will be accepting five small amendments from the EPP , though incidentally none of those mentioned by Mr Evans .
I very much hope that more members of the EPP / ED Group will support this report .
Mr President , what has not been stressed sufficiently thus far in the debate I believe is democracy and subsidiarity .
Many of the atrocities in the Balkans that we spoke of earlier and much of the racism and antisemitism is because communities everywhere have not been allowed the ability , in line with the concept of subsidiarity , to develop within their own communities the democracy that people need everywhere if they are to evolve and create within their own regions and nations , the social rights , justice , respect for minorities , coexistence of different people and respect for every race and people .
Article 3b of the Maastricht Treaty , President , still confines subsidiarity to the relationship between the European Union and the Member States .
Regions and stateless nations are ignored .
People within their own communities therefore suffer .
They are unable to establish the structures they need so that human rights can prosper and the blight of racism can be forever removed .
In own nation , Wales , for example , we have no empowerment to establish our own laws to counter racism and defend human rights .
The principles of cohesion and the drive to limit poverty and depravity in our communities are a well-settled concept in the European Union .
However , it must encompass respect for minorities everywhere if it to inspire the world in its drive towards defeating racism and defending human rights .
A heartfelt thank you to the rapporteurs for their work .
More and more , we need to follow our words with actions .
Disrespect for human rights , racism , xenophobia and antisemitism are not confined to other continents , but are also present here , within ourselves , our lives and our institutions .
Even in this Parliament , fascist and xenophobic opinions are expressed .
We must start with ourselves if we want to build a world where everyone helps each other .
We will be able to intervene more effectively in countries which deny the existence of human and social rights - whether these are the rights of Kurds , Palestinians , Chechens or the rights of Afghan women - if we avoid hypocrisy .
Europe is full of Haiders .
We are Haiders when , to give the minor example of an incident which took place in Rome last week , Bosnian Roma refugees are deported with the approval of the mayor and sent back without aid to places of conflict ; children and mothers , brothers and sisters separated , without even the time to gather together any belongings to take with them ; children born in Italy snatched away from their schools where they have become integrated and made good friends with the other pupils .
We are Haiders when , in Rome , parties of the right-wing opposition and the new centre incite the people to hatred and prevent the authorities from accommodating the Roma safely in places with running water and electricity .
And this does not mean that I do not condemn the unlawful behaviour of many Roma and other immigrants .
I would like to be able to share with everyone my conviction that , in our countries , no one is a stranger .
For this reason I give my full support to the proposals contained in the resolutions which promote and lend support to all those elements which contribute to a culture of peaceful coexistence and all-embracing citizenship .
Mr President , I should like to concentrate mainly on certain aspects of the Belder report , which contains an excellent analysis of the current situation in the candidate countries .
As far as these candidates are concerned , and this has already been said , we must avoid creating the impression that we demand higher standards of them than we meet ourselves .
We should compare the actual situation in these countries with the reality in our own countries rather than with our perfect legal texts , otherwise the candidate countries will always come off worse in practice .
Certainly nobody contests the fact that candidate countries which , for example , only acquired their independence recently , such as Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania , have the right to redefine and articulate their own national identity first .
As the Communist dictatorship under which they previously suffered obviously did not foster a culture of pluralist debate , many forms of expression of national identity appear to us to be overstretched or even to be directed , indirectly , against minorities within the country or in one or more neighbouring countries .
We should not look down from our high moral horse and condemn this phenomenon as long as it is only a question of temporary manifestations on the path towards self-definition .
However , we should give these countries en route to the EU the specific support that they require so that the self-awareness which they need to find is not based first and foremost on negative restrictions on minorities or neighbours .
I should like to use the situation in Estonia and Latvia as an example of a positive development between two sections of the population which is by no means self-evident .
It is not self-evident given their history of illegal occupation and deportation and the politically motivated transfer of people into their countries , accompanied by the suppression of every expression of national self-determination up to the end of the 1980s .
The fact that the Russian tanks which withdrew in 1994 were often daubed with the words " We ' ll be back ! " did little to foster understanding between the Baltic states and Russia .
And yet , despite this history , there has not been one single incident of violent clashes between the majority and minority sections of the population since they regained independence .
We should therefore voice to the Estonians and Latvians our express recognition of the fact that they have managed to keep a cool head and that they are receptive to our arguments when it comes to adapting their legislation in this area to European standards .
I therefore take the view that the express call to continue measures to integrate the Russian minority contained in point 14 of the Belder report is unnecessary .
This is already happening .
This express reference creates the erroneous impression that this is not the case .
Madam President , it is a fact that over recent years , as immigration has increased , a climate of prejudice has started to creep in , racial violence has become more and more frequent and even political parties have been set up on the basis of racist ideology .
In other words , a social climate is developing - and it made its appearance in a wing of our House this morning - which suggests that the protection of human dignity , respect for those who are different , democratic values and social solidarity have not yet been fully mastered .
Our action to foster respect for human rights and create a fair society of creative coexistence therefore needs to be examined against a backdrop of policies and measures which seek to improve economic and social conditions for everyone and combat unemployment , poverty and social exclusion .
The new multicultural Europe needs a policy which ensures that immigrants and different social groups and minorities are integrated into the social , political and economic life of national societies .
What we need is a common European asylum and immigration policy based on European humanitarian values .
Of course , the education sector is also important and we need huge improvements in education for the children of immigrants and gypsies .
At the same time , the mass media need to help fight prejudices and to demonstrate the beauty of modern multicoloured , multicultural society .
Of course , within this framework , respect for those who are conscientious objectors , for example , and who do not therefore wish to serve in the army , should be guaranteed .
I should like to take this opportunity of assuring the European Parliament that the problem which used to exist in Greece no longer exists , following the adoption and application of legislation on 1.1.98 .
The reference in question , therefore , in Mr Haarder ' s otherwise excellent report , is therefore irrelevant today .
I must protest about the use by the United States of America of the death penalty on an almost industrial scale . This is the most powerful country in the world which claims to embody the cutting edge of civilisation .
Regardless of the risk of judicial error , a society which uses this machinery of the law to knowingly and coldly perpetrate such a barbaric act , in order to wreak revenge for vile and barbaric acts committed by individuals , can only be regarded as behaving in a way which is worse than that which it condemns .
The abolition of the death penalty worldwide is the very least that we should be calling for if we really want to defend human rights .
The condemned sometimes await their execution for many years in American prisons .
I must particularly highlight the threat of execution hanging over Leonard Peltier and Mumia Abu-Jamal who are both victims of the machinations of a police force and legal system riddled with racism .
In truth , they have both been condemned to death for their political ideas .
Having respectively suffered 26 and 18 years of this vile torture of waiting on death row , they must immediately be set free .
As it is now time for the votes , we shall suspend the joint debate and it shall resume at 3 p.m.
Vote
Madam President , to clarify the situation , 29 amendments have been tabled together with a proposal to reject the common position .
As rapporteur , I obviously support the amendments of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
I also support all the amendments intended to restore the position adopted by the European Parliament at first reading .
On the other hand , as rapporteur , I must clearly state that I cannot support the amendments which deviate too far from the position adopted at first reading .
This concerns Amendments Nos 17 , 16 and 19 in particular .
Clearly , I also cannot support the proposal for rejection tabled by the Union for a Europe of Nations Group under Amendment No 8 .
Thank you , Mr Lannoye .
This is totally clear .
After the vote :
Madam President , can the Commission confirm that it has accepted Amendment No 1 by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy ?
This would mean that the directive could be adopted by a qualified majority , and we would then be able to lay the directive to rest .
Belgians and French people would then be able to enjoy British chocolate as much as the British have enjoyed French and Belgian chocolate .
( The President declared the common position approved ( as amended ) )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0054 / 2000 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on a revised Community Eco-Label Award Scheme ( 10656 / 2 / 1999 - C5-0223 / 1999 - 1996 / 0312 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Schnellhardt )
( The President declared the common position approved ( as amended ) )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0056 / 2000 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the incineration of waste ( 11472 / 1 / 1999 - C5-0274 / 1999 - 1998 / 0289 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Blokland )
( The President declared the common position approved ( as amended ) )
Report ( A5-0062 / 2000 ) by Mr Davies , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive relating to ozone in ambient air ( COM ( 1999 ) 125 - C5-0048 / 1999 - 1999 / 0068 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0063 / 2000 ) by Mrs Myller , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on national emission ceilings for certain atmospheric pollutants ( COM ( 1999 ) 125 - C5-0047 / 1999 - 1999 / 0067 ( COD ) )
Madam President , I would like to point out a mistake in translation in Amendments Nos 18 and 30 .
This has already been notified to the relevant linguistic services , and it has also been mentioned here in the voting list that was distributed to us , but I would like to remind everyone of the matter , so that it is taken into account when people vote .
Quite right , Mrs Myller . I am informed that the Translation Department is already aware of these errors .
We can therefore point these out at the appropriate moment .
Before the vote on Amendment No 18
In both Amendment No 18 and No 30 it should read " critical loads should not be exceeded " .
In place of the word ' exceeded ' it says ' reached ' , which is the opposite .
Thank you . Everyone is now clear on this .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on the Special European Council to be held in Lisbon on 23 / 24 March 2000
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , I would be most grateful if we could lay Mrs Caroline Jackson ' s resolution to rest in the Committee on the Environment ; we could take care of it in three or four minutes .
I would be most grateful if we do that right now .
I feel that we should not spend any more time on this .
I will therefore put this to the House .
Madam President , please note that the French socialists in the House will not take part in the vote as we consider that the tabled motion is not impartial .
We do want the environmental directives to be applied and integrated into European policies but this must involve all the directives and not just the Natura 2000 and migratory birds directives .
We also consider that the application of directives is the responsibility of the law , the Commission and the Court of Justice .
We do not therefore wish to take part in this vote which we regard as partisan .
We do not in fact yet know whether we will be voting on this motion this morning as I was going to put this to the House .
Madam President , I would like to remind you that you said that the previous vote would be the last one , and I would also like to point out that this resolution , which is the result of an unfortunate accumulation of two oral questions , in violation of the Rules of Procedure and normal practice , is causing complicated problems in all of the Groups and I do not believe that this is the best way to deal with it .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must think about this carefully .
I did say clearly , at the start of voting time , that we would go as far as the motion for a resolution on the European Council in Lisbon .
I said that we would end at 1.15 p.m. and we have respected this timetable .
We should keep to what was decided .
Madam President , I disagree with this decision .
The House is free to decide if it wishes to vote on this now or not and I would therefore request that we take a vote on whether to vote .
( The President put the proposal to the House which decided to end voting time )
Madam President , I did not want to interrupt the voting when I arrived a little bit late .
Could we request that the bells be rung a little bit earlier ?
People on the twelfth floor had extreme difficulty getting here for the vote as the lift stopped on every single floor and we could not make it any quicker .
The lift was full of Vice-Presidents , Quaestors and all sorts of people coming down from the twelfth floor .
Absolutely , Mrs Banotti .
We will make a note of this .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Recommendation for second reading of the Lannoye report ( A5-0047 / 2000 )
Madam President , by tabling amendments to the chocolate directive , we have tried to offer better protection to those consumers who would like to know whether they are buying real chocolate or a product which , instead of cocoa butter , also contains fats of another origin .
However , these amendments were not adopted , unfortunately .
As a consequence , we remain concerned about the third-world cocoa producers .
We predict that , despite any improvements for the benefit of producers of other vegetable fats , the overall outcome will , in any case , be harmful to the third world .
It is regrettable that the study into the impact of the new directive for the countries in the South was not carried out earlier .
From now on , chocolate is no longer a product which consists of nothing but cocoa butter .
In some parts of the Union , the name ' chocolate ' was already used , even if the product contained substitute products .
We regret that the standardisation we have achieved is to the detriment of the consumer and the cocoa producer , and was dictated by the pursuit of profit .
Madam President , the traditional dictionary definition of chocolate is a foodstuff made from cocoa beans roasted or ground with sugar , vanilla and other seasonings . Yet it seems that another definition is now emerging .
This states that chocolate is the former name for an authentic , healthy and quality product , produced in its day according to ancestral tradition and to which some delightfully outdated nostalgia-seekers are still attached .
This new definition goes on to say that this name is now used to designate a black , brown or white product , or one of any other colour , made with vegetable or industrial fats , or in fact anything else provided that the end result finds a market and preferably a world one at that .
This is the essence of the new directive before us today , if applied to the letter , which could end up replacing the definition of chocolate as we know it . Clearly , the alternative products are a speciality of the industrial lobby which seems to have inspired this amazing directive .
Once again it seems that the law of business or , in other words , the law of the strongest has been preferred over the protection of consumers , SMEs and our craftsmen ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , given the disastrous vote just now on the chocolate issue , I must say that I am not particularly proud of what we have approved .
It should be pointed out that the European Parliament has taken responsibility for altering the very composition of chocolate by allowing the introduction of vegetable oils and fats other than cocoa butter .
The European Parliament is clearly not in tune with public opinion in several respects .
Firstly , its position does not correspond to the demands of consumers who want clear labelling .
We have not granted them this labelling on chocolate .
Parliament is also not in tune with public opinion which is becoming increasingly reticent about GMOs .
We have rightly refused to allow GMOs in chocolate , but only by three votes .
In addition , we have applied the precautionary principle by refusing the prior studies on the impact which this directive will have on the producing countries and so on .
Nothing has changed .
The question to be asked is who really benefits from the manipulation and ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I taste sweet victory for British chocolate producers in our vote today in their fight to have good British chocolate recognised across Europe as the delicious , high-quality product that it is .
The victors are not just British chocolate makers but chocolate consumers right across Europe who will now be free to wallow in the delight of Dairy Milk , Galaxy and Milky Way at will .
Clear labelling will enable consumers to choose and enjoy the chocolate that they want .
Their taste buds will no longer be deprived by Europe 's chocolate police .
Developing countries are also the victors .
This legislation takes account of the needs of the world 's poorest farmers .
Those vegetable fats permitted will be of tropical origin , and there will also be a review of the impact of the directive after three years .
Best of all , the directive will increase chocolate sales overall , thereby increasing the market for developing countries ' exports .
So chocoholics can now munch safe in the knowledge they are doing their bit for the Third World .
I am sure you will agree that the EU , in the past , has got itself into a right Twix on this matter .
Some governments have got their Snickers in a twist trying to protect their chocolate industries .
For them , however , Crunchie time has come and they now have Creme Egg on their faces .
It is high time the European Parliament gave two Cadbury 's Fingers to the chocolate snobs .
- It is now sixteen years since the debate on chocolate started in the European Parliament .
I believe that we should not even have become involved in this directive .
Debates about national tastes and products give us too far wide a sphere for ridiculous discussions .
Consumer choice will be exercised regardless of what the EU does , and that is only fair .
National chauvinism has been all too often evident in the chocolate debate .
The European Commission ' s directive authorising certain vegetable fats which are cheaper than cocoa butter to be used in the composition of chocolate clearly serves the interests of the five multinationals which share three-quarters of the European market .
Given that the resultant product incorrectly referred to as chocolate will not be any cheaper , consumers will not gain in the purchase price what they will lose in transparency with regard to the nature of the product .
Although we do not share the protectionist concerns hiding behind the defence of ' real chocolate ' , we do not see any reason to vote for the Commission directive .
After more than two years of prevarication , the Council finally adopted in October 1999 a common position on the directive relating to cocoa and chocolate products .
As it stands , this text does not allow the interests of consumers , small-scale chocolate makers or cocoa producers to be protected . It also does not guarantee the quality of chocolate .
Instead it allows the widespread use of vegetables fats other than cocoa butter , fails to provide precise information to the consumer and attaches little importance to the absence of a reliable method of analysing and measuring the fats present in chocolate .
This proposal in no way responds to the concerns expressed by MEPs during the vote at first reading on 23 October 1998 .
This text opens the door to the industrial production of cocoa butter equivalents based on palm oil , the price of which is significantly lower than that of cocoa .
Its adoption could lead to a dramatic fall in income for the eleven million people earning a living from cocoa in West Africa and for all the producing regions .
To help us swallow this bitter pill , an attempt has been made to give the text a social aftertaste by claiming that it defends the interests of the poorest shea butter producing countries such as Mali or Burkina Faso .
However , there is no guarantee that the chocolate industry will use shea nut oil which , in any case , can only replace 50 % of the cocoa butter .
This is a largely artificial conflict between cocoa producers and shea producers , between poor countries and even poorer countries .
In reality , this proposed directive mainly reflects the position of the chocolate multinationals and defends only their interests with any certainty .
I am therefore not happy about this .
This is why I fully support the amendments which place greater importance on the concerns of small-scale chocolate makers , the interests of consumers and the future of millions of small-scale cocoa producers .
This proposed directive dating from 1996 is connected with the harmonisation of the internal market . The Commission is therefore giving Member States the option to authorise the addition of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter to chocolate products up to a maximum of 5 % of the total weight of the finished product .
The directive also provides for the marketing of these chocolate products containing vegetable fats in all Member States , subject to a label which lists the ingredients .
I agree with the rapporteur that we should go back to the text adopted at first reading in this House in 1997 and that we should not authorise this addition and this marketing .
I still believe that the name ' quality chocolate ' should be reserved for chocolate which does not contain any alternative vegetable fats . A study into the impact of such a measure on developing countries ' cocoa exports should be recommended .
Finally , I still want clear and precise labelling for consumers .
This is a position of principle which is not really open to negotiation , just like the protection of quality products and consumers which we all are .
This is why I encourage this House to vote for the amendments tabled by our rapporteur and , in so doing , to take a stand against the position of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
This is all cock-eyed .
In a Europe which claims to want to protect the consumer and which talks of quality and authenticity labels , here we have a common position from the Council which aims to change the nature of what has , up to now , been a quality product , namely chocolate , rather than upset the food multinationals .
What is even more astonishing is that this same Europe produces mad cows , sheep with scrapie and chickens containing dioxin and imports hormone-treated beef and genetically modified cereals .
Of course we should ' inform ' consumers that the products they are buying are adulterated .
Yet this is nonsensical when this information is written in small letters in an incomprehensible language on the back of the packaging .
You are accustomed to doing anything you like in the name of your dogmas , free movement , free competition and free trade .
Please stop messing about with our gastronomic traditions , our quality products and our soil .
Stop playing with our food .
Now that would be real progress .
Understand this . I and my colleagues on the European right will vote for the ' zero option ' which is no vegetable fats other than cocoa butter in chocolate .
Who would have believed it ?
More than twenty-five years after the first debate on chocolate in the European Parliament and I am again involved in a discussion on the big question of whether a product can be called chocolate when it is not made exclusively from cocoa butter .
Today , as twenty-five years ago , this question has divided this House to the point that my Group did not produce a voting list and group discipline could not be imposed , which I love in such a case .
I can therefore freely come out in favour of the solution which seems best to me for the producers of real chocolate , as appreciated by the gourmets who believe in calling a spade a spade and calling chocolate chocolate , provided that it is actually made with cocoa butter .
I deeply regret that we could not agree on the solution which seemed to me to be the most sensible which was that the name ' chocolate ' should be reserved for products containing 100 % of vegetable fats originating from cocoa and that the presence of other fats should be clearly indicated in the packaging of products containing these . In this way the consumer could be informed and not led astray , given of course that the marketing of these products in the single market would be guaranteed .
In terms of chocolate , as in other areas , different cultures and traditions exist .
Everyone has different tastes .
In addition to the ' product quality and taste ' aspect there is , of course , the ' development policy ' aspect .
The ACP countries fear losses of income in the region of 160 million dollars if our large industrial chocolate producers use up to 5 % of other vegetable fats , with this percentage being the recommended figure but not actually being verifiable .
The situation being as it is , I would have preferred the common position to be rejected in the same way that I prefer good handmade chocolate to an industrial product which is currently unverifiable .
Unfortunately , a small majority in this House has failed to ensure that consumers can enjoy real chocolate .
. ( PT ) We fundamentally reject the principle of allowing chocolate to be produced throughout the Member States using a percentage of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter .
This is for reasons connected with safeguarding the legitimate interests of cocoa-producing countries and also reasons relating to consumer protection .
It is quite clear that a step of this kind would inevitably have an adverse effect on cocoa-producing countries . Furthermore , and this is the key reason for our views , consideration has not even been given to a study on the impact of such a measure on developing countries that produce cocoa .
At the same time , allowing up to 5 % vegetable fats other than cocoa butter to be used in chocolate production sets a dangerous precedent , given that , in the long term , it may lead not just to the use of a higher percentage of these fats than set at present , but it may also open the way to chocolate being produced with other kinds of fat in future , including even genetically modified fats .
Furthermore , it is clear that there is still no reliable method for testing the quantity of such fats used in chocolate production , whilst there is no requirement for clear , compulsory labelling which would , as a minimum , allow consumers to distinguish real chocolate , which only uses cocoa butter , from chocolate whose ingredients include other fats .
This directive alters the very definition of chocolate which should , in our opinion , be made from cocoa butter and beans .
We do not have the right to mislead the consumer by using the name ' chocolate ' to designate products which are not necessarily made from cocoa .
Consumers require clear and specific information .
They should no longer be deceived .
Today ' s vote went beyond the problem of chocolate alone and has threatened the confidence of our fellow citizens .
This is why I voted for all the amendments which aimed to improve this directive and which were tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
- ( DA ) The basis for prosperity in the EU is competition .
And the intention in adopting a new directive on chocolate products is precisely to improve competition in the EU .
With regard to food policy and consumer protection , we must be very careful .
But this is not a question of health or environmental protection .
It is exclusively a question of the extent to which , without any risk to health , we are to permit free competition in the chocolate industry so that all chocolate producers can sell their chocolate in all EU countries and not only in the seven countries which have so far permitted the aforesaid vegetable fats .
Seen from the consumers ' point of view , it is exclusively a question of taste .
It cannot therefore be right for politicians to decide what consumers should be entitled to choose between .
Products should be put on sale , and it should be clear what they contain , but otherwise we must rely upon consumers ' own judgement .
We can hardly do otherwise .
Consumers should find out for themselves what tastes best .
If , today , we are obliged to note considerable opposition to the proposal here in Parliament , this cannot be viewed as anything other than an attempt on the part of certain chocolate manufacturers to curb competition .
If one looks at where the opposition is coming from , it is also clear that it crosses the Group divide and comes mainly from those countries which are already using current rules to protect their chocolate industries .
Despite the commendable efforts of Mr Lannoye , I personally voted against this text which aims to authorise the addition of 5 % of vegetable fats to chocolate . This is the very type of European regulation which leads to a lack of understanding among our fellow citizens and which prepares the ground for Euro-scepticism .
Where a clear and unambiguous labelling obligation would have been sufficient to allow the marketing of all the types of chocolate available in Europe , one of those grotesque compromises at which we are so adept has been proposed . Instead of no vegetable fats as specified in eight Member States or 10 % as specified in other Member States , the knife has fallen at 5 % for the whole of Europe !
This 5 % of vegetable fats , which of course cannot be verified , will be of greatest benefit to the chocolate industry which will soon flood the market with cheap imitation chocolate , thereby causing an increase in the price of real chocolate which will become a luxury product for privileged consumers .
Will we now harmonise the composition of tomato ketchup , mustard , cooked meats , cheese , beer or pizzas , all in the name of a single market aiming to promote a single taste solely for the benefit of the food business ?
Although it is legitimate , out of concern for public health , to lay down legislation on manufacturing processes and the traceability of products , it is not legitimate to impose a standard food style for the whole of Europe solely in the interests of ' big business ' .
Although the construction of the internal market is a way to strengthen Europe in the face of world competition , this must not lead to a totalitarian dogma and meddling at all levels of our home life .
In particular , the diversity of Europe ' s gastronomy and food customs is part of its heritage and culture , if only at the cost of local specialities foreign to the internal market .
The people of Europe do not want this to be a place with standardised consumers living in a large uniform internal market .
They expect major political ambition from Europe , not punctilious regulations of secondary importance .
The misadventures of the new ' chocolate directive ' primarily illustrate the extraordinary weight and slowness of the Community ' s legislative process .
Introduced at the Edinburgh Council in 1992 , the ' simplification ' of the 1973 directive became a Commission proposal only in 1996 and was considered at first reading by this House in 1997 . It has taken another two and a half years for the Council to adopt a common position which is before us today .
Has such a long process at least resulted in a practical text ?
The answer is clearly no .
The new directive does not meet any of the relevant needs .
The 1973 directive clearly and unambiguously defined chocolate as a product made with sugar and cocoa .
To take account of the food customs of certain northern countries , derogations were specified .
The situation was therefore satisfactory .
So why change it ?
Why , under the pretext of ' simplification ' , has it actually been attempted to subvert the 1973 directive ?
Might the rest of the acquis communautaire no longer be untouchable ?
In effect , if the content of the directive is being changed , this is due to the pressure of the five multinationals - Nestlé , Suchard , Mars , Cadbury and Ferrero - which already share over 70 % of the European market but whose production capacity is hindered by the current dual legislation .
A site located in France , for example , cannot produce chocolate which does not meet the French standards . These stipulate that chocolate cannot contain vegetable fats other than cocoa butter .
However , these multinationals particularly want to minimise the cost of their raw materials and do not care that this will be at the cost of a change in the composition of chocolate .
Cocoa butter represents 8 to 9 % of the total price of chocolate .
Shea butter costs a third of the price of cocoa butter and palm oil butter is ten times cheaper .
By adopting a list of alternatives to cocoa butter and by specifying a percentage , this new directive is opening the door to further changes and this is the heart of the matter .
Tomorrow , the percentage will simply have to be increased and then soya , for example , could be added to the vegetable fats proposed today .
Shea butter will have played its role as an alibi . Its producers will then experience the same problems which are now going to be suffered by cocoa producers given the fall in prices which will follow the adoption of a directive which resolutely ignores its own development consequences and cynically postpones their examination indefinitely .
To achieve their aim of being able to produce and sell imitation chocolate under the name of chocolate at a lower price throughout the Union , these multinationals have worked ceaselessly to make the 1973 derogations the rule , regardless of the interests of chocolate makers and cocoa producers .
The common position fully grants their demands by proposing to establish , as a uniform and compulsory rule for all fifteen Member States , a derogation which used to correspond to a food custom confined to just a few States .
Will this at least increase the level of requirements and quality for all Member States ?
Not at all .
In fact , quite the contrary .
As usual , harmonisation is occurring at the lowest common denominator .
It is the lowest quality level which will be generalised in order to ultimately impose a standardised Euro-taste , to the detriment of taste quality .
Paradoxically , the burden of proof for quality will fall on the small-scale chocolate maker who can be comforted by the fact that he is not prohibited from indicating that he has not added vegetable fats other than cocoa butter !
Will the new text at least allow the consumer to easily distinguish between true and imitation chocolate ?
The answer is no because the text of the directive is dishonest . It specifies the option of introducing into the chocolate manufacturing process an extremely precise percentage of 5 % of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter , whereas everyone knows that we do not have a reliable method of analysis allowing this percentage to be verified .
The Commission is therefore setting a percentage which it knows is unverifiable .
This is deceitful .
The text also contains dishonest provisions in terms of labelling .
On Mr Lannoye ' s initiative , this House rightly adopted at first reading an amendment specifying the obligation to place , on the front of the product , clearly legible wording indicating the presence of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter .
As this amendment was not retained by the Council , the consumer will not be correctly informed .
In all countries and for all consumers with a taste for real chocolate , the name ' chocolate ' can now legally cover a completely different product .
Through a Community mechanism which is constantly diluting everyone ' s responsibility , the definition of one of our basic foodstuffs is being changed , solely for the purpose of allowing a few multinationals to maximise their profits .
Chocolate lovers , religiously savour your next Easter eggs !
This will be the last time you can be sure that they have been made with real pre-harmonisation chocolate .
What will be next after chocolate ?
When labelling comes in the door , sense flies out the window ...
This is a distinctive label used throughout Europe which we want to imbue with renewed vigour .
Like the French NF Environnement mark , this label is voluntary which means that it is up to manufacturers to apply for it .
It is based on the principle of a global approach which takes account of the whole life cycle of the product .
However , we must not cast aside all the national logos .
Consumers and buyers have their own codes and have built up their confidence on the logos which they know .
Any attempt to replace the national logos would end up once again confusing the people of Europe who are lost among a forest of markings including lists of ingredients , quality labels , logos and references to regions .
You could almost imagine yourself faced with a bar of chocolate !
As our main goal is to help SMEs gain access to these essential Community eco-labels , we support the rapporteur .
- Madam President , I wholeheartedly support Europe 's moves to become an eco-friendly continent .
This measure is yet further proof of the EU 's commitment to greening up its act .
Since 1992 , the Euro-Flower logo has become a hallmark of environmentally-friendly products , ranging from washing machines to writing paper .
However , consumers ' enthusiasm for green goods has yet to be matched by industry .
The measures contained in this 3-year strategy , however , should hopefully bring manufacturers on board .
In the fight to clean up our planet , Britain 's Labour Government has , of course , been at the forefront .
At Kyoto , for example , Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott secured , against the odds , an agreement to cut global emissions .
Britain is already well on the way to achieving its target of cutting carbon dioxide emissions by 20 % by 2010 .
Not content with that , the Government has recently raised the target to 60-70 % by 2050 .
This House should challenge other Member States to match Britain 's example .
They will get their chance to pick up the gauntlet at the forthcoming Kyoto follow-up Conference in The Hague this November .
Of course , protecting the planet means much more than just cleaning up the atmosphere .
It means protecting the natural environment on the ground too .
Again , Britain 's Labour Government is leading the way .
Its recent Wildlife Bill , for example , will give greater protection to endangered species than ever before .
Furthermore , ' right to roam ' legislation will give the British public the freedom to enjoy and appreciate our beautiful countryside .
Madam President , coherent action is urgently required at local , national and European levels to clean up our land , sea and air .
The Euro-Flower is just one element of the broader environmental strategy that is needed to save our planet .
Our citizens want to see concrete action .
They do not want to see mere hot air from politicians , which just adds to global warming .
By harnessing Euro-Flower power , we can all contribute to a cleaner , greener world .
Recommendation for second reading of the Blokland report ( A5-0056 / 2000 )
- Blokland rightly raises serious concerns regarding waste disposal , including incineration .
Coming from a country with over 90 % landfill use , I face the conclusion that properly controlled incineration is both necessary and inevitable .
Commitment by the Irish Government to serious recycling and separation of waste is far from evident .
Separation of waste , including use of organic waste for composting , must be a priority in any waste strategy .
Waste management is a very complex issue subject to extensive lobbying .
This is why the European Union has adopted a comprehensive strategy to tackle this major environmental and health challenge .
The directive before us today is part of this strategy as it aims to regulate the thermal treatment of hazardous or non-hazardous waste .
I myself have always been doubtful about the incineration of hazardous waste being dealt with in the same legislation as the incineration of non-hazardous waste .
I therefore raised my concerns and questions at first reading .
Regrettably , in my opinion , a majority has approved co-incineration .
This is why I am now fighting for measures to be adopted in order to guarantee that emission standards for hazardous waste will not be diluted .
Everyone knows that the volume of waste to be incinerated in the European Union is set to increase .
Thirty-one million tonnes of municipal waste were incinerated in 1990 and this figure will be in excess of 56 million this year .
There are several reasons for this , including the increase in the volume of waste produced and the fall in the quantity of waste sent to landfills .
It is well known that the incineration of waste causes emissions of substances which seriously pollute the air , soil and water and which are therefore dangerous to health .
The pollutants emitted depend both on the nature of the waste to be treated and the technologies used to treat this waste .
This is why our concerns focus on the emissions of heavy metals , dioxins and furanes .
The debate has particularly crystallised around co-incineration plants .
These use hazardous waste as fuel for the production of energy or physical elements .
Although the provisions of the applicable directives impose a maximum limit of 40 % of hazardous waste in the fuel used , this percentage is too high !
These plants must be subject to very strict control standards , at least as strict as those imposed on incinerators .
In addition , the generalised use of this hazardous waste must not lead to the production of this waste becoming acceptable .
We are at great risk of being told in the future that , as investments have been made to build these co-incinerators , we must now make these profitable !
I firmly reject these arguments in advance as they will lead to an increase in the volume of hazardous waste being transported with all the risks which this entails for the environment and safety .
To conclude , although offences must be penalised and authorities must be assisted in bringing their incinerators up to standard , it must be stressed that our priority is , and must , remain the prevention of waste production , whether this is hazardous or non-hazardous waste .
- The European Union has been at the forefront in devising new waste management strategies in recent years .
In fact , the object of the directive we are discussing here today is to reduce the adverse effects of incineration on the environment and on human health by considerably reducing the emission levels of several major pollutants into the air .
This directive also seeks to control the discharge of waste into our water systems .
This report is now before us at second reading .
I note that one of the recommendations from the European Council is that , if an operator of a plant incinerating non-hazardous waste intends to start incinerating hazardous waste , an integrated pollution prevention and control licence must be secured .
I believe that this is a particularly sensible proposal .
It is very important that the European Union is very active in putting in place new waste management proposals .
Waste in Europe has been generated at a rate of over 1kg per person per day .
2 billion tonnes of waste are being generated within the EU each year .
The European Union is clear about one aspect of our waste disposal problem . The future of waste disposal does not lie in local authorities up and down the length and breadth of this country searching for new landfill sites .
There is a growing concern about the environmental consequences of landfill sites in general .
Nothing less than a major shift from reliance on landfill sites to more integrated waste management plans will suffice .
The European Union fully supports the strict , ambitious but attainable recycling and recovery targets that have been laid down by the Irish Government .
These targets , which are to be achieved over the next fifteen years , include the following : -
· A diversion of 50 % of overall household waste from landfill sites .
· A minimum 65 % reduction in bio-degradable waste presently consigned for landfill sites .
· The development of waste recovery facilities , employing environmentally beneficial technologies capable of treating up to 300 000 tonnes of bio-degradable waste per annum .
All these measures reflect changing public opinions on the issue of waste management .
The day of landfill sites is now coming to an end and they must be replaced by more environmentally beneficial technologies .
There is unanimous support for this position across all the fifteen Member States of the European Union .
.
( FR ) The enormous volume of waste generated by our industrialised urban societies is undoubtedly one of the major challenges to be overcome by the European Union in the 21st century . Imperceptibly , the planet is gradually being swamped with waste and each year another 2 billion tonnes are produced by the Member States .
In view of this , waste management according to the law of the least immediate cost is not acceptable . The waste treatment industry , which employs tens of thousands of people and makes billions of euros , is flourishing due to this growing need .
It will certainly have to be very inventive if it is to correctly carry out its task without itself causing pollution under the guise of waste recovery , given that incineration discharges heavy metal particles and dioxins into the atmosphere , that cleaning generates unwanted sludge and certain recycled materials have not found a market .
The best possible protection for the environment and health therefore lies in the major progress to be made in implementing waste management legislation . The transposition of this legislation is actually far from satisfactory according to a recent Commission report .
The Member States and their industries must therefore be urged to quickly take the steps necessary to adapt .
The former must adapt their national legislation according to environment protection and precautionary principles and the latter must adapt their techniques in order to eradicate and not just displace the problem of pollution . However , at the same time , the European Parliament would be well-advised to come up with realistic ways of achieving objectives which are feasible , rather than allowing its lyrical instincts and idealism to dominate to the detriment of its credibility .
On environmental matters , it is by doing what is immediately possible that we will have a chance of achieving what is desirable in the long term .
This is why the UEN Group has not supported the amendments which are inapplicable in our Member States and whose anticipated economic consequences could prove to be very harmful .
Otherwise , as a local elected representative , I hope that the merger and simplification of the Community directives will clarify and streamline the regulatory framework in which the departmental waste management plans must be established .
The adoption of this directive on waste incineration , which will come into force with effect from 2005 , will considerably improve the current waste management framework in Europe , by giving higher priority to important criteria such as public health and the protection of citizens ' rights .
Furthermore , if this directive were to come into force immediately , rather than in 2005 as is unfortunately the case , it would be virtually impossible for the Portuguese Government to continue with its co-incineration strategy .
As it is , given that this directive imposes strict technical , legal and operational restrictions on all incineration and co-incineration processes across Europe , it will become more obvious that the strategy being pursued in Portugal is deeply flawed .
Accordingly , although I would have liked to go further with restrictions on incineration and co-incineration processes , I am nevertheless delighted with what has been achieved , given that this directive :
1 . Establishes stricter limit values for emissions , in particular those of carbon oxides and particulates .
2 . Will put incineration and co-incineration plants on the same footing in terms of limit values , removing the special status granted to co-incineration plants .
3 . States without any doubt whatsoever that incineration and co-incineration may only be used as a last resort , once all other technical avenues have been explored .
4 . Sets extremely rigid conditions for overall waste management and for the siting and size of incineration and co-incineration plants , which must be complied with before permission can be granted to any authority .
5 . Increases the relevant authorities ' powers of intervention in case of non-compliance with limit values at installations .
6 . Drastically reduces the scope for using the end waste from incineration and co-incineration , particularly in civil engineering projects .
7 . Makes continuous sampling of dioxins a compulsory requirement in incineration and co-incineration processes .
8 . Increases the role of the public in decision making on the siting of installations .
9 . Makes it compulsory to publish an annual environmental report on compliance with limit values .
10 . Considerably limits the present derogations for cement kilns .
11 . For the first time sets a limit value for emissions of ammonia , NH3 , in view of the atmospheric acidification caused by this chemical product .
The proposed directive on waste incineration is a complex and technical document whose environmental and economic implications must be carefully considered .
At first reading the European Parliament really made its mark on the issue by proposing the merger of two directives on the incineration of domestic waste and the incineration of hazardous waste .
I now believe that the common position submitted by the Council is a very good compromise which I can support .
However , I must make one specific point about co-incineration in cement works and justify my vote against two amendments .
I voted against the first part of Amendment No 25 , amending Annex II , which sets emission limit values for the cement industry and in particular the value of 15 mg / m3 for dust .
The majority of the Member States currently have limit values of 50 mg / m3 .
In a recent cost-benefit analysis , the Commission concluded that values of 30 mg / m3 are the best compromise .
To impose limit values of 15 mg / m3 would involve an excessive environmental cost and would not be profitable .
I also voted against Amendment No 14 on the definition of municipal waste . This amendment reintroduces a definition of mixed municipal waste even though this is already specified in Article 3 ( 3 ) .

Incorrect interpretation of this article could lead to the use of municipal waste in cement kilns being excluded whereas this type of treatment is provided for by the waste plans of several public authorities .
This vote is not at odds with my environmental concerns as co-incineration in cement works is not particularly harmful for the environment .
Cement kilns are actually subject to strict emission rules .
Moreover , co-incineration is , in certain cases , an integral part of the waste management policies of certain Member States or regions , under conditions which are both economically and environmentally acceptable .
- ( SV ) More stringent rules for incineration plants are highly desirable .
It is , however , doubtful whether the same kind of rules ought to be laid down for plants designed for unsorted waste as for plants that are only intended to treat certain types of waste , in other words waste that is sorted .
Plants for unsorted waste require more advanced equipment .
If the same requirements are laid down for all types of incineration plant , the effect could be to hinder the sorting of rubbish and to make recycling and reuse more difficult , including composting organic waste .
We in the Swedish Christian Democratic Party would therefore like to encourage the Commission to pay close attention to these points of view during the continued work on the issues of rubbish and waste .
I studied this report from my standpoint as a mayor because the Commission proposal mainly reinforces current legislation on the incineration of municipal waste . As an aside , this shows the usefulness for an MEP of being able to exercise the complementary mandate of mayor which is an option that the current French Government is unfairly and absurdly planning to prohibit .
It is in no one ' s interests to cut MEPs off from their grassroots .
The directive ' s objective is commendable . It aims to prevent and reduce the negative effects of waste incineration and co-incineration .
However , we cannot support the proposal as it also aims to subject all plants to the same emission standards .
This is not the way to deal with the overcapacity of incinerators in Europe and the rapporteur agrees with this .
Certain waste flows are more easily treated in a co-incineration plant .
We believe that certain proposed amendments to the common position may actually prevent existing plants being brought up to standard and may penalise the co-incineration of hazardous waste in cement works . This latter aspect essentially concerns France and Belgium .
With regard to municipal waste , I have several comments to make .
Firstly , confusion should not be allowed about the definition of ' mixed municipal waste ' in the context of co-incineration .
Likening ' partially separated waste ' to ' untreated mixed municipal waste ' , as Amendment No 14 does , risks affecting the development of the waste sorting sectors which we are trying to establish and in which some or all of the residues could be co-incinerated .
Furthermore , if Article 7 ( 4 ) was amended as proposed , the removal of the qualification of municipal waste as ' untreated ' would be tantamount to prohibiting the co-incineration of certain sorted municipal waste such as paper , cardboard and so on which could not be recycled unless it was collected separately .
Finally , it is not acceptable to reduce the threshold of 6 tonnes per hour above which existing plants incinerating household waste are subject to an emission limit value of 200 mg per cubic metre for NOx . This is because local authority planning to adapt existing equipment uses this threshold .
See , in this respect , Annex V ( a ) .
Even though we know that incineration is not the ideal solution , it represents an important advance for many authorities which have invested heavily to develop modern management of the municipal service for domestic and similar waste .
However , thinking on this issue must be taken into account and research must be continued .
The waste treatment industry will have to be very inventive in the future to avoid actually causing pollution .
We must therefore develop broader waste management strategies and actively encourage research and development in this area which is essential for life and for the future of our local authorities .
- I find it incredible , given the anti-Brussels hysteria of his UKIP allies , that Mr Blokland has managed to produce such an over-regulated monster of a report .
But at least these proposals will allow the anti-European rubbish peddled by Mr Blokland and the UKIP to be disposed of in an environmentally-friendly manner .
The aim of these proposals is to improve air quality and protect human health .
Incineration is often the most effective and safe method of waste disposal .
Sometimes , however , it can release dangerous chemicals , such as dioxins , into the atmosphere .
It is therefore vital that these by-products are monitored and prevented from escaping into the environment .
The technology for cleaning up fumes from waste incineration plants already exists .
We just need to make sure that it is used .
The sensible measures put forward by the Commission should encourage the utilisation of this technology .
I find the UKIP 's hypocrisy breathtaking .
I challenge the UKIP to explain to their own supporters how they can be allied to such an obvious supporter of EU over-regulation .
While pretending to be the Eurocrat 's foe , they are clearly , in fact , the Eurocrat 's friend .
I fear that cleaning up the environment may prove to be a doddle compared to the task of persuading the UKIP to clean up its act .
The losers , sadly , will be our own citizens .
If we are to believe the texts of the Ancients , waste disposal was a problem in ancient Rome even though , since then , this waste has made generations of archaeologists very happy .
At the time the majority of the waste was biodegradable which is far from being the case today .
We have just been talking about chocolate .
This provides an ideal way of illustrating this issue by looking , for example , at the journey of the packaging of a chocolate bar from the dustbin to the incineration plant . From this we can see that the combustion of the aluminium foil produces toxic gases .
We are facing an enormous challenge in terms of waste management .
However , I believe that some countries are not prepared for this either practically or theoretically .
One-third of domestic and similar waste treated by French disposal plants is currently handled by three hundred incinerators .
This incineration generates polluting emissions of dust , metals and dioxins which must be controlled using a smoke treatment system .
The regulations on the limitation of discharges are gradually being reinforced .
Clearly , action is needed to ensure that the rules are respected because health and the environment must be protected . However , in terms of co-incineration , the scope and definition of these plants should not be altered .
In consolidating certain regulations and complicating others , we must be careful that this does not lead to mistrust regarding European environmental legislation , advocating first one thing and then another .
Every change in this legislation causes uncertainty for certain professions and industries . Amendments to the legislation on co-incinerators or the specific treatment of hazardous waste risk creating cost distortions or even causing unjustified transportation of waste elsewhere .
There is a real risk of encouraging one particular sector to the detriment of others through ill-judged limit values . We need four incineration sectors specialising in hazardous waste , non-hazardous waste , co-incineration and incineration in adapted combustion plants .
My colleagues should also note another point , although this is of less importance .
In my opinion , however , an information campaign is needed following the merger of these directives .
The people of Europe are under the impression that special , hazardous , non-hazardous and municipal waste will all be mixed together and undergo common treatment in the same kiln and in the same plant .
The sorting of waste which they carry out therefore appears to be useless .
We must therefore set up a proper information and explanatory campaign .
Davies report ( A5-0062 / 2000 )
This debate on air quality concerns the particular problem of ozone in ambient air , as set out in the Davies report .
All the experts agree that it is essential to raise standards of air quality so that people throughout the European Union are protected effectively against health risks posed by ozone in ambient air .
The various health effects of ozone include irritation to eyes , nose and throat , difficulty in breathing , coughs and headaches .
Ozone also contributes to asthmatic attacks , impaired lung function and increased bronchial reactivity .
In the long term , this can even cause premature ageing of lungs .
These facts are frightening to say the least , which is why I warmly welcome this proposed directive .
It aims to amend the existing Community legislation on ozone in accordance with the requirements of Council Directive 96 / 62 / EC on ambient air quality assessment and management .
It sets long-term objectives and interim target values for ozone in ambient air .
It also introduces a framework of standards to protect human health and the environment .
Finally , it requires Member States to monitor ozone concentrations and to report the results to the public .
The directive will therefore provide a benchmark for the levels of ozone in ambient air .
In setting long-term objectives , the Commission proposes to use the 1997 World Health Organisation air quality guidelines .
The ultimate aim is to prevent these long-term objectives being exceeded and thereby avoid harmful effects on human health and the environment .
However , the Commission ' s proposals do not set a deadline for this to be achieved .
This is to be regretted .
As a first interim step , target values are set .
The aim is to achieve these , as far as possible , by 2010 .
These are also based on the WHO guidelines , but it is accepted that these will be exceeded on a number of days each year .
It must be pointed out that the Commission proposal does not take account of any changes which may result from the Community ' s climate change commitments .
These currently call for an 8 % reduction in a range of greenhouse gases .
Success in meeting these commitments should enable Member States to be more ambitious regarding target values for the reduction of ozone levels .
To conclude , I am fairly satisfied with the text of this proposed directive as it takes an important step towards attaining the ultimate goal set out in the fifth Environmental Action Programme of never exceeding critical levels of ozone in ambient air .
Myller report ( A5-0063 / 2000 )
We are in favour of the EU creating fixed limit values in connection with the environment by means of framework legislation , as most environmental problems are general and transnational .
Each Member State has different traditions and requirements , which is why the Member States themselves should be responsible for implementation , ensuring that the common goals can be achieved in a satisfactory way .
We have chosen to vote against Amendments Nos 16 and 17 , because these proposals , in a much too general and undifferentiated way , relieve small Member States of the need to achieve the environmental goals that have been established .
Motion for a resolution on the Lisbon European Council
The goal of full employment which reappears on the agenda whenever growth returns is clearly an admirable intention . It is difficult to achieve , however , without attacking the real causes of unemployment .
Despite current growth , job creation in Europe is notoriously inadequate .
Those jobs which are created tend to be precarious , particularly where they involve women and young people .
We must move away from simple declarations of intent , no matter how positive they may be .
In view of the extremely high social expectations , we must urgently define measurable and verifiable objectives .
What I would have liked to see was a commitment on the proposals indicated in my Group ' s motion such as :
The introduction of a process for reducing working time without any loss of wages or flexibility ;
A review of the directives on Euroworks councils and collective redundancies to reinforce the rights and powers of employees and their trade unions , particularly in the event of mergers and restructuring ;
The establishment at Community level of taxation on speculative capital movements and reinforcement of the fight against fraud and tax evasion .
I deeply regret that we are not embarking on a new type of sustainable development , based on the fairer distribution of wealth , an increase in the purchasing power of households and the stimulation of public and social investment .
For all these reasons we will vote against the joint motion .
Portugal holds the presidency of the European Union for the first half of the year 2000 . It has therefore decided to organise at the end of this month , in Lisbon , a Special European Council on the following problem : ' Employment , Economic Reforms and Social Cohesion - towards a Europe based on innovation and knowledge ' .
This initiative is to be congratulated .
Unemployment and the resulting poverty and social exclusion are scourges which we must tackle head-on .
The preparation of a coherent and coordinated strategy involving all the Member States is therefore essential .
We must firstly set ambitious objectives .
Those indicated in the Portuguese presidency ' s document are the return to full employment , stable growth , a genuine process of social cohesion , equal opportunities and the fight against poverty .
As underlined by the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Guterres , we were able to coordinate our economic policies to launch the euro .
The European Union must now accept the challenge and proceed in a similar fashion by proposing guidelines for the policy on employment and social inclusion .
I also welcome the idea of setting quantified objectives and benchmarks , in particular an annual average growth rate in the EU of 3 % and a level of employment of 70 % .
To complement this , a transparent benchmarking system must be established in order to assess the progress made by Member States in achieving these objectives . This requires an open system of paired assessment and coordination .
The presidency ' s document also stresses the necessary reinforcement of social convergence and the modernisation of our social protection systems .
The essential condition is clearly to guarantee a high level of employment .
This requires the creation of jobs , not just any jobs , but quality jobs , particularly in the service sector .
It also involves keeping jobs in Europe , given that the recent trend has been mass and systematic redundancies .
This means that the workforce has to adapt to the new information technologies .
I therefore broadly support this programme .
I hope these objectives will lead , during the Lisbon Summit , to specific and ambitious measures which can meet the legitimate expectations of the male and female citizens of Europe .
- ( EL ) Yet another summit , this time initiated by the Portuguese presidency , is about to add its contribution to the continuing intensification of , and support for , the neo-Liberal , monetarist policies which have led to the present dismal situation , which contradict every social and employment policy and which cause dramatic rises in unemployment , job insecurity , discrimination , social exclusion and widespread poverty , ostensibly in order to ' promote ' proposals and measures to support employment and combat unemployment .
It is a contradiction , it is ironic , it is hypocritical and it is insulting to workers to propose strengthening the competitiveness of undertakings by reducing labour costs , promoting total liberalisation , increasing the flexibility of the job market and supporting atypical forms of work as measures to combat unemployment .
We need to stop maintaining and strengthening the Stability Pact , giving priority to nominal convergence criteria , and we need to stop completely subjugating social policy to financial criteria and requirements before we can start talking about fundamental employment policies .
Speculative working capital would be taxed , tax havens would be abolished , fraud and tax evasion would be combated , wealth and income would be redistributed for the benefit of labour , state aid would be controlled , restructuring , merger and relocation grants which result in mass redundancies would immediately be suspended , and better social protection based on solidarity and independent of commercial and financial interests would be introduced if employment really were the European Union 's main concern , rather than how to ' sweeten the pill ' in order to deceive workers and limit social reaction to its anti-labour and anti-grass roots economic and social policy .
If its aim were to improve the standard of living of workers , increase their purchasing power and guarantee safe jobs , it would support public-sector and social investment and equal opportunities , combat all forms of discrimination in connection with access to employment and jobs and act as a barrier to policies based on privatisation , low wages and lack of social protection , flexible and temporary work and the constant exclusion of women , the young and people with special needs from the job market .
In fact , what the economic and social policy guidelines are promoting , what they are striving for in practice , is a minimum level of poverty , not a minimum level of prosperity for workers .
Prosperity is the preserve of big business , before which all bow down in reverence , making it more and more immune , throwing the job market even more out of kilter in the name of increased productivity and competitiveness , attacking social and other rights which have been won even more violently and promoting the perception that the modern ( anti ­ ) social state need only throw the people a few crumbs of charity .
The victims of long-term unemployment and social exclusion , and there are over 60 million of them , and European workers as a whole , have no intention of showing themselves to be ' mutually supportive ' , ' adaptable ' , ' docile ' and ' cooperative ' in their choices , as you will have them be .
You will find them insubordinate , uncompromising and intractable , fighting and demanding full and stable employment , a social policy system which includes insurance , health , a pension , unemployment protection , truly equal opportunities , quality education and fundamental vocational training . You will find them fighting for a social , democratic , mutually supportive Europe , a workers ' Europe , a Europe of the people , and you will find us by their side , fighting with them .

( The sitting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Human rights , racism , xenophobia and antisemitism ( continuation )
Ladies and gentlemen , the next item is the continuation of the joint debate on four reports on human rights , racism , xenophobia and antisemitism .
Madam President , I should like to expressly thank Mr Belder for his report .
Racism , xenophobia and antisemitism are a depressing problem , including within the European Union .
Fighting them is one of the common goals of almost every political group in this House .
This House is prepared to exercise diplomatic restraint in many areas , but not on this question .
And rightly so .
Mr Belder knows that I and the committee wished to quote the specifics of individual problems in candidate countries .
A number of proposed amendments by Baroness Ludford attempt to rectify this and I shall support them .
The way in which the social causes of racism in candidate countries and the highly significant social and employment policy consequences of a consistent anti-racist policy have been dealt with appears to me to be too general .
The fact that Mr Belder was prepared to clearly address the question of antisemitism is one of the most important results of the discussion process and I again extend my thanks to Mr Belder .

Leafing through the various positions of the Commission , the European Parliament , the Council of Europe and the Vienna Monitoring Centre , one is struck by the fact that antisemitism is quoted as a particular and particularly dangerous form of racism in several headlines , but only in the headlines .
There is almost a total lack of analytical appraisal or special programmes to combat it .
And as far as the Commission programmes in the candidate countries are concerned , Commissioner , the word " almost " can be dispensed with .
I consider this an unacceptable oversight and I therefore refer this question to you specifically .
Antisemitism is , without doubt , widespread ; often it is latent , which complicates the issue .
This morning in this House we were witness to one of its most repulsive forms , when the age-old assertion that the Jews themselves are responsible for antisemitism was repeated .
This debate should therefore be a separate and very , very specific task for us and the Commission .
Madam President , the presentation by the Council of a first EU annual report on human rights was a welcome contribution to the on-going debate .
In particular I welcome the information it contains regarding the EU-China human rights dialogue .
While this dialogue can and does play a role in the transformation of human rights issues in China , it will only bear fruit if the European Union speaks and acts as one .
Too often in the past EU Member States have allowed themselves to be blackmailed by China .
At previous sessions of the UN Commission on Human Rights in Geneva , when some Member States were raising China 's appalling human rights record , they were picked off one by one because of threatened trade sanctions by China .
Capitulating to China was both immoral and cowardly .
It was immoral to extend greater priority to the importance of trade interests over human rights and is in marked contrast to our approach in relation to the bilateral trade agreements we have with developing countries .
It was cowardly also .
History has consistently shown that the correct approach is to stand up to a bully .
Attempts to compromise are always interpreted as weakness by bullies , and China is such a bully .
We see this in its response to legitimate international concerns about its human rights record .
It treats the views of the outside world with contempt .
We witnessed it again at last week 's conference of the National People 's Congress in Beijing .
Its warmongering tone in relation to Taiwan is unacceptable and is a direct interference in Taiwan 's presidential election .
Its arrogance in relation to its treatment of Falun Gong practitioners and dissidents also cannot be tolerated .
In Geneva , and elsewhere , the EU should take every opportunity in a united way to express its displeasure .
While I strongly support China 's admission to the WTO , we should give China a dose of its own medicine .
We should use these negotiations as a means of leverage to ensure that China not only listens to EU concerns about its continued abuse of human rights but that it also takes action to improve its record .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , if we are to reinforce the protection of human rights in the European Union , we must firstly concern ourselves with the most vulnerable , i.e. essentially , the poorest .
The most basic violation of human rights is the denial of each individual ' s right to live decently .
Respect for human dignity must be our guide . We must ensure that poverty is not allowed to destroy individuals and families , that children are not taken away from their parents because of poverty and that the simple right of association is not refused to those who do not even have the right to work .
The aim is to create acceptable living conditions for all .
Everyone must be protected from poverty and exclusion .
Everyone is entitled to education , culture and health .
Everyone is entitled to decent housing and an income which allows them to live honourably .
We must declare that poverty will not be tolerated .
We must declare that everyone is entitled to their physical and mental integrity and that this integrity involves the right to a decent life .
Could the idea of fraternity become the key concept for the 21st century ?
Everyone has in them the enduring need to dream and through fraternity we could meet our main expectations for the poorest in society .
Fraternity gives meaning to solidarity , rejects exclusion and solitude , and ensures respect for differences .
Fraternity must guarantee the rights of the poorest .
Our century will be a century of progress in which the wildest utopian ideals may be realised .
Fraternity is one of these ideals and together , ladies and gentlemen , we can achieve it .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , once again we are devoting part of our time in this Chamber to one of the most honourable aspects of our parliamentary work : the defence of human rights of all kinds and in all parts of the world .
I would like to compliment the President on the wise decision to take these four reports together .
While we may not be able to devote to each report the time its importance would merit , we can safely say , when we discuss human rights elsewhere , in the rest of the world , that we have not omitted to carry out a serious analysis of shortcomings here in the European Union itself .
Whilst it is a fact - fortunately - that we here in the European Union are not faced with the gross violations that we rather unjustly criticise in other states , our own Member States still need to improve the way they respect these rights , economic and social rights , civil and political rights , with particular reference to respect for privacy and data protection for individuals , children ' s rights , women ' s rights and the rights of refugees who are immigrants here .
And we still have a long way to go as regards violence by the police and in prisons , and in combating racism and xenophobia .
With regard to third countries it is vital , and urgent , for the European Union to have a common strategy - to be prepared by the Council in consultation with this Parliament - which should consistently shape all the European Union ' s policies , and in particular its development cooperation policy .
It makes no sense in terms of Realpolitik for us to be more demanding in some areas than in others , for us to be more indulgent of some states than of others , and for us to pursue cooperation policies with some states that do not respect fundamental human rights , and where the rule of law has broken down and serious transgressions go unpunished .
If we continue to give political and economic support to countries where this is happening , we will be condoning regimes that do not respect human rights , countries where we can legitimately question whether Community aid is reaching the people whose development we are endeavouring to promote , or whether we are simply maintaining the vanity , opulence and secret bank accounts of a handful of leaders .
Madam President , even to a slightly unprejudiced eye , there is clearly no trace of racism down the broad middle of this House .
Even if we disagree on a report on racism , the reasons lie not in racism in Parliament but in the report itself .
For example , the report not only contains laudable words on the fight against racism ; it also deals with matters such as the voting rights of third country nationals in specific countries or the right to hold public office , which may be decided one way or the other , but which have nothing whatsoever to do with racism .
And it is precisely on these points that this report is a dishonest and sorry effort and I make no bones about the fact .
The fight against racism , to which we are all committed , is turned into small political currency and abused , which is why we are unable to vote for the report in its present form .
I stand firmly against the way in which racism has been played down , as we have said , to make it a subject of political debate .
That is our grave criticism of the approach taken in this report .
We are all against racism and we all have a contribution to make .
There should be a broad consensus on this in this House .
But we cannot possibly allow this concept to be taken up by one side of the House and used to conduct a political fight ; we must insist that matters of this sort are dealt with in a way which can meet with everyone ' s approval , and that is not the case here .
Madam President , I congratulate the four rapporteurs on their work , and in particular Baroness Ludford for carrying forward work that I , amongst others , helped to initiate nearly a decade and a half ago with the first Committee of Inquiry into Racism and Fascism in Europe , whose rapporteur , in fact , was an excellent member of the Christian Democrat Group and of Nea Dimokratia , Dimitrios Evregenis , of whose work Mr Le Pen has said that he will use all means possible to prevent its being put into practice .
I wish to make two comments with respect to the reports in front of us ; one on the Belder report , which contains a version of an amendment which I have tabled concerning the treatment of the Russian-speaking minorities in Estonia and Latvia .
I believe it has a place here .
What was happening 15 years ago in Austria was that Mr Haider was actually persecuting the Slovene-speaking minority there .
Very few of us wanted to stand up and say anything at the time .
We need to tell the Estonians and the Latvians that , if they continue that treatment , their prospects of joining the European Union will be that much less .
Secondly , the Ludford report has a series of amendments tabled by the Christian Democrats challenging a series of paragraphs that were originally in the Evregenis report 15 years ago - and were approved by the Christian Democrats then - on the amendment of the Staff Regulations to allow ethnic minority members to join the European Community staff .
On voting rights , on the selection of ethnic minority candidates , what I do not understand is whether they have no institutional memory or whether , a more sinister development , their political position has changed .
Madam President , both I and my Group enthusiastically support Mr Haarder ' s human rights report because we have found a very good line in it and there are numerous reasons for doing so .
My Group and I do , however , have serious reservations about the Ludford report because numerous political measures are discussed under the banner of the fight against racism and xenophobia which have nothing to do with the analysis and which , of course , have lost nothing by being in this report alongside a wealth of other measures which we shall wholeheartedly support .
Allow me to tell you which points we do not accept and why .
They are the points which fall outside the stated report period of 1997 / 98 .
And when Sarah Ludford says the report refers to the year 2000 , then she must be clairvoyant because it has only just begun .
Secondly , we are against all the points which fly in the face of the basic principle of solidarity .
Mr Nassauer has already pointed out the fact that intervention in the right to hold public office has been called for here .
Has the author ever tried to enter public office in Morocco for example ?
The question of recruitment to public office in a Member State or to the police is exclusively a matter for that Member State .
Thirdly , matters are addressed which have no place in this report , such as the voting rights of third country nationals in European elections or local elections .
I consider this last point to be very important .
As an Austrian , I cannot accept a report which takes exception to my country in a most unqualified and most unjustified manner and which expressly welcomes and supports party-politically motivated action and unjustified boycotting measures by the fourteen .
These are actions which , in the final analysis , are directed against young people , the economy , sport and the people of my country , and they have no place in this report .
The report does not contain what the title promises .
Madam President , thanks are due to Mr Haarder for a basically splendid piece of work .
There is , nonetheless , one point on which I have to say that I disagree with the rapporteur .
When I read the Danish version of Mr Haarder ' s report , I thought for one brief moment that Mr Haarder had grown wiser with the years , and I had taken note of the fact that there is now a judgement from the Danish Supreme Court stating that so-called ' exclusive agreements ' do not contravene human rights .
I believed and hoped that I could declare myself in agreement with Mr Haarder in emphasising the individual ' s right to membership of trade unions .
When , however , the report is read in other languages , it can be seen that Mr Haarder has not grown wiser .
Either that , or he is hiding it very well .
From a number of unclear wordings , it looks as if the rapporteur is continuing his crusade against the Danish model , in which employees and employers are able to agree that only members of a specific trade union can be employed in a specific area of work .
No one is being deprived of the right to work and no one is being deprived of the right to belong to a trade union , but individuals cannot benefit from extensive social agreements without also being themselves members of precisely that union which has produced the agreements .
Mr Haarder goes much further in his assault , for he tries indirectly to strengthen those unions which do not recognise precisely those collective victories which have helped create the welfare and the human rights which we have spent all day debating .
Madam President , I notice that you have not called Mr Hernández Mollar , who had asked me to speak on his behalf .
I would therefore ask you to allow me the two minutes allotted to Mr Hernández Mollar , so that I can present his intervention , and then the four minutes allotted to me , if this is acceptable to you .
I will therefore present Mr Hernández Mollar ' s intervention .
Madam President , the debate on xenophobia and racism is always of great importance , politically and socially .
The Ludford report contains points which are highly acceptable and which any democrat can and must ratify , but also contains other points which are less than rigorous from a political and even from a legal point of view .
European citizenship is an abstract concept which lacks any legal form .
The Member States regulate the political rights of their citizens in accordance with their own democratic laws , as also happens in many of the countries of origin of the citizens who emigrate to the European Union .
To ask for political participation in local , national or European elections , or even access to the civil service for people who are not nationals of the Member States , without even coming to a reciprocal arrangement , is politically unrealistic and displays a lack of legal rigour .
It would be impossible to comply with a proposal of this type and I therefore ask Mrs Ludford to withdraw it so that we can vote in favour of her report .
Xenophobia and racism should be combated by means of education and integration in the workplace and in society , and by paying attention to the issues of housing , health and social services , but let us not use blithe rhetoric when it comes to an issue which above all requires rigour and seriousness .
That was Mr Hernández Mollar ' s intervention .
I will now begin my own , Madam President .
The existence of a panoply of fundamental civil , economic , social and political rights , fully guaranteed by constitutional legislation and by public authorities , is one of the essential elements of modern Western society .
The various charters and declarations which mark the history , firstly , of European / American politics , and then , later , world politics , are milestones which have ennobled the collective life of humanity , carrying it aloft on the shoulders of Christian values and the Enlightenment through to today ' s democratic ideals .
The European Union has always considered the respect for fundamental human rights to be one of the essential principles of its founding spirit and has engraved this on the frontispiece of its founding Treaties .
Without this irrefutable component of our moral concept of social organisation , the very existence of the Union would cease to make sense , because , as well as constituting a broad space of economic freedom , the citizens of the fifteen Member States wish , above all else , to offer the rest of the world an example of the scrupulous respect for these rights .
However , that firm and unequivocal will must be exercised in a manner which is legally rigorous and , above all , based on common sense .
The nationals of non-EU states who live in the Union must be treated on an equal footing with the citizens of the Member States with regard to access to education , health and social protection .
This must be done whilst respecting their specific religious beliefs and cultural characteristics .
The tiniest hint of racism , intolerance or xenophobia must be eradicated in any Member State in which it may occur .
However , the administrative status of the resident is not the same as the political status of the citizen .
In a political sense , the citizens of the Union are classed as such by virtue of being citizens of one of the Member States and this allows them to enjoy full political participation and , in particular , to express themselves in elections , to take collective representative responsibility of an electoral nature and to compete for permanent posts in the public administrations .
The ingenious construction of a European citizenship which is not based on the prior and essential requirement of being a citizen of a Member State , of a European citizenship which is above the constitutions of the States of the Union , with no legal basis nor solid political foundation , rashly granted to passport holders from non-EU countries , even if they are residents , would be a source of confusion and would endanger the rights of the nationals of the fifteen Member States .
The European Union must offer a generous welcome , and must be open to all people who wish to contribute , through their efforts and their work , to our general prosperity or who seek asylum or refuge from oppression or persecution .
However , full political citizenship must be acquired in accordance with the laws of each Member State .
In his celebrated lecture at the Sorbonne entitled " What is a Nation ? " Ernest Renan warned us : " Let us not abandon the principle that man is first and foremost a rational and moral being , before speaking any particular language , before being a member of any particular race , before belonging to any particular culture " .
Many of the tragedies of the twentieth century in Europe have resulted from ignoring this wise advice .
Let us allow Renan to refresh our memories , but let us not indulge in excesses which are less than rational and of dubious morality .
Madam President , I would like to express my appreciation for Mr Belder ' s report , which is also the topic of my contribution today .

The report raises many relevant points .
Many indeed , such as the issue of racism and discrimination in the candidate countries , require a great deal of attention .
I hope that the candidate countries seeking membership of the EU will act upon the recommendations contained in the report and I also hope that our future partners , the enlargement countries , will soon sign up to the Community action programme against discrimination which will be tabled shortly in this Parliament .
However , in my contribution , I would like to home in on the predicament of the Roma people , otherwise known as gypsies .
Many Roma in the candidate Member States live in extremely abject conditions .
They are frequently at the receiving end of all kinds of discrimination .
Under the communist regime , they were subjected to an assimilation policy . After this , after 1989 , they were more or less left to fend for themselves .
For a long time , little attention was given to their predicament , but fortunately , the Council of Europe was the first to raise the alarm .
In the light of enlargement , the Commission has now also accorded their problem priority status , and rightly so .
Many governments in the candidate Member States concerned have also become active on this score , and many of us have noticed the sudden influx of gypsy groups into a number of Member States .
Parliament would like to gain more insight into , and an overview of , all the actions and intentions on the part of the European Union and the Commission and would therefore ask the Commission to produce a coherent programme , based on strengthened cooperation , with objectives and timeframes .
We want the European Union to get more directly involved in order to address the problems of the Roma .
Not only the European Commission but also this Parliament would do well to pay a lot more attention to this .
This should , first and foremost , be placed within a broader context .
We should not just aim to combat discrimination and change people ' s mentality .
We also need to address the causes of discrimination .
Regional developments and a sound social policy are indispensable tools in this .
Roma often live in areas where everyone is struggling .
We want to adopt an approach from a local perspective .
Local communities and local governments play a key role in solving the problems of the Roma .
This is the level at which improvement programmes need to be drawn up in the areas of education , housing and employment . They must be organised in such a way as to ensure that the entire population benefits .
At the same time , local cooperation is an effective tool against prejudice and discrimination .
Only at a local level can the negative cycle of disadvantage and discrimination be broken .
The Roma ' s own contribution is also important .
As far as I am concerned , this too is a key word .
Roma need to be able to stand up for themselves more .
They need to become directly involved and given co-responsibility in order to improve their conditions .
In my opinion , official recognition of the Roma as a minority could help them to achieve more political independence .
In addition , there is a need for more specific action aimed at changing people ' s mentality .
The tendency to discriminate is often deep-rooted , even at government level .
This needs to be given special attention .
I also advocate sound cooperation between the European Union and the Council of Europe .
We should make better use of the expertise developed within these circles .
Finally , I would like to underline that , more than anything , there is a great need for tangible results in the short term .
Many campaigns are being launched with a great deal of good will and the European Union is very active too .
This is praiseworthy in itself .
At the same time , however , I would ask the Commission to aim for swift and visible results , the goal being the European Union ' s first enlargement . We can then prove to our own citizens that we have addressed the problem .
Some investments require a lot of time and it takes a long time before they take effect , but other aspects , such as housing and tackling the employment issues , can yield tangible results sooner .
We must address the problems facing the Roma in the candidate Member States themselves , which is , after all , where they live .
In fact , we should do this as soon as possible in order to avoid this problem becoming our problem in six years or so .
Mr President , human rights , fundamental freedoms and the rule of law are the alpha and omega of any political system .
We take them for granted , but it appears that in our ultra-civilised Europe they are not always observed .
Mr Haarder has described the situation within the 15 Member States , and the implication is that there is certainly much work still to be done .
For example , it is an inadmissible , almost bewildering fact that , even today , some countries are denounced by Amnesty International for failure to respect the most basic human rights .
It is absurd that some states , including , sadly , my native country , are being condemned by the European Court of Human Rights over the exaggerated length of their legal proceedings .
The fact that the institution of exile is still in force in some Member States is incompatible with all the principles of human rights .
If the European Union wants to enlarge and become an authoritative reference system for the international community , we do indeed need a strong , coherent reaction from the European institutions , but there is also the need for each of us to transcend his own national political interests and focus on the good of the Union as a whole by voting responsibly , in both political and , more importantly , humane terms on these issues .
We are all quite aware that this report will not be binding upon our governments : until the Charter of Fundamental Rights is completed and inserted into the Treaties we can do no more than invite the Member States to take action .
However , where there is political responsibility this should not be a problem .
At a time when the Union is attempting to create an autonomous military body to enable it to intervene wherever the rule of law is under threat , at a time when the Copenhagen criteria have become an integral part of the acquis communautaire to be assimilated by the candidate countries , it is unacceptable for there to be such discrepancies in the area of human rights within the 15 States .
We must overcome this and incite our governments to be European through and through .
I am not the first person to say this : the European Union is not , cannot and must not be a purely economic union .
The European Union is something much greater than that ; it has a common origin and a dream which we must fight to realise , and civil rights are an integral part of that fight .
Mr President , we might call today ' s sitting a sitting in celebration of human rights .
Those with ulterior motives might say that Europe is engaging in self-flagellation .
I believe that Europe is reviving its hopes and its prospects .
Human rights issues spearhead and underpin the development of Europe .
And when it comes to human rights , we must never ever make concessions .
We demand various criteria of the countries which will accede and of other countries , wherever they may be .
The death penalty is an example .
And yet we have an ally , America , in which the death penalty both exists and is used .
I mention this in a spirit of international sarcasm and because , if we want to build a Europe based on humanitarian principles , it must never make concessions to political expediency and must behave in a mature forward-looking manner .
All four reports on which we shall be voting are good reports .
They need some improvement and I think that the entire House will help without any expediency or ulterior motive .
In particular , Mr Belder ' s report on candidate countries is a very good report and I hope that , in the end , it will be even better .
I am tempted for the sake of quality , and because I wish to participate and because I agree , to read two paragraphs , two proposals relating to two candidate countries .
Cyprus - Cyprus satisfies the Copenhagen criteria . In passing , it should be said that there has been no progress in resolving the political partition of the island .
Turkey - The Commission report notes no progress on the fundamental Kurdish issue .
In short , Turkey still fails to satisfy the Copenhagen criteria .
We are in favour of Turkey ' s joining the European Union .
However , we must not make concessions on questions of principle for anyone .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , I should like first and foremost to say one thing about the Belder report : it is an excellent report , a serious and very important report and it has my full support .
It is based on fundamental European values which , per se , vehemently oppose racism , xenophobia and antisemitism .
I think that only if we base our position on these fundamental values inside the European Union are we entitled to criticise others outside the Union , in places where these fundamental values are violated .
That is why I believe that this debate , which is being conducted in connection with the Austrian government , provided that it is a serious debate , is extremely important , because its precise aim is to struggle for these fundamental European values and stand up for them , both at home and abroad .
There are various sections of the population in the candidate countries , in the candidate countries , which merit our particular attention .
The first which I should like to mention are the Roma and Sinti ; they represent a very large section of the population and we must seriously consider how they can be sensibly integrated into society .
We must also admit that there is a problem in this regard because the Roma and Sinti themselves have different conceptions of how this integration can function .
But we must help them with training .
We must help them find jobs and we must do a great deal of educational work so that what happened recently , the literal immuration and separation of the Roma and Sinti from the rest of the inhabitants in the community , is never repeated .
The second group which I should like to mention are the Kurds .
Turkey , which is a candidate country even if we are not yet negotiating with it , recognises no minorities , not even the Kurdish minority .
I consider this stance to be wrong and one which contradicts the declarations of the Council of Europe .
But even if the Kurds are not recognised as a minority and Turkey is not prepared to grant them any collective rights , it must acknowledge that it is violating the Kurds ' individual rights and their cultural freedom , their freedom of expression as well as their economic freedoms and rights .
I therefore think it extremely important that we help the Kurds gain their rights in a reasonable and peaceful manner .
The Belder report also states this unequivocally .
The third group which I should like to make special mention of is to be found mainly in Estonia and Latvia . I refer to the Russian-speaking minorities .
I understand many of the arguments which I have heard in the Baltic states , namely how difficult it is simply to treat as equals and accept minorities which are not native but which came as an occupying force .
There are many emotional obstacles to this and yet it is important to take these steps and some have certainly been taken .
But they must be persevered with and the past , in other words what was done to these minorities by the occupying forces , must be overcome so that a new common future can be built in the Baltic states together with the Russian-speaking minorities .
The Monitoring Centre for Racism and Xenophobia will open in Vienna on 7 April .
I personally have asked the President of the European Parliament on behalf of my Group to ensure that this date is adhered to because , objectively-speaking , I consider it to be a very important date , irrespective of the current situation in Austria .
I hope that this institution will not only be supported and will attract a great deal of publicity and attention on the day of its inauguration , but that Parliament , the Council and the Commission will actively support it in years to come .
Mr President , I am in favour of the Haarder report in its entirety , including paragraph 38 , and I am therefore departing from the line of the Group of the Party of European Socialists to which I belong , for I feel that the four points mentioned in paragraph 38 - the excessive length of time for which people are remanded in custody , the excessive length of time taken to complete trials , failure to separate the careers of investigating magistrates and judges and the risk of politically influenced magistrates dealing with politicians in public enquiries - are all matters for careful reflection which should lead us to vote for this motion .
After all , I launched an attack on this subject when I was Italian Minister for Justice , and my right-hand man in that operation was the most important , the most famous and the greatest of all Italian magistrates , Giovanni Falcone .
In the same way as I , or rather , we do , he maintained that it was necessary to separate the careers of magistrates , not , of course , in order to penalise them , but to differentiate between the activities of investigators , who are part of the prosecution , and judges , who have to guarantee balance and impartiality .
I do not feel that the European Parliament ' s intervention in this matter is abusive or excessive , but rather that it is a step towards guaranteeing the realisation of the concept , the vision of balanced European justice , especially with regard to the proper functioning of the public authorities .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not intend this to be a very long speech .
I believe that the debate we have had here today is an extremely important one , and that the various concerns that have been expressed in relation to the various reports have raised some interesting questions . Some of these questions have been raised in a rather polemic way , in other cases contradictions have been highlighted .
In some cases there has been agreement with the form but probably not with the content . In any case , I think that these four reports are , overall , extremely important and that they raise highly topical issues for all of us , especially at a time when the European Union , both internally and as regards its role on the world stage , is endeavouring to highlight and give substance to a fundamental set of values which will ultimately act as a catalyst for its own political union .
We believe that it is impossible to achieve deepening of the European Union if we are not willing , amongst ourselves , to guarantee a common set of principles and to ensure that these principles also form the essential basis of our own external presence .
I have referred to our external presence and to the internal dimension .
A great deal has been said today , either directly or indirectly , about the stance adopted towards Austria . This was sometimes expressed in a rather emotional way , I might even say in an understandably emotional way , on the part of individuals linked with that country .
As the Portuguese Presidency , that is the Portuguese Prime Minister , acted as a channel for the position that 14 countries of the European Union expressed as regards their bilateral relations with Austria , I would like to be very clear about the following point : we do not have any criticism to make about how Austria has behaved at international level , and in particular about how Austria has fulfilled its duties and obligations within the European Union .
Austria has undeniably been a country that has met its European Union obligations .
But we have to recognise one thing that has a significant bearing on how we view the European Union : we are all Austrian citizens .
Today , in the European Union , citizenship means European citizenship .
An Austrian citizen is a Portuguese citizen .
A Portuguese citizen is an Austrian citizen .
There is no such thing as a domestic issue when certain ideologies and certain political forces propagate and advocate a certain type of ideology , even if they may subsequently retreat , for tactical reasons , from positions they have adopted .
This cannot be viewed as a matter of indifference to the other countries .
We are now operating within a European area , a common area within which we regard ourselves as being bound by a basic set of principles , many of which are highlighted in the reports before us here .
We need to look at these issues from a European perspective , and we cannot keep using subsidiarity as an excuse to say that these are national issues and that this amounts to interference in the internal affairs of a particular country .
That simply is not true .
As I have already said , Austria ' s internal affairs are also the European Union ' s internal affairs .
When we advocate the need for political life in Austria to be in accordance with the values and principles promoted by the European Union , and which Austria has also undertaken to promote at European Union level , we are not trying to interfere in Member States ' internal affairs .
Apart from any emotional issues and , of course , apart from the reactions that situations like this can engender , we believe that there is a need for mature reflection on the significance of this act , which we should point out was bilateral and which , let there be no mistake about this , is a precautionary political act .
We believe that political precautions of this kind are possibly the best way of warding off future problems , and in particular the ghosts from the past that may return to haunt us in Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to external relations , we believe that the European Union now has a solid set of values which the deepening process is bound to improve , particularly by means of these reports .
There are naturally some controversial issues in this area , and people may see things in various different lights in different areas .
Whilst we all oppose racism , and I think that is a statement everyone in this Chamber will accept , I am not so sure that we can all reach agreement in practice on concrete measures to combat racism .
And although we may all say that we oppose xenophobia , I am not sure if we can all agree on active steps to integrate foreign citizens into the European Union and accept measures to protect the interests of foreign citizens within the European Union .
And there is going to be an interesting test of this , in the form of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of citizens of the European Union .
If there is a will within the Union to extend this charter to foreign citizens living within the European Union , we will be giving a signal that we are starting our action against xenophobia by putting our own house in order , with measures that we ourselves have decided to implement at internal political level .
Furthermore , as regards antidiscrimination and the various forms of discrimination identified in the various reports , a great many differing measures obviously exist .
And we know that even when it comes to internal legislation within our Member States , there are major differences in the way some of these questions are dealt with .
However , I also think that the way these issues are being raised in this House , and the way these reports are helping us to reflect on these problems , represent a shake-up in our collective thinking and are an important factor in helping us to further intensify the debate on these issues .
This is a task not just for governments , but also for non-governmental organisations , for social lobbies and for political lobbies .
We need to keep this question on our agenda , and that is the rationale and the significance of this debate .
Finally , I would like to conclude this speech by drawing attention to the set of measures already adopted in the Council of the European Union and the various Community actions it has implemented .
The measures that have been developed include a set of initiatives connected with the European Year against Racism in 1997 . I would also like to highlight a very important aspect which we have probably not yet fully taken into account : the role of the new Treaty of Amsterdam in this area .
It was not easy to reach a consensus : when we were negotiating the Treaty of Amsterdam , and I took part in those negotiations , it was not easy to reach a consensus on including the various measures now covered in Articles 6 and 7 .
Our present experience suggests that it would probably be advisable to improve these provisions , that is to improve these articles .
We shall see whether , in the course of the Intergovernmental Conference , we can achieve a consensus that will allow us to make further progress on this matter .
However , I would also like to draw attention to an initiative that will , symbolically , take place in Vienna on 8 April - the launch of the European Monitoring Centre for Racism and Xenophobia .
This will be a very important body , and I believe that it will also be very important to secure everyone ' s cooperation in encouraging an effective fight against racism and xenophobia in the European Union . This essentially represents what we might call the " ethical pillar " of the Union .
I am talking about a Union of principles and a Union that we have to strengthen - there will not be a political Union in the future if we cannot guarantee that these principles are shared by the great majority of the Community .
Madam President , at the end of this extremely interesting debate perhaps I can explain the division of labour or work-sharing on the Commission 's side .
I intend to deal mainly with the Malmström and Belder reports and my colleague , Commissioner Vitorino , will deal with the other two important reports , although there will obviously be some overlap between us .
Let me start with the Malmström report .
I think the first annual report of this new European Parliament is thorough and timely .
Timely , because I hope that before the summer break this equally new Commission will adopt a communication on human rights in external policies .
It will cover many of the areas in the report and all the European Parliament 's recommendations provide extremely useful input for our work .
I cannot respond to all of the points in the report at this stage .
Instead I will pursue them , including discussions with the European Parliament , over the coming months so that we get the communication right and reflect the important arguments in this report .
I want to concentrate my initial remarks on women 's and children 's rights , as the rapporteur has chosen to focus on these important objects .
It is a timely choice in view of the Beijing + 5 platform for action this year at the UN General Assembly in New York .
Beijing confirmed that women 's rights are universal human rights and that women have a central role to play in building democratic and just societies .
The European initiative for democracy and human rights reflects this .
Women are explicitly included as a target group for support .
The actions cover a broad sweep of concerns , from women 's participation in decision making in the Balkans to support for female domestic workers in the Ivory Coast .
Issues such as violence against women have been rightly categorised as issues of human rights .
As such , they should be promoted vigorously as part and parcel of our foreign policy and development assistance .
Mrs Malmström 's report sets out some of the stark realities of the violence which is perpetrated against women in many forms and at all levels of society .
From the horrors of rape to genital mutilation , from the home to the prison cell .
Our programmes DAPHNE and STOP are the mainstay of the Commission 's response .
DAPHNE has supported the sharing of information and good practice amongst NGOs and Member States through more than 100 transnational projects .
A new DAPHNE programme for 2000-2003 was adopted in December 1999 at a level of EUR 5 m a year .
In response to a European Parliament resolution in 1997 the Commission has conducted an awareness-raising campaign on domestic violence within the Member States .
We should use what we learn during such campaigns and share that knowledge with applicant countries , perhaps in the context of DAPHNE .
I take note of what the report says on the horrific practice of genital mutilation and the lack of data on the subject .
We will look , in the Commission , at ways in which we can contribute to the search for a solution .
The Commission is also working with others to halt the heinous trafficking of women which has been growing in the last few years .
We produced a communication in 1998 on this subject .
The focus then was placed on prevention , research , law enforcement , effective sentencing of traffickers and support to victims .
We are working on this , as the honourable Member knows , with NGOs , the OSCE and candidate countries .
As for children 's rights , the STOP programme has co-financed 67 projects dealing with trafficking and sexual exploitation of children with a budget of EUR 6.5 m for the first five years .
A new STOP programme is planned to start from this year and this will be open to accession countries .
Moving on to more general issues , I mentioned the forthcoming communication on human rights and external relations .
My aim is to adopt a more effective and coherent approach to policy and to spending and in particular to improve the management of our programmes in this area .
Human rights projects are very different from projects to build bridges or reinforce primary education .
NGOs and civil society partners are integral to their implementation .
The projects are often carried out in sensitive or dangerous conditions in the field .
Those who implement the projects may even see their own rights threatened , which is no doubt why NGOs often feel a little aggrieved that they then have to provide the Commission with a shoebox full of receipts when they return to the office .
The European Union 's financial procedures , including the financial regulation are , to put it mildly , not NGO-friendly , which begs the question : should we stop funding NGOs or should we change our procedures ?
The former is clearly as impossible as it would be totally undesirable .
We could not work without NGOs .
Reform to our procedures , many of them determined by Member States in an era when NGOs barely existed , is going to take time but we are working on it , not least as part of the overall reform package .
We will not , alas , see an overnight change .
This brings me on to the budget and the Parliament 's proposal for a joint declaration on yearly increases in human rights expenditure .
The size of the budget cannot be divorced from the question of our capacity to manage it .
Otherwise we will make too many promises which we simply cannot fulfil and when it comes to supporting NGOs you often operate on a shoestring .
Broken promises can lead rapidly to bankruptcy .
We have a backlog of projects to complete and we have underspent the human rights budget in the past so I would find it very difficult to justify an increase in spending until we have sorted this out .
But I want to make this clear : I would like to put myself in a position as soon as I can where we spend every penny and can therefore justify spending a great deal more .
The possibility of creating a human rights agency as foreseen in Vienna and Cologne could help us here .
I believe that such an agency should be operational , not advisory .
I will be exploring this in the communication .
The potential for an agency should also be considered in the context of wider reform of our external assistance and of externalisation as a whole .
I now turn to the issues raised in the Belder report which responds to the Commission ' s communication on countering racism , xenophobia and antisemitism in the candidate countries .
I am responding to this on my own behalf and that of my colleague , Commissioner Verheugen .
I would like to congratulate the authors of the comprehensive report .
Of course , it criticises the lack of specific proposals in the Commission ' s communication but I should note that the adoption of that communication came after the resignation of the college in March 1999 when the Commission , and I put this gently , was not best placed to elaborate new proposals .
I hope this response will set a few pointers for the future .
The fight against racism is an essential element of the Union ' s human rights policies and of the pre-accession strategy .
This has two main elements : adoption and implementation of the acquis by candidate countries including the 1996 Joint Action concerning racism and xenophobia and the 1951 Geneva Convention and the 1967 New York Protocol on Asylum Seekers and Refugees , and effective use of our cooperation programmes .
The compatibility of legislation concerning minorities is raised during the screening process and during bilateral discussions and in association committees .
For example , we have looked at language laws in Lithuania , Estonia and Slovakia , a subject that was raised during the debates , and legislation regarding the Roma in the Czech Republic and Slovakia .
These discussions have produced concrete results .
The second element , our cooperation programmes , include the PHARE national programmes , PHARE Democracy and the MEDA Programme .
Under PHARE , reform of the police , criminal justice and asylum systems has been accorded a high priority in line with the rapporteurs ' proposals .
This reform helps to bring about the necessary changes in attitudes within institutions .
The goal of raising police awareness of racism and xenophobia was also incorporated in the framework of the European curriculum for the training of the police in Central and Eastern Europe .
We will persevere with such measures .
We are also open to opportunities for strengthening them .
One central aim common to the Malmström and the Belder reports is the need to build on our relationship with NGOs in candidate countries .
The new Access Programme which replaces the LIEN and Partnership Programmes aims to strengthen civil society .
Finally , on the Roma , whose condition was mentioned by several speakers , the Commission is seeking to bring more coherence to its support for Roma communities .
We intend to be associated with the meeting to be organised by the European Monitoring Centre to which European Parliament representatives are being invited - a meeting called in order to stimulate ideas for improving European Union assistance to Roma communities .
These reports cover extremely important issues .
They are issues of increasing concern to European Union citizens as they are daily assailed by media footage of human rights abuses , whether they be in the Caucasus , Colombia , the Balkans , Sierra Leone , China and so on .
I look forward to the European Union taking up these abuses at the UN Commission on Human Rights in Geneva , which I will attend on 27 March .
I am grateful to Parliament for its timely input .
The Commission and Parliament are well placed to work together on human rights .
We are well placed to give a strong lead to others .
I am particularly looking forward to working with Members of this Parliament to ensure that the communication we produce later this year gives an intellectual and political lead on this issue and can be regarded by NGOs , parliamentarians and others as blazing a trail for discussion of these fundamental issues .

Madam President , I understood my good friend ' s , Mr Seixas da Costa ' s , remarks as a defence of the sanctions against Austria , and I should therefore like to ask him , as a matter of form , whether he was tabling this proposal as President-in-Office of the Council , and therefore on behalf of the Council , or whether it was on behalf of the 14 governments .
Madam President , I too should like to ask in what capacity you made this statement .
Secondly , in speaking of subsidiarity , I meant points in the report which referred to areas of intervention in the rights of nation states which , according to the Treaty , clearly come within the remit of those states .
My third comment , if you will allow , is addressed to you , Mr da Costa : what happens in one country of the European Union is of interest to the other countries , that is perfectly obvious .
That is not least precisely why we are members of this European Union and it is to be commended that we obtain information and evince an interest .
But evincing an interest also means , in my view , obtaining objective information about a country and levying criticism where criticism is due and then taking measures when transgressions have taken place and not preventatively or , where possible , on the grounds of political persuasion .
Minister , I should like to call on you on behalf of the Austrian delegation to obtain this information , which neither you nor many or , presumably all of the 14 , have , in situ .
If you want to know who elected this party which forms part of the coalition , namely the Freedom Party , then the answer is that 50 % of the workers who used to vote for Socialism have now voted for this party and that half the youth of Austria voted for this party .
It was not right-wing extremists , although , of course , we do unfortunately have them in Austria , perhaps in the order of 3 to 5 % , just as other countries do .
The motives here were different , however , and voters simply overwhelmingly voted the old government and Socialism out in favour of an alternative .
If you wish to pass value judgements here , please ensure that you are in possession of all the facts first and then levy criticism where it is really due and not on the basis of supposition or suspicion .
Madam President , Mr Pirker has not spoken on the agenda .
Clever as he is , he has taken cover under a point of order to give a short , two-and-a-half minute speech as to what we must forgive him for as an Austrian who also comes from Carinthia .
I should like it recorded that what Mr Pirker has said had nothing to do with the agenda .
I call on the President of the Council on behalf of my Group to continue to be as vigilant and critical of racism and xenophobia as you have demonstrated here , in whatever capacity .
Madam President , I am grateful for this opportunity to clarify once again the capacity in which I made those observations .
Let there be no mistake : the statement by the President of the European Council and Portuguese Prime Minister was made on behalf of the 14 countries in the European Union apart from Austria .
This statement was made in a context which , from the outset , as I explained in the speech that I made to this House on 2 February , had nothing to do with the workings of the Community ' s machinery .
The 14 countries ' three levels of response as regards Austria are therefore bilateral in nature .
The fact that this was channelled through the President of the Council was merely a question of coordinating the joint position of the various countries .
I would like to reiterate and to emphasise what I have said about Austria ' s conduct at Community level up to now : I think I made it quite clear that Austria has been a loyal partner within the European Union and that nobody is questioning Austria ' s conduct .
Nor is there any question of Austria infringing any of the provisions of Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The bilateral sanctions are therefore exactly that . They are not sanctions within the operational framework of the Community .
No formal aspect of the European Union ' s operational framework has come into play during the Portuguese presidency in relation to the Austrian situation .
Certain informal aspects may have been involved , but at present , formally speaking , Austria ' s representations are being dealt with at Council Working Group level , at Council of Ministers level , and at the European Council which is to take place shortly .
With regard to the political question which the honourable Member has put to me about the attitude of the Member States towards the effective operation of the Austrian Government , I would like to stress a point which has not always been sufficiently emphasised in relation to Austria : the current situation does not represent ' business as usual ' , neither for Austria in general nor for Austria ' s political life .
It was not by chance that the party with the second largest vote in the Austrian elections was not invited to form the government .
It was not by chance that a party that received a larger number of votes was invited to form the government , but that it then passed on to the party with the third largest number of votes .
It was not by chance that the President of the Republic of Austria has obliged the two parties in the coalition government to make a declaration recognising a basic set of principles .
It was not by chance at all !
That is also the reason why the present political situation in Austria is , of course , not ' business as usual ' and why , in the same way as the Austrians have doubts about this situation , we all have the right to entertain such doubts and to express them bilaterally .
As regards Austria acting as a full partner within the Community , as it has done up to now , nothing will militate against Austria at Community level .
That is quite clear .
However , at bilateral level , we must have the responsibility , the right and the duty to be aware of what we regard as a certain violation of the atmosphere of trust which we can no longer take for granted , because of statements that certain individuals have made in the past and because of the political proposals that these individuals have made .
This is a political point , it is a political statement , and we have drawn the relevant conclusions here bilaterally speaking , and bilaterally speaking no one can deny us the right to draw conclusions as regards our relations with Austria .
We regret that this is how things have to be and we hope that matters will develop in Austria in such a way that we can act differently .
Madam President , as my colleague Chris Patten has clearly said , it is my responsibility to set out the Commission ' s position on the other two reports being discussed this afternoon . These are the Haarder and Ludford reports .
Firstly , the Commission shares the European Parliament ' s view that the new legal context , following the adoption of the Amsterdam Treaty , gives the Union increased competence and responsibility for human rights .
In this respect the Commission congratulates the European Council ' s initiative to prepare an EU Charter of Fundamental Rights . This will give greater visibility to these rights and also , I hope , greater legal security if , as desired by both Parliament and the Commission , this Charter becomes a legally binding instrument under the supervision of the courts .
In this context and as the personal representative of the Commission President to the convention responsible for preparing this Charter , I must defend the view that the Charter should be extended to third country nationals legally resident on the territory of Member States .
The Commission is also pleased to note that its views are basically in agreement with those of the European Parliament on the nature and content of this Charter .
This was also the case in yesterday ' s debate on the Duff and Voggenhuber report and it is also true with regard to the conclusions of the report by Mr Haarder whom I warmly congratulate .
The Commission shares the concern for action , and not just words , in ensuring the coherence of the rules on human rights applied by the national courts and by the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg or the Court of Justice of the European Communities .
In this respect there is no doubt that the signature of the European Convention on Human Rights by the European Union would allow the hierarchy of the courts ' decisions to be clarified and would allow external supervision of Community law , as is already the case with the legal systems of the Member States .
The signature of this Convention is certainly compatible with the preparation of a binding Charter of Fundamental Rights .
With regard to the content of the Haarder report , I will particularly concentrate on the aspects which come directly within my area of competence within the Commission .
The conclusions of the Tampere European Council provide a very clear political framework for the EU ' s policy on respecting and promoting migrants ' rights in the broad sense of the term .
The Heads of State and Government underlined that the joint policies on immigration and asylum to be developed on the basis of the Amsterdam Treaty should be founded on principles which are clear to the people and which offer guarantees to those seeking protection in the European Union or requesting access to its territory .
Furthermore , the Presidency ' s conclusions define the four pillars which will form the future basis of the joint European policy on asylum and immigration . These pillars are : partnership with the countries of origin , a common European asylum system , fair treatment for third country nationals and more efficient management of migratory flows .
I must particularly stress the need for the European Union to have a comprehensive approach to immigration which covers political aspects , human rights and development questions in the countries and regions of origin and transit . The latter involve the fight against poverty , improvement of living conditions and job opportunities , prevention of conflicts , consolidation of democratic states and respect for human rights , including those of minorities .
I wish to confirm the importance which the Union and its Member States attach to absolute respect for the right to ask for asylum on the basis of a full and comprehensive application of the Geneva Convention .
I must also underline the intention to develop a vigorous policy on the integration of third country nationals legally resident on EU Member State territory .
Finally , although these measures are needed to guarantee social peace in our Member States , we must recognise that the fight against illegal immigration must be strengthened and the protection of the rights of the victims of the criminal networks organising such immigration must be guaranteed . Particular attention must be paid to the situation of women ' s and children ' s rights .
I therefore share the rapporteur ' s and Parliament ' s concerns .
The Commission asks you to note that , in response to your concerns , our concerns and the requirements of the Tampere mandate , we intend during this year to submit all the main instruments of the asylum policy to Parliament and the Council . These consist of the joint procedures , the revision of the Dublin Convention and the final Eurodac instrument .
However , at the same time , the Commission intends , in the autumn , to submit to Parliament a communication on immigration policy in the European Union .
We must review the 1994 communication and update the approach to the questions of immigration policy in the Union in light of the Tampere conclusions .
As for the inadequacies of the legal services which have been underlined during this debate , the Commission does not intend to tackle some of these albeit very interesting theoretical and practical questions , such as the career structure of national judges or the duration of trials in several Member States . This is because we should respect the principle of subsidiarity and recognise that the basic options must be the decision of each Member State .
The Commission would underline in this respect that a green paper on legal aid represents a worthwhile contribution , both to the requirement to define common rules on the protection of defendants , such as the guarantee of assistance from interpreters and translators in cross-border trials , and to the establishment of a wider programme of mutual recognition of legal decisions .
As for civil justice , the communitisation of several civil justice instruments is an efficient way of ensuring the effective legal consideration of human rights .
The Commission has already proposed communitising all existing conventions not currently in force , particularly the one on the service of documents and the Brussels II Convention and the convention on bankruptcies .
We have also proposed making the very important Brussels Convention of 1968 on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgements in Civil and Commercial Matters into a regulation .
All these instruments are currently being examined by the Council .
Even the United Kingdom and Ireland have decided to join the Member States on this and Denmark , which does not have the same capacity to participate in work on civil legal cooperation , is also seeking solutions which are currently being examined .
Finally , with regard to children ' s and women ' s rights , although these matters specifically come under the competence of Member States , I can remind the House that the Commission and I have undertaken to submit a package of measures on these questions by the end of the year .
These measures will aim to go beyond the joint action of February 1997 .
They will consist of definitions , charges and penalties in the fight against the trade in human beings for the purposes of sexual exploitation and measures against the sexual exploitation of children .
Turning now to the Ludford report , I very much welcome the opportunity to respond to Parliament ' s report on racism and xenophobia .
The Union ' s commitment to supporting fundamental rights and fighting discrimination was made very clear in the Amsterdam Treaty and this is , for me , a crucial development of the European message .
Article 7 of the Treaty on European Union introduces new powers to react in case of serious and persistent breaches of fundamental rights by a Member State .
Article 13 of the EC Treaty provides for measures to combat discrimination on the grounds of sex , religion or belief , disability , age , sexual orientation and - of greatest relevance to us today in this debate - racial or ethnic origin in which ( to clarify the question raised by Mr Brie ) we include the fight against antisemitism .
Many forces came together to reach agreement on Article 13 in the last Intergovernmental Conference , as the representative of the Council has already reminded us , and the Commission is determined to honour the Treaty commitment to a discrimination-free society .
That is why we put forward our package of proposals to fight discrimination only two months after taking office last year .
My message today , in the follow-up to the Ludford report , is that we still hope that Parliament will give priority to giving its opinion on this package so that we can adopt the two directives and the action plan by the end of this year .
But besides that , I think that in many quarters there is growing recognition of the need for European action against racism .
That is why in the Article 13 proposals we are able to make greater progress , I believe , on racial discrimination than on the other matters .
We felt that it was politically possible .
We sincerely hope that the facts will not deny our hope .
As you know , the package of proposals that the Commission has put forward consists of two directives and an action programme .
The two draft directives provide a legislative framework for legally enforceable rights including provisions on a number of key issues such as protection against harassment , scope for positive action , appropriate remedies and enforcement measures .
The proposed directives are complemented by a proposal for an action programme .
We know that , to combat discrimination , practical action is needed to reach out to people and help change discriminatory attitudes and behaviour on the ground .
Getting the Member States to adopt the anti-discrimination package is now our top priority .
Although it is important , the Article 13 package is only part of an on-going process to develop new ways of tackling racial discrimination .
The Union is committed to mainstreaming the fight against discrimination on the basis of race and ethnic origin , and we recently organised a major conference on this issue .
We intend to keep pushing the process forward , through the Structural Funds , the Research Framework Programme , the European Employment Strategy , the new EQUAL Initiative and the new Social Action Programme which we hope to adopt in the summer .
We intend to use all these instruments to fight discrimination and , as you know , work has also started on the European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Parliament has a key role to play in this regard .
It is vital for the Commission that the Parliament contributes to the growing momentum surrounding these proposals by delivering its opinions on the package as soon as possible , and by participating fully in the work of drafting the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I will conclude as I have started : the Charter will represent the high priority that the Union as a whole accords to the fight against racism and discrimination and to protection of human rights .
I sincerely hope that , during our debate on this issue next year , we will be congratulating ourselves on achieving , with the Charter , a new tool to fight against racism and xenophobia in the Union .
Madam President , allow me briefly to correct what the President-in-Office of the Council said .
Two heads of government , Mr President-in-Office , have already been reprimanded by their parliaments for the steps which they initiated against Austria .
You therefore had no right to speak on behalf of their countries ; on the contrary , you obviously spoke as the head of a socialist party .
At most , Mr President-in-Office , you can therefore only speak of twelve countries .
Mrs Flemming , the debate on Austria should not be restarted as we have already had an exchange of views on this issue .
I will give the floor to Mr Schulz who wanted to raise a point of order on a personal challenge made in yesterday ' s debate .
Madam President , I seldom make use of these rules but I must do so now for the record .
During the debate , Mr Gollnisch , a member of the French extreme right , attacked me personally .
I should like to state the following for the record : I have nothing to take back as regards my statement that the extreme right is abusing this House for rabble-rousing purposes .
Mr Gollnisch stated for my benefit during his speech that his family , and these were his words , would never accept fascism .
That is where Mr Gollnisch clearly differs from his family , because he himself accepts fascism or , to put it plainly , he is a fascist .
Thirdly , I should like to state for the record that the fact that such speeches are given here fills me with consternation , as does the fact , which I ascertained from his loud applause , that Caudillos Le Pen is still allowed to sit in this House , despite the fact that he has already lost his eligibility for office on account of his prize fighting activities in the French election campaign .
Mr Schulz , we have noted your statement .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
Eurodac
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , firstly I would like to thank the Presidency-in-Office of the Council for their high level presence in this House and for their positive attitude .
Last year , this Parliament was consulted twice about the establishment of a system for comparing fingerprints .
In principle , the system is intended to correctly implement the Dublin Convention .
On 13 April 1999 , this Parliament rejected the Council ' s proposal to extend the Eurodac system to illegal immigrants by means of a protocol .
This Parliament was then consulted again in accordance with the provisions of Amsterdam .
We were once again told that this system has to be developed in order to correctly implement the Dublin Convention .
This seems all very well to me , with the limits introduced by Parliament in its last report , with the amendments which ranged from our reservations about the inclusion of children under 14 in the system to the request that this Eurodac system be only applied to the Dublin Convention .
Given that we have been informed that none of our suggestions are going to be accepted , I would like to ask the Council whether it is prepared to hold a genuine dialogue with Parliament .
This is not a trivial question .
We are beginning to build and implement the instruments for the ' communitisation ' of the area of freedom , security and justice and , as we will never tire of saying in this House , this cannot be done without the national parliaments and without the European Parliament , because these issues are far too important to the citizens not to be endorsed through a strong social consensus .
The other question I would like to ask the Council is whether it agrees that this system should be administrated by the Commission , in which case the Commission should be provided with adequate staff and resources .
Returning to the content of the report , the non-acceptance of Parliament ' s amendments and the ambiguity of some of its provisions , as well as certain information that I have received , lead me to ask you , and to insist once again , what exactly are the Council ' s intentions with regard to the scope and functions of the Eurodac system . I would like to ask why other foreign nationals have been included and , especially , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , whether the Council has any intention to extend the use of the Eurodac system beyond the application of the Dublin Convention .
I await your responses to this question and I would like to thank you once again for coming to answer this oral question before the debate on the new Eurodac Regulations , which I hope will also reach this House .
Mr President , as far as the Council Presidency is concerned , I for one am delighted that we are currently cultivating extremely positive contacts , especially as regards cooperation in the domestic policy area .
We have all managed very well to really work together with you , and the same applies of course to Commissioner Vitorino .
But when it comes to EURODAC , we have a problem .
We here in Parliament have passed a resolution and have made clear why we cannot accept EURODAC in the form which the Council and the Commission wish it to take .
And we have given our reasons .
We have humane reasons , we have reasons when it comes to children , as far as the age limit is concerned ; for example we cannot accept the age limit of 14 .
We highlighted all these problems in a resolution by Parliament .
For this reason , it is of course most important for us , for my group , to see how seriously you take Parliament , how you deal with our proposals and , in the final analysis , we hope that we will continue to be able to report gladly and proudly on how well we are cooperating together .
The question is whether you are willing to lend us an ear when something gives us cause for concern and we urgently need your support .
Mr President , esteemed Commissioners , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the debate on EURODAC and the implementation of this system is something of a never ending story .
It started back in Dublin in 1990 .
In November 1999 , we here in Parliament , and I assume you too Commissioner , believed that we were on the home stretch and were finally going to be able to implement EURODAC .
Set targets were tabled on several occasions and , on balance , we welcomed the fact , and I personally was pleased , and that ' s a rare occurrence , when you said , following the vote in Parliament , that you would not accept the proposals adopted by a majority in Parliament which we , I should add , had voted against .
That too was a very positive aspect .
All in all , I would have been pleased to see this system implemented for the simple reason that it is this system alone which makes Dublin enforceable and because it allows the jurisdiction of the Member State responsible for the asylum procedure to be established unequivocally , thereby indirectly dividing the burden to a certain extent .
Plus , we could then prevent multiple applications for asylum and abuse of the asylum system and this , in turn , would allow us , as it were , to fight illegal immigration indirectly .
In other words , it is , as a whole , a system which must be seen as very positive and absolutely necessary in the context of asylum and immigration policy and the responsibility of the Member States .
What filled me with consternation was the fact that the Council then upset the whole applecart at its meeting on 2 December by refusing to accept that implementing powers should remain with the Commission , i.e. that the competent regulatory committee should be able to act under the chairmanship of the Commission .
The upshot of this was that we failed to achieve what we wanted to do , i.e. to communitise the system ; on the contrary , the Council upset our plans by more or less announcing yet again that it was staking its claim .
As a result , it is not the Commission which controls this instrument in the interests of the Community ; on the contrary the initiative is again with the Council and , as a result , the Commission and , in the final analysis , Parliament too are excluded .
We will not and cannot accept this because it involves consequences which are so far-reaching that , in the end , there will be no control over the efficiency of the system , it will no longer be possible to collate statistics for the purposes of analysis and action and a delay has been caused which is absolutely unacceptable on account of the fact that we need this system .
My question to you is this : when can we really expect to see the EURODAC system which we have waited so long for up and running ?
How will the system actually be configured ?
Will it comply with the rules and with our requests for the Commission to be fully responsible for implementation , because then we would have achieved our own necessary goal ; we would have re-Europeanised one part , because it makes sense here to actually implement this communitisation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall reply very directly to the questions that have been raised , so as to avoid any possible doubt about the Council ' s position , and I think it is indeed important for that position to be clarified .
With regard to the scope of the Eurodac system , I would like to recall that Article 1 of the proposal for a regulation on establishing this system is very clear , so let me quote it : " A system known as ' Eurodac ' is hereby established , the purpose of which shall be to assist in determining which Member State is to be responsible pursuant to the Dublin Convention , " I repeat , " pursuant to the Dublin Convention , for examining an application for asylum lodged in a Member State , and otherwise to facilitate the application of the Dublin Convention under the conditions set out in this Regulation " .
This is the sole objective of the regulation , which is an instrument pursuant to the Dublin Convention and which goes no further than that objective .
As regards the role of the European Commission , Article 3 of the proposal for a regulation clearly defines that a Central Unit shall be set up within the Commission .
Furthermore , the Commission has , as we know , started to work on this , and preparations for establishing a Central Unit are under way .
Concerning the role of the European Parliament , I would like to clarify something that can only be the result of a misunderstanding . I would like to make it very clear that in no way has the Council stated its opposition to all Parliament ' s amendments , nor has it called upon the European Commission to come up with any new proposals .
Some of Parliament ' s amendments were in fact incorporated into the proposal for a regulation , which is a point I wish to stress .
In addition , I would like to remind you that all the Justice and Home Affairs Council ' s proposals on this matter have been presented to this House , which has , in fact , given its opinion on this matter on three occasions : 15 January 1998 , 18 March 1999 and 11 November 1999 .
At present , as you know , and for reasons that are not entirely relevant to this issue , but have more to do with other circumstances of a political nature , it has not been possible to reach a consensus within the Council on the new proposal to be submitted to this House .
We hope that this will happen shortly , perhaps even during the Portuguese Presidency .
With regard to the other questions raised here , the first was the minimum age for taking fingerprints , which has been set at 14 years .
I recognise that there are some concerns about this , but I would like to say that this is in line with the practices followed in Member States , which in some cases even allow fingerprints to be taken from children under 14 .
I would like to highlight an important aspect which was probably not taken into consideration when discussing this age limit : an ever increasing number of applications for asylum are submitted by minors , and such situations need to be monitored using technical procedures of this kind .
As regards the involvement of the European Parliament and of the courts , I think that Title IV of the Treaty of Amsterdam is sufficiently clear about the role of this Parliament and the Court of Justice in this field .
I believe that the need to safeguard privacy is properly covered by the provisions of Article 18 of the proposal for a regulation , to which I would like to draw your attention , and which , in addition , refers to the rights already enshrined in Directive 95 / 46 .
Furthermore , as a result of Article 1 of the proposal for a regulation , and I think it is very important that this should be reiterated here , it is clear that the application of Eurodac will , at all times , be governed by the principles enshrined in the European Convention on Human Rights and in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child .
I believe that these points mean we can say that this is a safe system without any aspects that could jeopardise citizens ' rights .
But we have to recognise that the creation of a set of EU mechanisms for regulating all these issues relating to applications for asylum needs to be subject to rigorous technical scrutiny , failing which it could be perceived as implying a loss of citizens ' rights .
Mr President , the statements by the President-in-Office of the Council go straight to the heart of the problem facing us here .
The Social Democrats are divided , I make no bones about the fact , as to how to deal with fingerprinting of under 18-year olds .
Some members are saying we should not fingerprint fourteen- to eighteen-year-olds .
I personally take a different view on this .
You cannot advocate reducing the voting age to sixteen and still say that an eighteen-year-old should not be fingerprinted .
It is incomprehensible .
It comes down to how this system is seen under the rule of law .
If you guarantee that the Council has no objection to leaving implementing powers definitively with the Commission and allowing us in Parliament to exercise a control function , at least in the area of Commission jurisdiction , then that is considerable progress .
However , the Council has not so far given us to understand this in so many words , which is why I listened to what you said with pleasure .
Because I should like to draw your attention to the following point : if we create systems at European level which can directly violate people ' s basic freedoms - and the anthropometric treatment of a person , compulsory treatment of a person is a violation of his individual rights - if we create institutions at European level which have these rights then the Executive must be subject to parliamentary scrutiny and the people affected by the measures must have legal recourse , both of which are lacking in almost every system which we have created within the framework of internal security in the European Union .
There is a lack of parliamentary scrutiny and no precise guaranteed legal recourse .
It is there in principle , but it has never been accurately described .
The same applies to parliamentary scrutiny .
We therefore say that if implementing powers remain with the Commission , if the regulatory committee is set up under the chairmanship of the Commission , then we agree .
If not , then we must tell the Council that there is no question of the Council taking implementing powers away from the Commission , not if it expects the Community budget to finance the system .
Otherwise Parliament would have to reconsider the budget and the question of financing the system from the community budget .
And believe me , we shall do so .
The purpose of the Dublin Convention and Eurodac is to allocate to a single Member State responsibility for examining an asylum application , and the justification for the proposed regulation is that there is a need to extend fingerprinting to certain categories of illegal immigrants on the grounds that a substantial number of them will have claimed asylum previously or intend to do so .
The problem is that some have not and will not , so this means that the proposed regulation goes beyond the strict terms of Dublin by guessing at or anticipating the existence of an asylum application .
Thus the Dublin Convention is , in the words of the UK House of Lords Select Committee on the European Communities , a shaky edifice on which to construct a system for taking and exchanging fingerprint data on those who have not yet made or may not make an asylum application .
This is a legally uncertain basis for legislation and that makes me unhappy .
There is also an absence of clarity in the definition of the illegal immigrants to whom the regulation will apply .
Member States are required to fingerprint every third-country national over 14 who is apprehended in connection with the irregular crossing of their border - that is not very precise .
Fingerprinting is a serious invasion of privacy and the compatibility of such requirements with the European Convention on Human Rights needs to be carefully weighed .
I am not sure that this has really been done .
There are also data protection worries , which is why Parliament wanted to extend the provisions on erasing data to include , for instance , those who obtain any kind of legal status to remain in a Member State even if not full refugee status .
I am glad to see the amended proposal takes up Parliament 's demand to erase the data when an individual has got a subsidiary or temporary form of protection , but could I enquire whether this would cover for example - in the system I know best - the UK 's exceptional leave to remain ?
Finally , Mr President , whatever the justification for widening the Eurodac fingerprinting system to some categories of illegal immigrants , I am personally not convinced that this proposal is legally watertight .
Are the Council and the Commission so convinced ?
Mr President , we are beginning to establish a common asylum and immigration law in Europe .
That means that we need instruments to exercise the necessary controls .
A common immigration law means that we have no more internal borders and take responsibility for the people entering the European Union at the external borders .
It is perfectly clear that there is abuse , for example in connection with asylum claims .
The number of people applying for asylum on grounds which have nothing to do with political persecution far outweighs the number of applicants recognised as victims of political persecution .
Abuse in this connection means not only that asylum is sought on non-existent grounds but also that the same applicants make applications on these grounds to several countries .
We will only be able to control this abuse if we at long last implement the EURODAC fingerprinting system , which we have been waiting such a long time for , and if the Council finally decides to allow this system to enter into force .
It has already proven its efficacy on several counts , and it is essential if asylum is to gain acceptance .
We therefore advise the Council in the strongest terms to make its decisions so that EURODAC , the system which allows fingerprinting throughout Europe , can become a fact of life .
That is the task now before the Council .
Ladies and gentlemen , as we have been told by the Council representatives , the amendments adopted by Parliament and included in the text have improved the draft regulation .
However , this is still unacceptable to us as it stigmatises third country nationals and tends to criminalise them .
Given that we are now discussing a Charter of Fundamental Rights and yesterday , for instance , a report on human rights , could we really live within a fortress Europe outside , or even inside , which rights might be being violated ?
Moreover , this draft regulation concerns us basically because we feel that it is not needed yet .
It is , we feel , putting the cart before the horse .
We are using and establishing instruments before we have developed a proper harmonised policy on the right to freedom of movement , the right to live as a family and the right of asylum .
We should start by harmonising this policy . We can look at the instruments for implementation and control after that .
Finally , a third point which particularly concerns us is the dismissal of Parliament ' s opinion .
This raises a vital question about the democratic credit granted to the Members of the European Parliament .
It is a shame that we are currently being given the impression that we serve no useful purpose .
We are told that this is just a case of abstention but this is actually the norm as Members ' opinions are not being taken into account .
To conclude , the establishment of this area of freedom , security and justice needs instruments . Yet this security can be achieved only if there is real justice , and freedom can be achieved only if we have rights which are respected .
Mr President , we have spent a whole day here in the European Parliament discussing human rights and high ideals , and it is therefore a matter of some shame that , when the Union then acts in the real world , matters look quite different .
With Eurodac , the Commission and the Council are , in my view , going too far in their desire to monitor asylum seekers and other citizens of third countries who cross the border into Fortress Europe .
The Eurodac initiative is a series of absurdities and outrages .
Firstly , keeping the fingerprints of minors - right down to 14 years of age - who have not committed any criminal offence contravenes the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , which asks us to protect children and to respect an age of criminal responsibility of 18 years if we ourselves have not legally specified another age - something which , as far as I know , the Union has not done .
Keeping fingerprints for up to ten years , even if the person concerned has not committed any offence and even if they have perhaps , into the bargain , obtained legal residence in the area of the Union , is a violation of the demand under the European Convention on Human Rights for respect for private life .
To confuse asylum seekers with illegal immigrants contravenes the Convention on Refugees .
Those human and fundamental rights which are so much talked about have no value if we are not in a position to guarantee them in practice , and on behalf of those who penetrate Fortress Europe as well .
The impression with which those people travel home , or which they obtain while they are here , of the " area of freedom , security and justice " does not reflect those values which , on state occasions , are otherwise designated as global and universal .
What I would therefore urge the Commission and the Council to do is to allow Eurodac to die a peaceful death , as it deserves to do .
Mr President , on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group , I should like to express my confidence in the Council ' s handling of this matter and , in common with others , I want to urge the Council now to make a decision about establishing Eurodac .
We are talking about establishing an area which claims to offer a high degree of legal protection , and I think it odd that , in the next sentence , we express a lack of confidence in its being possible to administer such an arrangement responsibly .
In my view , the purpose is to safeguard the rights of asylum seekers , and there is no question of infringing the rights of those who honestly and legitimately request asylum .
I cannot imagine that either the Council or the Commission might wish to construct this system in such a way that it could include restrictions of any kind upon the freedom of law-abiding citizens .
The system is quite in accordance with the creation of an area of freedom and justice , and this is something we support .
Mr President , the back-peddling in relation to the adoption of the EURODAC system has given rise to numerous , logical questions concerning both the expediency and the efficiency of the system for the comparison of the fingerprints of applicants for asylum which complements the Dublin Convention .
I personally am among those who have serious reservations about the system .
Numerous facets of the system already exacerbate our concerns regarding possible violations of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , given that it calls for 14-year-old children to be fingerprinted .
Apart from that , the fingerprinting system per se has negative associations with criminal investigations by police authorities and criminal offences .
In other words , extending the system to asylum seekers automatically identifies refugees and immigrants as a whole with crime and illegality , which I think is quite unfair and goes beyond every concept of international law and respect for human rights as demanded in the Geneva Convention , the 50th anniversary of which we celebrated in this morning ' s extended debate here in the European Parliament .
In addition , the system does not guarantee 100 % identification , as we know from numerous criminal investigations and , as such , we cannot consider that its application will facilitate the implementation of the Dublin Convention and help to prevent abuse of the right to asylum .
In all events , the European Parliament is calling for the right to exercise parliamentary scrutiny , in which case the Council and the Commission will have the final word on the matter .
However , I think that the best thing the European Commission and the Council can do is to institute a common asylum and immigration policy based on European humanitarian and democratic values and respect for human rights .
Mr President , the Commission would like to welcome , first of all , the very clear statement issued by the representative of the Council to the effect that the Eurodac system is only a system conceived to implement the Dublin Convention .
I would also like to confirm , as the representative of the Council has already said , that there is a problem concerning the territorial application of the Eurodac regulation .
I can also confirm that the Council did not ask the Commission to come forward with a revised proposal .
Nevertheless , this is a very sensitive issue , as the debate has already shown , and one of the few cases where the three institutions do not have the same position , as I very clearly stated before Parliament .
The Commission , in this case , has a different position from both the Council and Parliament .
That is why , although not being asked to come forward with a new proposal , we decided that to clarify the political options that are on the table we should do that extra work and come before the Council with a revised proposal .
In its revised proposal the Commission takes on board the solution proposed by Parliament that the data should be deleted from the base as soon as someone is recognised as a refugee .
On the other hand , we did not subscribe to the idea of Parliament about the age limit for fingerprinting .
We considered that 14 years old is an adequate solution .
Perhaps this is because I come from a country - which the representative of the Council also comes from - where our children , when they are ten years old , in order to get their first identity card , are fingerprinted .
It is inconceivable for me that my country is one which criminalises all children of 10 years of age just because they are fingerprinted for their first identity card .
I still remember that it was a major event in my youth to get my own identity card .
Nevertheless , I recognise this is a very sensitive question .
Consequently , the Commission believes it should clarify to Parliament two very strict and clear ideas .
First , we should not ask Eurodac to give answers that Eurodac cannot give .
That is why we consider that some of the questions Baroness Ludford raised and some of the issues that were raised by Mrs Boumediene-Thiery - which are very important - have to be addressed in the context of the regulation on temporary protection and on subsidiary protection that the Commission is actively preparing .
We will come to Parliament and the Council with proposals in the next few months .
We have just achieved , this week , a working document to re-evaluate the Dublin Convention itself .
We want to launch a debate not only on the technical questions of Eurodac but also on the essential solutions to the current Dublin Convention .
We do not want to lose time .
We want to have as broad a picture as possible for all instruments that concern asylum policy .
Where is the point of difference between the Commission and the Council ?
Of course , the Council has been generous in the sense that it has given to the Commission management and the technical functioning of the system .
But there is a point where the Commission does not agree with the Council .
We do not agree that the Council should reserve for itself the powers of implementation of the system .
According to the comitology agreement , there are not sufficient grounds for the Council to reserve the implementing powers for itself rather than delegating them to the Commission .
The proposal of the Commission is that the executive powers , the implementing powers of the system , should be delegated to the Commission , associated with a committee composed of representatives from all Member States .
In our opinion this will be a more coherent and transparent way of managing the system and reinforcing the capability of Parliament to scrutinise the way the Commission manages and develops the Eurodac system .
Maybe through this balanced solution it will be possible to address in a more relaxed and trusting way some of the reservations and political doubts that have been raised by several Members of Parliament during this debate .
Maybe I am being stubborn but this is what I sincerely believe .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
Trade in bovine animals and pigs
The next item is the report ( A5-0044 / 2000 ) by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 64 / 432 / EEC on health problems affecting intra-Community trade in bovine animals and swine [ COM ( 1999 ) 456 - C5-0239 / 1999 - 1999 / 0217 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , the point of this report is to allow the situation which prevailed before 1 July 1999 to be reinstated with regard to a provision which has been in force since 1 July 1999 .
The reasons given by the Commission are as follows : the Member States have failed to honour their undertaking to implement a control system and we therefore need to reinstate temporarily the situation which prevailed previously .
We support the Commission in its implied criticism of the Member States which have failed to do their homework but deeply regret that we are again in a situation in which we are unable to implement amendments and improvements to a control system which has been accepted and entered into force because the Member States have failed to carry out their duties .
Nonetheless , we support the Commission ' s proposal because we consider that the old rules provide a sufficient degree of safety , especially as the Commission is only asking for one year ' s delay .
The Commission has , however , left itself with an escape clause by asking for a further transitional period of three years under the provisions of the agreement with the Council in the Council decision on comitology of 28 June 1999 and we in Parliament consider that somewhat unusual .
What you should have done , Commissioner Byrne , was to apply directly for four years , if it was going to take four years , especially as this would have given a sign to the Member States .
If the Commission is leaving itself an escape clause in the form of a three-year postponement , why should we keep to our side of the bargain ?
However , here too we said that we wanted to help out .
We tabled a proposed amendment seeking to reduce this period to two years and it became clear during discussions with the Commission that it too was willing to go along with this proposed amendment .
Then we noticed an unusual feature ; we noticed that you had presented us with the statements of this decision on comitology in long prose texts , despite the fact that you agreed with the Council a long time ago that references to the article would be succinct .
Hence , we have complied with the requirement and the practice which you have cultivated with the Council and , for our part , have now called in a proposed amendment tabled in my name for the new regulation to be adopted , still with the unusual feature that , because the legal basis was Article 37 and Article 152 , you had submitted both Article 17 and Article 17a to us on the grounds that this was both a consultation and a codecision procedure .
In the codecision procedure , Article 8 applies under the decision on comitology but not under Article 37 .
We take the view that these two separate submissions are unnecessary and we have tabled a single proposed amendment which I shall read to you .
We are calling for Article 17a to be deleted .
The proposed amendment should read as follows : " Where reference is made to this Article , the management procedure under Article 5 in conjunction with Article 7 of Decision 99 / 468 / EC shall apply and , in the case of a codecision procedure based on Article 251 of the Treaty , Article 8 thereof " .
I hope that the Commission is able to accept this amendment .
This is a codecision process .
If the Commission and the Council are able to adopt our amendments , we can shorten the procedure which , given that we have been in a legal grey area since 1 July 1999 , is a reasonable step .
We have already had intensive discussions .
I am curious to see what the outcome of your position will be .
I hope that you will go along with our considerations , as tabled during the discussions , especially as we do not disagree in principle .
Mr President , we are dealing here with amendments to a directive concerning the intra-Community trade in bovine animals and swine .
I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on his report and agreeing very strongly with the remarks he has just made .
I suggested a single amendment during the committee stage of the debate , which was accepted by the committee , regarding the need for Member States to put in place a proper system of spot checks , inspections and controls to ensure the efficient implementation of these regulations .
My amendment calls upon the Commission to monitor the Member States to see that they carry out the necessary inspections set out in these regulations , because if we are to mount a successful campaign to contain and eradicate tuberculosis and brucellosis , then the proper implementation of these regulations will be essential .
May I also say that , sadly , these regulations are at the present time largely academic in respect of my own Member State because of course we have been banned from exporting live bovine animals from the UK for the past four years .
Indeed , even the export of dead bovines is still being blocked in certain countries because although the ban on the export of beef from the UK was lifted on 1 August 1999 , it is , as we all know , still being illegally maintained by France and Germany to this very day .
In the case of the pig sector the export trade is also suffering because during the past two years the pig industry has experienced acute difficulties .
Indeed in Scotland , my own country , we have witnessed a 25 % reduction in the national herd in the past twelve months .
Unless urgent action is taken by the UK Government , a further 25 % will go within the next few months .
Now , this appalling situation has been brought about by a combination of issues involving the strength of sterling , the gold-plating of welfare and hygiene standards , which have been imposed on the industry by the UK Government , and the extra costs arising out of the BSE crisis .
These factors are driving UK pig farmers out of business as more and more cheap imports are sourced by retailers and supermarkets in the UK .
Now it transpires that the situation could deteriorate even further as EU applicant countries from Central and Eastern Europe are projected to increase their net exports of pigmeat by nearly 300 % by the year 2006 .
At the same time they will be seeking derogations from the EU to enable them to produce pork to welfare and hygiene standards that would be considered illegal under current EU law .
If Britain is once again to reactivate a dynamic intra-Community trade in bovine animals and swine , then immediate help is required to alleviate the catastrophic situation affecting rural Britain and affecting our pig and beef sectors in particular .
I hope this message is getting through to the British Chancellor of the Exchequer .
Mr President , I also agree with the rapporteur with regard to the basic matters and I can naturally and gladly sympathise with the amendment calling for the transition period to be just two years .
This is a case of negligence on the part of the Member States in putting these matters and the system into effect .
This is an issue concerning serious animal diseases , and I think the most essential matter in this discussion is the fact that we have to quickly adopt the system to avoid repeated postponement of legal provisions that should take effect as soon as possible .
Mr Stevenson mentioned that exports from East Europe are increasing : we are now expanding the area of the EU to include the countries of Eastern Europe .
If our own systems are not in order , how can we expect new Member States to be able to be ready to join our system of agricultural policy ?
We have to stress the importance of the fact that food safety and the European agricultural model should be a basic issue with us and one that serves as a vision of the future , but in the Member States we are ignoring issues of a basic nature which would help monitor systems that would ensure this .
For that reason we will have to pay very serious attention in the future to ensuring that Member States really do adopt systems we are here taking joint decisions on .
If that is not the case , there will have to be some form of sanction to ensure these matters are put right .
Mr President , I would like to join previous speakers in congratulating the rapporteur .
He has approached this matter with his usual conviction and great dedication .
I was very pleased to hear him say that there is no real conflict on the principles and objectives of the proposed directive .
I have no doubt that the Commissioner will assist in reaching a satisfactory resolution because both Parliament and the Commission have a common goal in relation to this very important and very crucial area .
The directive on inter-Community trade in bovine animals is central to the economic survival of livestock farmers , particularly from my own country , Ireland , where we export up to 90 % of our entire livestock production - a very high proportion of which is live exports to continental Europe and beyond .
In this regard , I support proposals for a further update of the 1997 directive with the caution that it must be done in a sensible way .
We need to eliminate unnecessary bureaucracy while , at the same time , providing total traceability with regard to livestock movement as well as safeguarding public health .
Mr President , this proposal introduces an extension of a current exemption to Directive 64 / 432 applicable to the Spanish Government .
Without this exemption , it would be required to implement a system of veterinary checks for tuberculosis and brucellosis , for each bovine animal exported from its region .
These are already , of course , implemented by many other states .
This exemption has important implications for my country .
Whilst Spain is being given exemption , the British meat industry is suffering heavily from the implementation of an allied directive which requires ruinously expensive veterinary checks in our slaughterhouses .
So rigorous are the requirements for veterinary supervision that we do not have enough British vets to carry out the work .
But instead of giving us more time , the Commission has commenced infringement proceedings .
In order to avoid ending up in the European Court of Justice , my government has had to recruit large numbers of EU vets , 300 of whom come from Spain .
If Spain has such a large surplus of vets that it can afford to send so many to my country , why is it having such difficulty implementing the system of veterinary checks required by this directive ?
It does not seem right to me that British slaughterhouses should be put through the hoops as a result of the Commission 's action whilst Spain is allowed to default on its obligations .
Why is the Commission giving Spain such an easy time ?
Should it not be asking why Spain can afford to send so many vets over to the United Kingdom to implement a related directive and perhaps be insisting that some of these officials be retained in their homeland to implement Community law in their own country ?
On that basis , I believe that this proposed directive is wrong and I will be voting against it .
The Irish interest in this particular amending directive centres around a request by our country to permit pre-export TB testing to take place at assembly centres , rather than only at holdings of origin as the practice now is in Ireland ; I understand that we have about two years to discuss with the Commission any difficulties we may have in relation to this and I am pleased to see the Commissioner here today .
Under EU trading rules and in the interest of food safety and consumer confidence in animal health status , annual testing is required to maintain the official TB-free status of our cattle herds .
With a cattle population in Ireland of between 7 and 8 million in recent years , some 10.5 million TB tests have been undertaken annually in some 138 000 herds .
Since 1954 , when our TB scheme was introduced , we have spent in Ireland - a small country - EUR 2.54 billion on TB testing and subsequently brucellosis testing .
I think that stands as a testament to our determination to protect the health status of our cattle herds in Ireland .
Indeed , following disclosure of a reaction , a special contiguous testing programme for herds adjoining restricted herds is operated .
Analysis of test data is carried out on an on-going basis by a special TB investigation unit .
Routine post-mortem examinations are carried out by veterinary surgeons employed by the Department on all animals slaughtered .
Animals which react positively to the TB test are slaughtered .
From the earliest stages in the bovine TB eradication scheme , the Department of Agriculture has recognised the benefit of pre-movement testing , and we request that our particular amendment to the amending directive be looked on favourably .
The point I would like to ask the Commissioner to consider particularly is the fact that the only test provided for in the EU and under Irish legislation is the single intradermal comparative test as specified in Directive 64 / 432 of the EC .
I understand considerable work has been done on laboratory-based blood tests for TB .
The gamma-interferon test is the most promising of these , and is used under practical field conditions as an adjunct to the tuberculin test in herds .
I would like the Commissioner to indicate where that now stands and how quickly we will be able to have a blood test accepted by the EU .
The TB test we use now is herd-specific , not animal-specific .
We need to get to the stage where blood tests for individual animals will stand up .
Mr President , Commissioner , animal epidemics are not only important economic matters , they are also important from the point of view of consumer policy .
Plus , animal epidemics are again costing us a great deal of money .
The main objective of the directive is to create electronic data bases from which information on bovine animals and pigs , and how they are kept , can be accessed , in order to foster safety and transparency .
These new data bases will form part of the bovine animal labelling and registration system set out in the regulation .
However , as the implementation of this directive and the long-windedness of the codecision procedure have given rise to difficulties , the Commission has concluded that transitional measures should be introduced in order to avoid problems with the trade in live bovine animals and pigs .
I agree with the rapporteur that Member States are always very slow to implement unwelcome Community legislation , which is why we need to discuss if a 3-year margin is really sensible .
I think that Mr Daul ' s proposed amendment of two years would be an excellent compromise .
I should also like to point out in this connection that , rather than planting more trees , we need to clear the jungle of paragraphs and exemptions .
Absolute account must be taken of the Economic and Social Committee ' s reservations concerning strict limits on exemptions and harmonisation of veterinary legislation .
I therefore fail to understand that some countries are doing their homework while others keep finding excuses and dragging their feet .
All that does is distort competition and , for this reason , I vote that we make the regulation binding on everyone as quickly as possible .
Mr President , I will try to be brief , and I will not use all the time available to me but restrict myself to a short message .
This morning , in this Chamber , one of the Members made the statement that without rules there is no freedom .
But I feel that where there are too many rules , freedom can become confusion .
It is my opinion that this measure is suffering from a surfeit of rules .
Since 1964 , a series of laws have been adopted on this subject .
Some were implemented , but many were not .
The application of some of them was deferred , and others were not adapted by the individual States .
Now , in all probability , some of the States are at fault in that they have not aligned themselves with certain directives .
However , we have to ask why it is that this happens so often and in so many States .
It is very likely that this is caused by difficulties in implementing the directives .
The delays in the adaptation of national legislation may well be due to the expense and tedium involved , as well as the fact that the process is often unproductive .
Therefore , the message I would like to convey is that where there is an excess of rules and regulations , and in this case there is an abundance of rules in the preparatory measures of this text , which , in essence , I approve of , when the sheer number of different texts makes implementation difficult , then application of the text is deferred and we run the risk of creating not only legislative , but also practical gaps : legislative gaps on account of overlapping competences and confusion of legislation , and practical gaps because it appears that , in many areas , there is clearly the risk of insufficient control , and there is therefore a danger that consumer policy will not be aligned either .
Mr President , may I first of all thank you for the interest you have devoted to the Commission proposal modifying Directive 64 / 432 on health problems affecting intra-Community trade in bovine animals and swine .
I am particularly grateful to Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf for his report on this proposal and to the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for the support given to most of the modifications proposed by the Commission and for the amendments included in the initial committee 's report .
Member States encountered serious trade problems when implementing the updated animal health rules for intra-Community trade laid down in Directive 64 / 432 that came into force on 1 July last year .
In order to facilitate the change-over to the new rules the Commission , based on Articles 37 and 152 of the Treaty , proposed amendments to the directive that include transitional measures to solve the most acute trade problems , minor corrections and clarifications in the annexes and a general mandate to the Commission to lay down transitional measures in accordance with the new comitology procedure included in the proposal .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development of the European Parliament agreed on two amendments tabled by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf to the Commission proposal .
The first amendment requires the Member States to ensure full implementation of the directive and the Member States and the Commission to execute controls on the implementation .
The second amendment seeks to restrict the period of application of transitional measures to two years .
The Commission can agree to these Amendments Nos 1 and 2 and must therefore oppose the amendment from Mrs Auroi requesting the deletion of any transitional measures .
However , I regret that I am not in a position to accept written Amendment No 3 which Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf put forward last week .
It modifies the comitology procedure by proposing for implementing measures relating to Article 37 to introduce a management procedure with the right of scrutiny .
This is clearly against Article 2 of the Council Decision 99 / 468 on comitology which provides for regulatory committees in issues relating to animal health and it seems that perhaps it is not accepted by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf following detailed discussions with my cabinet that this is the position .
But I understand that perhaps Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf may very well have misinterpreted the comitology and that he intends to amend it again during this plenary .
Let me express my surprise and concern about this .
I regret that I cannot accept your new amendment which replaces Article 17 and 17a by a single new article comprising the entire comitology procedure .
It introduces a regulatory committee with the right of scrutiny for Parliament and I quote from the letter which he sent me : " in the case of a codecision procedure based on Article 251 , Article 8 thereof " - that is Article 8 of Council Decision 99 / 468 on comitology .
I can assure you of the importance that I attach to Parliament 's role in the legislative process , in particular relating to comitology in the codecision procedure .
The overall aim is to achieve quick and efficient results in order to translate policy into legislative acts .
The framework for the comitology procedure is clearly established in the abovementioned Council decision .
The right of scrutiny for the Parliament is foreseen for areas relating to codecision , that is Article 8 .
The amended Directive 64 / 432 is based on Articles 37 and 152 of the Treaty .
The new provision concerning the implementing powers for the Commission to lay down transitional measures may have a direct effect on public health .
This is the reason why the Commission , in this case , proposes Article 17a which refers to a regulatory committee with the right of scrutiny for Parliament .
I refer you to Article 3 of the directive in particular which amends Article 16 of the original where it says : " where necessary to facilitate the change-over to the new arrangements provided for in this directive the Commission , acting in accordance with the procedures laid down in Article 17a , may adopt transitional measures applicable for a period of not more than three years " .
That is , and I am advised by the legal service , the appropriate way to deal with this .
In any situation where a basic legislative provision envisages amendment by a comitology procedure it must include in the basic provision the actual procedure for the comitology .
That is why each individual provision which envisages such an amendment must identify the procedure quite clearly .
Therefore , the power that is given to the Commission to further extend the period of time which is contained in Article 3 clearly identifies Article 17a as being the appropriate article to deal with this which incorporates Article 8 of the Council decision of last June , thereby giving Parliament full scrutiny powers in relation to any such proposal .
Where reference is made in the current version of 64 / 432 to Article 17 , this relates to implementing measures concerning animal health , that is based on Article 37 which are of no or , in very few cases , of very remote , public health concern .
Therefore these measures should not be subject to the right of scrutiny of Parliament .
For example , such implementing measures relate to the approval of procedures and sites for cleansing and disinfection , the format of disease reporting , the approval of assembly centres , the definition of additional guarantees for Member States free of diseases not transmissible to humans such as infectious bovine rhinotracheitis or transmissible gastroenteritis in pigs .
I will now make some remarks on the implications of the proposed amendment for the institutional balance .
The implementing powers of the Commission are laid down in Article 202 , third indent of the EC Treaty in conjunction with the Council Decision 99 / 468 that I earlier referred to which is the appropriate Council decision laying down the appropriate procedure for comitology .
This system aims clearly at defining exactly the respective role of the executive and legislative power in the basic legislative instrument .
Consequently , in the basic legislative act it has to be made clear from the outset which implementing measures are based on codecision procedures , that is , Article 152 and which provisions do not have as their direct objective the protection of public health and would therefore not be subject to Parliament 's right of scrutiny .
The procedure must be made clear in the basic legislative provision requiring to be amended by comitology .
Any wording leaving room for case-by-case negotiation would jeopardise the delicate institutional balance and also seriously undermine transparency .
The wording proposed in the new amendment for the regulatory procedure with the right of scrutiny , and I quote : " in the case of the codecision procedure based on Article 251 , Article 8 thereof " leads to legal uncertainty and is not in line with the agreed implementation of Council 's comitology decision .
I note from the document that Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has circulated this afternoon where he signals his intention to put forward this amendment at this stage .
He says : " I think that it is not necessary to include two almost identical references to the comitology procedure just to make sure that the European Parliament does not ask for rights that it does not have " .
Let me assure Parliament that it is not my intention , in setting out these two procedures - Articles 17 and 17a - to ensure that the European Parliament does not ask for rights that it does not have .
I am firmly committed to the procedure of codecision and I am firmly committed to the procedures laid down in comitology .
I am firmly committed to the notion that Parliament will have full scrutiny of Commission proposals in circumstances where the legal structures of the European Union , that is the Treaty and the directive , allow for that situation .
To deviate from that is to risk challenge in the European Court , which is something that I must avoid .
Also I must reply to Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf by saying that the two , as he describes , almost identical references to comitology procedure are not in fact identical .
They are quite different and must be dealt with quite separately .
However , it is in the interest of all the institutions that the procedures are clearly defined and transparent for everybody .
Furthermore , adopting this amendment would mean further delaying the legislative procedure which could otherwise be concluded after the first reading .
In conclusion I wish to confirm that I accept Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's Amendments Nos 1 and 2 but not the amendment on the comitology procedure that he has suggested this afternoon .
Consequently I cannot accept the amendment of Mrs Auroi either .
To deal with the individual issues which were raised by speakers this afternoon , first of all , in respect of those points made by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf which I have not already dealt with , he makes reference to the long prose text and that there is an agreement with the Council to be more succinct .
You are , of course , quite correct in relation to that .
That agreement , however , was reached with the Council subsequent to the initial drafting of this document .
That is why it has been drafted in this way .
It pre-dates that agreement .
It will be automatically amended in the manner envisaged in the agreement with the Council .
Therefore the concerns that you have in relation to this matter will be remedied automatically in accordance with that agreement .
You also suggested that if the Commission goes along with your suggestion that there will be a shortened procedure .
In response to that , if this particular amendment is withdrawn by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , having regard to what I have said here this afternoon , then it is also true to say that the procedure will be shortened and this matter can be dealt with on first reading .
There is a significant risk that if the matter is proceeded with in this way and if the Council votes in accordance with the proposal put forward by the Commission , the matter will go to second reading , thereby creating further delays .
It has come to my attention as late as today , in consultation with members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , that there is a concern which I was unaware of : of the interaction between Articles 37 and 152 .
I have made it clear that I am prepared to respond quickly to any invitation that the committee might wish to extend to me to discuss this important constitutional issue of the interaction between Article 37 and Article 152 .
I say that in circumstances where I also urge Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf to give serious consideration , in the light of what I have just said , to the withdrawal of that particular amendment , having regard to the serious legal difficulties that exist in relation to it .
In response to Mr Hyland and Mrs Doyle , both of whom are concerned about the testing issue , I have taken note of what both of them have said in relation to this and I will make the appropriate inquiries .
Mr President , allow me to ask Commissioner Byrne one more question .
The situation is this : you tabled a text which no longer complies with the standard procedure agreed with the Council .
We noticed that .
We then table our proposed amendments , which you consider to be correct as far as principle and procedure are concerned .
Then you differentiate between what applies to a report tabled to us under Article 152 alone and this report , which you have tabled under both 37 and 152 and you say that is why we need separate references to comitology .
Of course , we too consulted our legal service and the text which I read out to you contains precisely this reference to comitology .
The legal text is therefore confirmed .
The Commission is being thick-skinned here ; it is saying no , we stand by our proposal as we have already done on a similar occasion in the past here in Parliament .
Hence , Mr Byrne , when you say I should consider withdrawing the amendment , I should like to ask you to consider if you do not agree with it , especially as it complies with the decision on comitology .
Then we can use the simplified procedure .
Generosity is incumbent upon the Commission , not the rapporteur .
It makes no sense to continue with the debate .
I would ask the Commissioner to reply as briefly as possible .
I am afraid that what Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has said discloses a misunderstanding of the issue .
First of all , the agreement that was reached with the Council in relation to the shortening of the prose text is something which will automatically be dealt with in accordance with the agreement as I have identified a moment ago .
Secondly , on the issue relating to comitology , I can only repeat what I said which is that in any basic legal text which authorises the Commission to amend that text by comitology , that text must itself identify what procedure is being adopted .
What Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf is suggesting be done in his amendment is to confer a discretion to deal with the issue in each case on a case-by-case basis , so that the text to be amended will refer to Article 17 , but within Article 17 there will be a discretion as to whether Article 7 or Article 8 of Decision 1999 / 468 will apply ; this means that somebody - that is the Commission - will have to determine in those circumstances which of the two articles is the appropriate one , depending on whether it is or is not codecision .
I submit that this is inappropriate , because it effectively confers a power on the Commission to make a decision on that issue as it were in its office , rather than enabling the reader to consult the text - the basic text - in any circumstance where the Commission is empowered to amend a provision by comitology , and to refer to that basic text .
From that text it will be clear what comitology procedure is the appropriate one to follow : whether it is Article 17 in the version suggested by the Commission which applies to all of the circumstances in this particular directive , or Article 17 ( a ) which incorporates the scrutiny procedure of the comitology , and which is appropriate to the circumstances set out in Article 3 - that is , where there is a further extension of time beyond 31 December 2000 and where the Commission can extend it for a further period as we have discussed .
That gives clarity to the situation .
It avoids any exercise of discretion by the Commission or anybody else .
It leaves it clear to anybody reading the text what the appropriate procedure is that will govern this particular situation .
I regret I cannot make it any clearer and I regret I cannot accede to your request : I would ask you again , in the light of what I have said about making myself available to your committee , to discuss the interaction between 152 and 37 , and to give serious consideration to withdrawing this amendment yourself .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The relevant committee will continue the discussion of this issue .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0201 / 2000 ) . We will examine questions to the Council .
The President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Seixas da Costa , is here with us today .
He has to leave the chamber at 7.00 p.m. and we must therefore try to be very quick and make a collective effort so that we can deal with the majority of the questions .
Question No 1 by ( H-0141 / 00 ) :
Subject : Human rights of women in Europe On 19 January 2000 , the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe met to prepare a special session of the UN General Assembly due to take place on 5-9 June 2000 in New York to assess the situation of women five years on from the Beijing World Conference on Women , which adopted a platform for action to tackle the problems faced by women at international level .
During the proceedings , the Swiss Foreign Minister , Mrs Ruth Dreifuss , stated that 300 000 women were victims of trafficking in Europe .
Does the Council concur with that statement ?
Does it consider that the measures it is taking are sufficient to guarantee the safety and dignity of women in Europe in the face of the threat of trafficking ?
What additional measures will it take to counteract a probable deterioration in the situation arising from enlargement , given that the majority of victims are from countries applying for membership of the Union ?
. ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before going any further , I would like to remind you that the Member States of the European Union played a very important role in the Beijing Conference in 1995 and in preparing the Beijing Action Platform .
Since the adoption of that platform , the European institutions and the Member States have been working hard to ensure that it is applied both at national and European Union level .
As regards the specific question of trafficking in women , which is covered in the chapter on violence against women , the objectives are very clear .
Various measures are to be taken by the governments of the countries of origin , transit and destination of the regional and international organisations , and Mrs Avilés Perea is quite right in drawing attention to the violation of women ' s safety and dignity in Europe by the threat posed by trafficking .
You may rest assured that the other institutions are taking this subject very seriously , and some measures have , in fact , already been taken to combat trafficking , and I would like to sum these up as briefly as possible .
Firstly , starting in November 1993 , the Justice and Home Affairs Council agreed a series of recommendations on trade in human beings for prostitution , with a view to combating trafficking in human beings .
Two years after that , this House took on this subject : apart from adopting a number of resolutions , it also produced a report and a resolution which specifically addressed trafficking in human beings .
For its part , the Commission published an initial communication on trafficking in women and , in 1996 , that is to say the year immediately after the Beijing Platform was adopted , it launched the STOP programme , with an annual budget of EUR 6.5 million .
The importance of this programme should not be underestimated , given that it has helped to finance a great many projects and has proved to be genuinely effective .
Thirdly , back in 1996 , the Commission and the International Organisation for Migration organised an interdisciplinary conference in Vienna , which brought together representatives from Member States , the institutions , the European Union , the academic world , and various non-governmental organisations .
A number of conclusions emerged from this work .
Lastly , also in 1996 , the Council approved a common action to combat trafficking in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children .
In 1997 , the Ministerial Conference in The Hague resulted in The Hague Ministerial declaration on a European Code of Conduct to prevent and combat trafficking in women for the purpose of sexual exploitation .
Lastly , in 1998 , the Commission adopted a further communication on new measures to combat trafficking in women .
I would also like to point out that this issue is periodically considered under the transatlantic dialogue , because this phenomenon also affects countries like Canada and the United States , and is not limited to the area immediately adjacent to the European Union .
We believe that it is increasingly important to exchange views with other destination countries so as to make a comparative assessment of this phenomenon and to establish a series of harmonised measures for controlling it .
This issue has , of course , been a regular agenda item in contacts with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe which are both transit countries and even the countries of origin for the great majority of this traffic .
Campaigns are being financed under the PHARE programme in this field , some with support from the International Organisation for Migration .
I would like to make it clear that the Council does not wish to comment on the figure of 300 000 women falling victim to trafficking in Europe given by the Swiss Foreign Minister .
There is no statistical data on this very specific subject , because we have to work with figures that are very difficult to obtain , given that we are talking about illegal immigration on the one hand and about illegal employment on the other , but it seems to us at first sight that this number is rather high .
We think that an attempt should be made to assess this figure more accurately , and we should not get involved in commenting on an estimate of this kind , which does not seem to us to be well founded .
In any case , this problem needs to be taken very seriously , not just because of the number of people involved , but also because trafficking in women is a form of organised crime that is evidently on the increase throughout the world , as it generates high profits in return for relatively low risks as far as the traffickers are concerned .
Some of this trafficking is on a small scale , but there are also big international companies and networks behind a sophisticated and well-organised industry , with political support and economic resources in the countries of origin , transit and destination .
This is why this question needs to be tackled at the highest level , and in particular in conjunction with the United Nations .
Mrs Avilés Perea , you will certainly be aware that discussions are taking place on a protocol aimed at preventing , eliminating and punishing traffic in human beings , especially in women and children , which would complement the United Nations convention against organised crime .
To this end , the Council recently adopted a decision authorising the Commission to negotiate on this very protocol .
The Member States of the European Union are also playing a very active role in the meeting of the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women which is preparing the United Nations General Assembly Special Session on women .
To conclude , I would like to reiterate that the Council continues to attach great importance to the issue of trafficking in women and children , and I hope that I have been able to allay some of your fears , Mrs Avilés Perea , at least in relation to the Council ' s efforts in this field .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am truly grateful for your full answer to this question on the programmes which , as you have pointed out , have been implemented .
However , the question stressed the fact that this is a problem which has recently become more serious , precisely because of the ease with which our borders can be crossed . This movement of people basically originates in the candidate countries of the East .
The majority of cases involve women in illegal situations .
This immigration is taking place in the worst possible conditions and these women are defenceless victims of every type of marginalisation and hardship .
I believe that an effort has been made over recent years , but I must insist that it requires special attention now and we must prevent such problems in the future , since it is possible that this problem will become even more acute .
Mr President , I would just like to add that I totally agree with you , Mrs Avilés Perea , and that the European Union is anxious , as part of the enlargement negotiations and , in particular , in the context of external relations in the field of justice and home affairs , to enter into a specific dialogue with the candidate countries on all issues concerning the free movement of persons , and in particular illegal immigration .
We believe that without questioning the need for the European Union to have a policy of tolerance on immigration and a policy of welcoming economic refugees , we should try , by following this route , to avoid creating mechanisms that make it easier to exploit women in particular and to develop forms of crime specifically associated with the free movement of persons .
We believe that the work that has been done , and the increasing awareness on the part of the candidate countries of the need to work with the European Union during the pre-accession period to strengthen control mechanisms , combined with collaboration in this field , may yield concrete results .
The Commission is paying particular attention to this subject , and I believe that the fact that during the Portuguese presidency various negotiating chapters linked with this - particularly in the field of justice and home affairs and freedom of movement - are to be opened with the Luxembourg phase candidate countries may help to create a common culture , a common culture that the candidate countries will later on have to share in terms of respecting the acquis communautaire .
While adding my thanks to the Council for the earlier answer , I would like to press the Council on a related matter .
The BBC recently produced evidence that ' wombs ' , as they described it , were for sale in Romania - that women were being paid to have children for export to Member States of the European Union .
Furthermore , the BBC alleged that this was being done with the tacit approval of the Romanian authorities because it was bringing hard currency into Romania .
Will the Council raise this in their dialogue with Romania in relation to Romania 's application for membership of the Community ?
I would like to thank you for your question , Mr Martin , as it gives me an opportunity to discuss an initiative recently taken by the Portuguese presidency in Romania .
I had an opportunity to exchange impressions with the Romanian authorities on this subject less than 10 days ago , and not just on the subject of trafficking in children , but also on the problems of the Roma .
These are issues that the Romanian authorities say they are taking very seriously and , as far as I could ascertain , they consider that they stem from a cultural situation affecting certain sections of the population .
The Romanian authorities ' determination to tackle this issue seems genuine to us , and all the more so as they know that it has specific implications for the way in which their application for EU membership is viewed by the Community of Fifteen .
I detected a great commitment by the Romanian authorities to going as far as possible to confront situations of this kind .
Question No 2 by ( H-0148 / 00 ) :
Subject : Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty on European Union On 2 February the Commission told the EP that it intends to monitor Austria , following the entry of the FPÖ into government , pursuant to Articles 6 and 7 of the EU Treaty .
In its resolution of 3 February 2000 the EP ' calls on the Council and Commission to be prepared , in the event of any violation of the principles of fundamental rights laid out in Article 6 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on European Union , to take action under Article 7 of the Treaty .. ' .
For its part , the Commission replied to Oral Question H-0826 / 99 - on the fact that Italy is the country most severely criticised by the Court of Human Rights for slow and inefficient legal proceedings and that in Belgium trials linked to paedophilia proceed with slowness and worrying delays - by saying that ' it is not for the Union to interfere with the administration of justice in the Member States ' , that it had set up an administrative structure which would , if necessary , be instructed to examine cases of serious and persistent violation of fundamental rights by a Member State , applying the criteria and principles already laid down by the European Court of Human Rights and the Court of Justice of the European Communities , and that , at present , no serious and persistent violation of human rights by a Member State was being examined .
Can the Council rule out the possibility that the facts outlined above constitute serious and persistent violations of fundamental rights as defined in Article 6 of the TEU and , if so , for what reasons ?
If not , does it intend to launch the procedures referred to in Article 7 ?
Mr President , this question has already been broached here more than once .
We have to recognise that the Austrian situation in particular , and the issues raised in this question concerning Italy and Belgium , are quite different from what is envisaged in Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Article 6 of the Treaty of Amsterdam - and it is very important to make this point , as the Treaties are breaking fresh ground here - states that the Union is founded on the principles of liberty , democracy and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , and the rule of law .
Although we all know that the European Union is not a signatory to the European Convention on Human Rights , the same article compensates for this by stating that the European Union respects fundamental rights as guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
As for Article 7 , which is in fact a Portuguese proposal that I was able to present to the Reflection Group which prepared the previous Intergovernmental Conference , this article establishes a specific mechanism , and this is the point to which the honourable Member ' s question refers , for taking action against any Member State which seriously and persistently breaches the principles mentioned in the previous article , Article 6 .
And this action may lead to the suspension of this Member State ' s rights as a member of the European Union .
This mechanism goes back to an idea originally put forward in the Spinelli report in 1984 , and it is linked with the need to guard against breaches of democratic principles within a Member State , and in particular against actions that may infringe the principles of the rule of law .
I have to say that the facts that Mr Dupuis refers to in his question do not represent a violation of any of the principles mentioned in Article 6 of the Treaty .
This article should not be invoked with a view to any type of interference in the administration of the home affairs of Member States , particular in the field of justice .
The existence of a violation of a principle mentioned in Article 6 must - and this is also an important point and the reason why no mechanism has been brought into play - be determined by the Council acting on a proposal by one third of the Member States or by the Commission and after obtaining the assent of the European Parliament .
As this procedure has not been invoked by any of the bodies with this right of initiative , this situation does not , in our view , constitute a matter covered by Article 7 .
With regard to the Council statement made on 2 February , I would like to repeat , as I was the one who presented this declaration in this House , that it was made by the Council Presidency , but on behalf of 14 Member States , and of course the consequences of that statement and of its content as regards relations with Austria are only binding on each Member State on a bilateral basis .
They do not bind the Council and they do not affect the free and normal functioning of the Community institutions , in which Austria is still participating in full .
Mr President-in-Office , I think that you have clarified the technical aspects of Articles 6 and 7 very fully indeed .
The fundamental point that we have to bear in mind here is that whilst Europe has made enormous progress in economic terms , as regards the single market and the single currency , nothing or next to nothing has been done in the field of justice and home affairs .
We still have an almost purely national framework for justice , although certain situations are in practice clearly of a transnational nature .
We constantly find ourselves having to deal with this contradiction , particularly as regards the rights of the child , an area where there are cases in which more than one country is involved and in which the victims are not only not notified by the state where the judgement is made , but are also deprived of legal support .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I should like to thank you expressly for stating during question time that Austria has not been found guilty of violating Articles 6 and 7 and that , in the case of Austria , it is a preventive sentence .
My question relates to the ad hoc decision by the Prime Minister concerning bilateral sanctions taken without consulting the foreign secretaries of the governments and parliaments of the states of Europe .
All the European Union institutions were bypassed and presented with a fait accompli .
Hence my question : what will happen in the future if we disregard the case of Austria now ?
Will the national Prime Ministers of the countries of Europe pass judgement in future ?
Will a majority of eight votes suffice or will a different majority be needed ?
In what way do the European Council and the European institutions lose power and the potential to formulate policy as a result ?
Is this a question of new competition between the European institutions and the national states ?

Mr Casaca , I can assure you that despite everything I am not pessimistic about the way in which the European Union has been progressing towards establishing an ethical dimension , and in particular towards equipping itself with legal mechanisms to enable it to cope with new situations such as the ones you have mentioned .
When it comes to the development of the Treaty of Amsterdam , I think it is important for us to bear in mind that transfers of power have taken place , and that further transfers of power remain to be made over the next five years from what was the old third pillar to the first pillar of the Union , particularly as regards visas , judicial cooperation in civil matters and customs cooperation .
We still have judicial cooperation in criminal matters under the third pillar , but at the moment we are working towards establishing a European area of freedom , security and justice , and we hope that the Commission can respond to this by presenting a scoreboard giving us a catalogue of pertinent measures .
On the other hand , I would like to stress that the European Charter of Fundamental Rights that is being discussed will very probably help to strengthen these new aspects and will certainly help to give the European Union a more solid body of legally arguable principles , which some of us , and the Council in particular , would like to see .
As for your question about Austria , I would like to repeat what I said about Austria ' s compliance with Articles 6 and 7 up to now .
It was good to hear you talking about an " ad hoc decision " as it is clear that this was an ad hoc decision , and one taken by the 14 Member States regarding their relations with the Austrian Government . What was at issue was not the Austrian Government ' s conduct , but its political make-up .
During an earlier debate I said that we are now all Austrians within the European Union , and I would like to repeat that .
We are all Austrians because the European Union is a single entity in terms of rights and citizenship , and I would like to have the same rights in Austria that Austrian citizens should have in my country .
So I do not like to be taught any lessons by a party which behaves in a racist and xenophobic way , and makes racist and xenophobic statements which it seems to me give us every reason to be concerned .
These concerns are at present being expressed in a bilateral political framework rather than at European Union level , because there would only be scope for a decision at European Union level if there were an infringement of Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which means that , for the future , Mr Rübig , we will have to assess to what extent the Austrian Freedom Party can make a break with its past ideology , because that is crucial .
It is important for the Freedom Party to clarify if it is still adhering to the principles described in its previous statements , and in particular the kinds of individuals through which those statements were made , because otherwise I cannot see any other solution except for the other Member States to continue to have the same kinds of reservations about their relations with the Austrian Government , with all the consequences that flow from that .
And , as I said , this would be a purely bilateral matter .
The Austrians have every right to whatever government they want - but we have every right to our opinions about the Austrian Government .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you said that there is a party in power in Austria which has made racist comments in public .
Here in the European Parliament , people speak , not parties .
In your reply to Mr Dupuis ' question , you referred to the fact that the sanctions approved by the Heads of State and Governments of fourteen countries were bilateral in nature .
Can these sanctions also be stopped bilaterally ? In other words , can an individual Member State decide to end the sanctions and resume normal working relations ?
If so , when will the Council officially release the citizens of Austria from this ordeal , which violates their democratic rights ?
Must each Member State individually abandon the sanctions before the Council comes to its senses and overturns the decision ?
I think Mrs Kauppi must have misheard or there must have been a mistake in the interpreting .
I never said that the Austrian Government is a racist government , let me make that quite clear .
I know people in the current Austrian Government who I have worked with in the past and who I hope to carry on working with in the future , who are a long way from being associated with any kind of racist ideology .
What I am saying in very clear terms is that this government includes a party , some of whose leaders have not only made extremely serious racist and xenophobic statements , but have even proposed domestic legislation clearly inspired by racist ideology .
And the Freedom Party has not as yet made any statement totally repudiating its association with ideologies of this kind .
As for the other question you have raised , the answer is yes .
Any country can disassociate itself from the declaration made by the 14 countries .
We are talking about 14 free countries which freely made the decision , on a purely bilateral basis , to demonstrate to Austria their displeasure at the make-up of its government , but any of these countries could pull out of this joint arrangement whenever it wishes .
The same freedom that led them to stand together could lead them to part company tomorrow if they had a different view of developments in Austria .
You also asked , Mrs Kauppi , when the Council will allow the Austrian people to escape from this pressure .
First of all , there is no Council decision .
As I have already said , we are talking about 14 countries . This is not a European Union issue .
I would like to make it clear that Austria has been totally involved and will continue to be one hundred per cent involved in all the formal workings of the European Union ' s institutions .
Mrs Kauppi , you cannot expect some members of governments within the European Union to be happy about sitting alongside people who they consider to be apologists for ideologies which clearly remind them of another period in history and which raise old European ghosts .
Different individuals will have different perceptions of all this .
I personally do not like sitting alongside fascists .
Question No 3 by ( H-0151 / 00 ) :
Subject : " Energy for Democracy " - FRY The current winter is one of the severest in recent decades , with several European countries having been hard hit .
Among those affected is the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , which additionally faces the fuel embargo , with the result that hospitals and schools are not being heated and have been forced to close temporarily or to operate a restricted service .
In some cases , the fuel shortage has claimed human lives .
Given that the embargo is continuing , as is the harsh winter , does the Council intend to take steps to extend the ' Energy for Democracy ' programme as quickly as possible and to cover the needs of hospitals and schools ?
Mr President , as you know , as part of the energy sanctions imposed on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , it was decided , on the basis of a proposal discussed in the Council , to provide for exceptional measures for municipalities run by democratic forces .
This measure was intended to send a message of support to democratic forces and to encourage those within the Republic of Yugoslavia who , despite the adverse conditions they face , are committed to an approach in keeping with the defence of democratic rights and to policies in the interests of the people of Yugoslavia . This programme started with two local authorities where the opposition held power .
The European Union subsequently decided , acting on proposals from various Member States , to extend this system to five other municipalities .
This is a complex process involving substantial budget commitments , and the Commission has made a great effort here to find the funds needed to extend this system .
We hope that this signal from the European Union will be heard by democratic forces in Serbia .
We deeply regret the need to maintain energy sanctions against Yugoslavia , but they form part of a set of measures identified to exert pressure on the regime there , and in particular they represent a form of pressure on the way Mr Milosevic is running the country .
We are aware that this obviously has an impact on the civilian population .
But we have to recognise that the political situation in Yugoslavia and the way in which Mr Milosevic is continuing to behave at international level justify maintaining these sanctions , and this remains the unanimous view of the Council .
We are witnessing what I see as speedy preparation for a new bout in the dirty war against Yugoslavia and its people and everything going on outside Kosovo over the last few days bears witness to this .
On the other hand , as we have heard today , the much-vaunted " Energy for Democracy " programme amounts to no more than barbaric blackmail of the Yugoslav people by NATO and the European Union in a bid to impose the New Order and completely subjugate them .
The point is whether or not a country has the right to decide its fate and choose its government .
In Yugoslavia , the people decided democratically and Yugoslavia has its government and its president .
And whether we like it or not , that is a fact .
What sort of logic is it which , in order to punish the supposed suppressor of a people , punishes his supposed victims ?
Mr President , that is what is being done with the barbaric bombing , that is what is being done with the fuel embargo on Yugoslavia .
We are supporting a policy of genocide against a people which does not accept the choices foisted on it by the USA , NATO and the European Union .
My question is this : because there have already been a great many deaths due to the cold , will the fuel embargo be lifted and will the Yugoslav people be left to decide its own fate ?
Mr President , I confess that I find it strange to hear the word genocide used about action against the Yugoslavian Government , the same Yugoslavian Government that carried out various actions in Kosovo involving exactly that type of behaviour .
I also find it impossible to forget that this same government has , in the past , promoted a wide range of actions to destabilise Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia , and has repeatedly played a destabilising role in the entire region .
I totally accept the honourable Member ' s premise that every people needs to be the master of its own destiny , that is exactly what we are seeking .
But we want this to mean access to the media , total freedom of expression for the opposition , unrestricted individual rights , freedoms and guarantees , the rule of law and total transparency in the institutions .
If that is what Mr Korakas thinks exists in Serbia , then we know where we stand .
Question No 4 by ( H-0155 / 00 ) :
Subject : Information on European Union citizens condemned to death In the absence of a reply from the Council to Question P-2697 / 99 within the deadlines laid down in the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , can the Council say whether it is or is not in possession of information on the numbers , the identities , the legal situations , the conditions of detention and the personal and family situations of nationals of Member States of the European Union condemned to death in other countries ?
Has it attempted to obtain this information and , if so , will it forward it to the author of this question and to the European Parliament ?
If the Council is not in possession of such information , does it not agree that steps need to be taken to establish a system for keeping proper records of these cases ? What action does it intend to take to remedy this lack of information ?
Mrs Díez González , you have asked an important question , but I have to confess that the Council does not have the information you have requested about the number of European Union citizens condemned to death in other countries .
However , I would like to stress that work is currently being done through consular cooperation between Member States with a view to monitoring and safeguarding the interests and rights of the citizens of any Member State in third countries , particularly as regards the possibility of their being condemned to death .
For this precise purpose , and in all cases where a citizen of a Member State is threatened with the death penalty in a third country , there is now a coordination mechanism allowing combined approaches to be made to the governments of third countries by the European Union missions in those countries .
This cooperation between the missions of Member States will also cover information sharing on citizens who may be threatened with the death penalty .
We will therefore , in due course , be able to give a concrete reply to this question , and to obtain specific and up-to-date information , but this will naturally depend on progress made with the consular cooperation that the European Union is trying to build up .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am grateful for your words but not for their content .
In other words , I appreciate your concern but not the content of the information you have offered .
This cannot be due to lack of time because I asked this question to the Council three months ago and it did not reply in writing .
It did not reply within the time period laid down and is replying now , orally , two months late .
Do you not think , Mr President-in-Office , that a census of European citizens sentenced to death throughout the world would be a very useful tool in the defence of the right to life , so that the political institutions of the European Union may be in a position to defend that right to life ?
Do you not think that it is rather difficult to accept that an economic and political power such as Europe , which is capable of building satellites , of sending men to the moon , of creating a single currency , that is to say , an important power , is not capable of knowing how many European citizens are sentenced to death in the world ?
Do you not think that this is rather difficult for the European citizens to understand ?
I know that we require the commitment of the Member States , but do you not think that what we basically need is a political will which , until now , I have not seen from any quarter ?
Mrs Díez González , you have asked two questions . The first concerns the reply and the time the Council has taken to provide it .
As you know , this is a procedural matter and involves deadlines set unilaterally by the European Parliament .
The Council was not involved in approving those deadlines , has never accepted them , and it is accordingly the Council ' s policy to reiterate this point on a regular basis .
With regard to the specific point you are making , I recognise that you are perfectly right and that this is an issue which should be included in the agenda for work in this area as soon as possible .
Your comments make perfect sense .
The European Union is indeed , as you have said , a world power , and it is establishing various instruments and mechanisms to strengthen its position and to properly protect the rights of its citizens in other countries .
You will also be aware that consular cooperation within the European Union is a recent development .
A systematic approach for consular cooperation and for coordinated consular action has only been developed in the last few years .
I presume that there are delays , and I believe that you are quite right , and the pressure being brought to bear on the Council on this subject is welcome as far as I am concerned .
I would like to add that I share the opinion of Mrs Díez González and I also share the view that the European Union has the capacity to put a man on the moon , but has yet to demonstrate it .
It is a challenge which has still to be met , but I understand what was meant by that comment .
Question No 5 by ( H-0158 / 00 ) :
Subject : Parliament and the Euratom Will the Council issue a general request for opinion to Parliament on the subject of international agreements under the Euratom Treaty , so as to assist the ' KEDO ' procedure agreed in 1998 between the Commission and Parliament , and if not will the Council issue a request for opinion on each occasion , and in any case for the Ukraine Agreement currently on the table , and the US-Euratom Agreement on fusion in preparation ?
Is the Council prepared to formalise the KEDO procedure by changing the Euratom Treaty in the IGC , or at least to establish it as an Inter-institutional Agreement on Euratom between the three institutions , to compensate for the democratic weaknesses of the Euratom Treaty ?
Does the Council agree that , as the other part of the budget authority , Parliament should be consulted in advance about the impending Euratom loan to Ukraine on k2 / r4 , especially given the recent safety incidents at both the Khmelnitsky and Rivne sites , as well as the falls in electricity production and consumption and the halt to the reform of the energy market , which puts the viability of the loan and also its repayment in even more doubt ?
Mr President , Article 101 of the Euratom Treaty provides the legal basis for international nuclear agreements , as is the case with the European Atomic Energy Community ' s accession agreement to the Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organisation or KEDO .
This article provides that agreements or contracts with third countries shall be negotiated by the Commission in accordance with the directives of the Council , and are to be concluded by the Commission with the approval of the Council , which shall act by a qualified majority .
It is for the Council to respect and apply the relevant provisions of the Euratom Treaty , which does not provide for the Parliament to be consulted on these matters , which is how the Treaties stand .
You will recall that as an institution , the Council is not empowered to make any amendments to the Treaty , which is quite natural , as questions of this kind can normally only be raised at an Intergovernmental Conference .
In my role as chairman of the preparatory group for the ICG , I will make sure to take account of this request regarding the ICG .
Turning to your questions about the nuclear power stations in Ukraine , whose names I find rather difficult to read - Khmelnitsky and Rivne - may I remind you that is it for the Commission to carry out technical assessments of these nuclear power stations so as to determine what maintenance is required , or even closure .
In March 1994 , the Council approved a decision authorising the Commission to contract Euratom loans of up to EUR 1 100 million in order to contribute to the financing required for improving the degree of efficiency and safety of nuclear power stations in certain non-member countries .
However , no non-member country has made use of this facility to date .
Furthermore , the legal basis for this is the Euratom Treaty , so that there is once again no provision for consulting the European Parliament .
To sum up , your questions raise some sensitive problems which , as we know , have been discussed in this House in recent years in the context of increasing its powers , and Parliament has been using its budgetary authority as a legitimate source of pressure .
As regards the specific instance of KEDO , let me remind you that in 1998 Parliament blocked the funds for that year , and it was only possible to overcome this problem by means of a compromise with the Commission , in which the Commission undertook to inform Parliament , at the beginning of each year , about Euratom agreements being negotiated , so that Parliament could consider them .
Thank you , Minister .
Just to continue on the question of the IGC , Parliament will probably ask , under institutional reforms and especially the chapter on decision-making procedures , to have assent for international agreements and codecision on other matters .
So do you have a feeling about how these discussions may develop in the IGC ?
Mr Turmes , the extension of codecision on legislative matters is an issue which the Intergovernmental Conference has been considering and , as you know , the more radical position traditionally adopted by many Member States is that all legislative decisions adopted by a qualified majority in the Council should be submitted to the European Parliament under the codecision process .
Although this position has been explicitly welcomed in the ICG , there are some Member States who advocate a case-by-case approach on the use of the codecision procedure , even where legislative decisions are concerned .
With regard to ratification of international agreements , I have already been able to raise this issue at the ICG , and when it was first discussed this request and traditional position of the European Parliament did not receive what might be called a ready welcome from the Member States .
Although this item is still on the table , as all these issues are kept on the agenda until the end of the conference , it does seem to us at this stage that there is unlikely to be any significant progress on this .
Nevertheless , we will continue to maintain a dialogue with the European Parliament on this subject .
Next Tuesday I shall be attending a meeting of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs at which I will make sure to discuss this issue and to explain in a little more detail how the ICG preparatory group is dealing with questions like this , and in particular the list of requests and proposals presented by the European Parliament , which we hope will be supplemented by the resolution to be voted upon on 23 March .
Question No 6 by ( H-0160 / 00 ) :
Subject : Compensation for victims of fascist war Many rulings by Greek courts have confirmed that Greek citizens are entitled to compensation as victims of the nazi regime , while the war reparations which Germany owes Greece remain in abeyance and have not yet been paid .
Repayment of a loan which Germany extracted from the Bank of Greece during the occupation in 1943 also remains outstanding .
In the light of the recent agreement signed by Germany on compensation of DM 10 billion for forced labour in German industry , will the Council take steps to ensure that the victims of the fascist war are given their rightful compensation and that the loans extracted during the occupation are repaid , bearing in mind that , since the unification of Germany , not even the formal reason that Germany adduced for not settling these legitimate and valid claims now applies ?
I can answer the honourable Member ' s question quite easily : this issue does not fall within the competencies of the Council .
It is a matter for bilateral relations between Greece and German and the Council is not , therefore , willing to take any action , let alone the action recommended by the honourable Member .
Mr President , the reply by the President-in-Office puts me in mind of the reply by Pontius Pilate .
How exactly do things stand ?
During the occupation , the German Government forced the Greek Government to give it a loan , which today , with interest and inflation , totals some USD 25 billion .
This loan was signed and sealed and represents an obligation .
The point at issue , to get to the crux of the matter , is a transaction between two Member States of the European Union and the Council of Europe cannot turn a blind eye to the fact that Germany is clearly using its power to refuse to honour its commitments .
It collects every last cent of the loans which it grants .
The other issue is the tremendous damage caused by Germany ' s occupying forces in Greece .
This comes to some USD 40 billion .
Other countries have been paid .
Greece has not .
Why ?
Of course , the Greek Governments bear some responsibility , but at some point all this needs to be analysed .
Germany has acknowledged its obligation from time to time . However , it has failed to honour it on various pretexts .
Now there are no longer any excuses and it is duty-bound to pay and the Council cannot wash its hands .
I consider the reply by the President-in-Office to be unacceptable .

I can assure Mr Korakas that the Council is perfectly willing to intervene in this matter , as long as he can explain to us what the legal basis for doing so would be , under the Treaties .
Question No 7 by ( H-0162 / 00 ) :
Subject : Support for European films European films are highly important to the cultural diversity and the cultural heritage both of the individual countries and of Europe .
80 to 90 % of the films showing in Sweden are , however , American .
Up to 50 % state aid for film production is allowed in the EU at present .
The Commission is said to be considering lowering the limit for State aid , i.e. to reduce the exemption for cultural support to a maximum of 30 % .
This would be a threat to European film production , as producing films is expensive and commercially very risky , especially in smaller countries .
Does the Council agree that State aid is important to promote European culture ?
Does the Council not consider it important to encourage diversed European film production ?
Mr President , Mrs Hedkvist Petersen ' s question is a very important one , but we do not have any information to the effect that the Commission is considering reducing state aids in this field .
In fact , the Council understands that as part of its programme , the Commission is holding discussions with Member States on this very subject .
I would like to explain that at national level this type of support is a matter for Member States , within certain legal limits laid down in the Treaty .
On the other hand , the existing MEDIA II programme and the future MEDIA-PLUS programme provide complementary financial assistance with a view to strengthening the presence of European cinema .
This is one of the key steps the European Union has been taking in order to maintain and protect its cultural diversity and forms part of the guidelines contained in its own position in relation to the WTO negotiations , in particular as regards the audiovisual industry .
I would like to thank the Council 's representative for his reply .
Firstly , I would like to say that there is an enormous difference between , for example , producing cars or lorries and producing a film .
We are aware that film production is dependent on aid , as it is a combination of culture and commercial production .
We also know that European film , particularly when produced in languages with few speakers , cannot easily maintain as large a film production as one would wish .
Therefore , aid for both national and European film production is extremely important , as is the opportunity to continue the practice of accepting up to 50 percent State aid for film production .
I would , however , like to ask the Council 's representative whether he does not consider it important , with the help of this practice , to be able to give up to 50 percent in aid to the production of European film in those languages with few speakers .
Mrs Hedkvist Petersen , I am of course especially conscious of the point you have made about the Union ' s smaller Member States .
We are also concerned about this .
As you know , in the past all the Member States of the Union were authorised to provide special support for their film industries , particularly bearing in mind the specific need for cultural diversity within the European Union and because it was necessary to ensure that account was taken of this specific need , thus going beyond a purely economic view of the film industry .
We hope that it will be possible to maintain this support in future , and we also hope that this can be totally reconciled with the new WTO rules , especially in the new round which we hope will start sooner or later .
At present , there is still a 50 % limit on state aid in relation to the overall cost of any given project , but this percentage could even be raised to 60 % in special cases envisaged in the programme .
At the moment we have no indication that the Commission is considering a lowering of this limit , let alone the amount and the percentage mentioned by the honourable Member .
Question No 8 by ( H-0166 / 00 ) :
Subject : Information for the public Will the Council draw up a list of parties which the electorate can safely vote for without running the risk of their country being ostracised ?
Mr President , it is clear that the European Union does not have the power to intervene in the constitutional arrangements of the Member States , no more than it is for the Union to draw up a so-called positive list of parties for whom electors may vote .
If we went down that path we would certainly be entering very dangerous territory .
This does not mean that the idea behind this question does not make some sense politically speaking : in some countries , including my own , a Nazi or fascist party does not have the right to register with the constitutional court . This means that it cannot be accepted as a legitimate party in the democratic process .
Other countries have different systems and these have just as many virtues as my own .
What we have to recognise is that when we are considering a broader Community , no situation affecting democratic rights in one country can be a matter of indifference to the other countries and their citizens .
We are all European citizens and we are all citizens of a European Union which is underpinned , politically speaking , by a basic set of principles .
If these principles are at risk , we have the right - and the duty - to sound the alarm .
But whether lists of parties are desirable or otherwise , I hope that this never becomes a matter for the European Union .
Yes , but the problem , of course , is that this is what we are concerned with here .
Because Austria has a county mayor in Klagenfurt who has expressed himself in a way for which you and I feel equal revulsion , you have punished a country with sanctions and you are punishing a people with sanctions , including those individuals who may have voted against the party in question , and this without specifying what their crime entails .
Up until now , it is only opinions you are punishing and not actions .
If it were a question of actions , it would perhaps be Denmark which should be punished for a ban on immigrants of a kind which the FPÖ has not been able to put into practice .
It is therefore opinions which you have punished and not actions .
I should therefore like to know , when I next vote , if Portugal and other countries - outside the Council - will wish to propose sanctions against my country in the event , for example , of the present Danish government ' s incorporating ministers from the Socialist People ' s Party or Unity List , which are both opposed to Economic and Monetary Union , or if they will wish to prevent the appointment of a government including Fogh Rasmussen from the Left party if he relies upon support from the Danish People ' s Party which , in many newspapers , is described as a party equivalent to the FPÖ in Austria .
Knowing the answer to these questions would be useful as a guide to the consumer , but it may well be that the action taken by the 14 Prime Ministers is a source of regret .

Mr Bonde knows what I have said in previous answers : in the specific case of Austria , and I know that that is what is behind his question , we are not working at Community level , but through bilateral relations .
The attitude adopted by some Member States towards the Austrian Government related to their negative perception of the new Austrian Government , which does not affect the Community framework .
We are not working at Council level here . The European Union has not taken a single discriminatory measure against Austria .
These 14 Member States decided of their own free will to make plain to the Austrian authorities their displeasure at the kind of government they had established , and above all at the fact that they had included in the government a party which advocates , or has advocated in the past - it is difficult to distinguish between the past and the present in the Freedom Party ' s statements - a certain ideology and a certain way of interpreting European values .
However , Mr Bonde , you should not , of course , confuse economic and monetary union with Nazism , they are in fact slightly different .
Of course , all parties have every right to oppose economic and monetary union , the Schengen Agreement , or anything else ; they can even oppose the European Union itself .
As you know , there are parties which are opposed to the European Union , but that does not mean that they should be seen as undemocratic .
The fact is , and you know this as well as I do , Mr Bonde , that there are parties which promote ideologies which jeopardise the system itself and which affect the set of values which are the very essence of the European Union , which are ultimately part of the justification for creating the European Union in the first place .
It is therefore quite natural , Mr Bonde , that certain governments should feel somewhat uneasy .
This uneasiness is only being reflected in bilateral relations .
We are not confusing Community matters with bilateral matters .
Question No 9 by ( H-0169 / 00 ) :
Subject : Secrecy of legislative proceedings in the Council During Question Time in January , in answer to my question , the President-in-Office said that all information about legislative sessions in the Council , such as who voted which way , the minutes and the summary record was readily available to the public .
I expressed my doubts , but , further to my supplementary question , the President-in-Office undertook to write to me , before Question Time in February , a letter giving full details of where and how this information was readily available to the public .
I have received no letter from the President-in-Office , which confirms my worst suspicions about the obsessive secretiveness of the Council .
Will the President-in-Office now finally tell me where this information - who voted and how , the minutes , and the summery record - is readily available to the public , as he claimed during Question Time in January ?
Mr President , it is possible to keep track of the Council ' s work by means of the monthly reports prepared by the General Secretariat of the Council and which are published on the Council ' s web site , covering legislative and non-legislative acts approved since January 1999 and including the results of votes , explanations of vote and statements for the minutes when the Council is acting in its legislative capacity .
In the case of definitive legislative acts approved by the Council , the reports include the results of any votes , and any statements for the minutes made by the Council , the Commission and the Member States .
However , the only authentic texts are , of course , definitively approved minutes from which extracts are published by the General Secretariat of the Council on the Internet via the EUDOR web site , which is managed by the Office for Official Publications of the European Communities , under " Transparency of the Council ' s legislative activities " .
This is in fact one of the achievements of the much maligned Treaty of Amsterdam which people need to be regularly reminded about .
After each meeting of the Council , a press release is issued which contains information on decisions taken by the Council . This indicates for which decisions statements for the minutes were authorised for release to the public and which are obtainable from the Press Service .
It is also possible to obtain information on the legislative transparency of the Council by e-mail .
The public ' s right of access to Council documents is covered by Article 255 of the Treaty , which stipulates that the Council shall determine general principles and limits for exercising this right within two years of the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
It should be borne in mind that this provision of the Treaty of Amsterdam makes it possible for the various institutions to regulate access to their own documents , and we need to be aware of this , given the particularly delicate nature of certain issues under discussion in highly sensitive fields , such as the common foreign and security policy and justice and home affairs .
These provisions need to reflect a number of concerns which , whilst preserving the rules of transparency , cannot be allowed to turn transparency into a means of making any Council activity totally ineffective .
For this reason , as I have already said , this article stipulates that the rules of procedure of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission should contain specific provisions regarding access to their documents .
This issue comes under the general transparency rules of the European institutions which were , in fact , defined in the conclusions of the last European Council , in Helsinki , and I quote , as " an important element in bringing the Union closer to its citizens and improving efficiency " .
During the Finnish presidency , substantial progress was made in the field of access to documents by means of modern information technology , and in particular the Internet .
Furthermore , a Council Decision on improving the provision of information relating to the Council 's legislative activities and the public register of Council documents was approved .
In accordance with this decision , and let me quote once again , " The General Secretariat of the Council shall make accessible to the public a list of the items on the provisional agendas of meetings of the Council and its preparatory bodies referring to cases where the Council acts in its legislative capacity " .
The current presidency has been following this practice .
The decision stipulates that the public register of Council documents shall also include references to the document number and the subject matter of classified documents , with the exception of cases where disclosure of this information could undermine protection of the public interest , protection of the individual and of privacy , protection of commercial and industrial secrecy , protection of the Community 's financial interests , and / or protection of confidentiality as requested by the natural or legal person who supplied any of the information contained in the document or as required by the legislation of the Member State which supplied any of that information .
From the outset , the Portuguese presidency has declared its commitment to initiate discussions on public access to documents and its intention to entrust this dossier to the " Friends of the Presidency " group as soon as the Commission presented the proposal for a regulation on public access to European Parliament , Council and Commission documents .
This proposal was presented to the Commission , in the College of Commissioners , on 26 January , and , as I have said , it attempts to fulfil the objectives of increasing transparency , and in particular proposes significant amendments to the 1999 Code of Conduct .
The presidency immediately initiated discussion of the proposal , which was presented at the Coreper meeting on 2 February and which was examined at two subsequent meetings .
This set of tasks has therefore , Mr President , been developed by the Council on the basis of Commission proposals which I believe suggest a real will to increase the transparency of this work .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for a very long , detailed and serious reply .
Because I do not speak Portuguese I shall study the reply before the next question time and come back to you on it in April .
For now I would like you to give me a very simple reply to a very simple question of principle .
Do you accept that for legislation in a democratic environment , in which we are in the European Union , the public , whom the laws affect , should be able to see and hear what their elected representatives are doing to pass the laws ?
I do not think it is the case in the Council that the public is actually able to see and hear everything that their representatives say and do when passing laws .
Would you accept that principle ?
Mr Newton Dunn , this is a complex issue and it relates , of course , to the type of legislative practice involved and in particular to the degree of similarity between the legislative practices adopted in the European Union and in its Member States .
In the Member States , there are legislative powers associated with parliaments in which debates are held openly and in public , and there are legislative powers which , either because they are delegated by parliament or as a matter of law , are a matter for the government .
Discussion of legislative proposals within the government is not in the public domain , but the result of these legislative proposals is in the public domain , whether they come before parliament or not .
At European Union level , I do not believe that we can go any further than the existing provisions , that is to say making the results of discussions in the Council public , and in particular making public the way Member States voted and explanations of votes and statements for the minutes .
I think that I have said enough on this subject now but , as I have said , this is my personal view , given that this is basically about the underlying philosophy of the European Union ' s legislative procedures .
Mr President , during the Finnish presidency , we were able to get through twenty questions in question time .
Last time we covered twelve with Portugal as the country holding the presidency .
It seems as if we will not get through any more than that today either .
But my actual question concerns the fact that the President of the European Commission , Mr Prodi , has sent a letter to the European Parliament criticising the Parliamentary Ombudsman , Jacob Söderman , for having taken part in a public debate and wanting various documents to be widely accessible , as well as having presented his own point of view that there should be more public access to documents in the EU .
I would ask the representative of the Council whether he thinks the President of the Commission ' s action was right and justified , and whether the Council also wants to restrict the Ombudsman ' s freedom of speech on this topic .
.
( PT ) I have two points to make , Mr Seppänen .
Firstly , if that was how Parliament saw things , we could even give not twenty , but thirty answers to honourable Members ' questions .
But I shall reply in 15 seconds , omitting the detail which would reflect the presidency ' s desire to deal more thoroughly with questions and to go as far as possible in giving specific replies to honourable Members ' concerns .
But we can also opt for a bureaucratic , officious , quick , artificial and probably unsatisfactory answer .
We would then - in quantitative terms - be more successful in giving answers to this House .
I have been here since 9 o ' clock in the morning and I do not think that the Council can be accused of not doing a serious job in answering honourable Members ' questions .
With regard to your question about this disagreement between Parliament and the Commission , it is obvious that the Council would be the last institution to get involved in this disagreement and will leave those two institutions to sort out this potential argument between them .
Just to follow on from Mr Newton Dunn 's question regarding the decisions made in secret in the Council , could the Minister possibly list those legislatures in the world , that he referred to , where decisions are made in secret ?
I would be grateful if you could rephrase your question , Mr Nicholson , because I did not grasp what you were saying .
Excuse me , but could you put the question in a different way ?
You were saying that the Council is not alone in being a legislature that makes its decisions in secret .
I just wondered if you could give us examples of other similar organisations in government that make these decisions in the same way .
Unless I am very much mistaken , Mr Nicholson , the majority of governments do not broadcast meetings at which they are acting in their legislative capacity .
Governments ' legislative role is normally exercised in restricted , closed meetings in every country in the world .
I am not aware of any governments who perform their legislative work in open meetings , only parliaments do that , and as legislative power is divided between parliaments and governments there are two different ways of dealing with the legislative process .
Therefore , to the best of my knowledge , in the majority of countries throughout the world , governments do their work in closed sessions not open to the public .
Mr Seixas da Costa had informed us that he had to leave at 7.00 p.m.
He has also pointed out that he has been working with us since 9.00 a.m.
I believe that today he has earned his salary as a minister and as President-in-Office of the Council .
We will therefore conclude questions to the Council and thank him for being here .
Questions Nos 10 to 38 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Council .
( The sitting was closed at 7.00 p.m. )
Mr Evans has the floor .
Evans , Robert ( PSE ) .
Mr President , my point of order relates to Rules 148 and 135 regarding the distribution of the minutes and particularly regarding roll-call votes .
All Members have , this morning , received a booklet containing 113 pages of roll-call votes .
I am sure this is of interest to a number of Members and there will be a few Members who want to look at it .
But in the interests of economy and the environment , I would suggest that Parliament look again , or ask Parliament 's services to look again , at the interpretation of the word ' distribution ' .
Perhaps the results of roll-call votes could be distributed on the Intranet or made available to Members who need them so that we do not have the waste and the superfluous nature of everybody being distributed with a 113-page document listing roll-call votes .
I wonder if you could ask the services to have another look at this please , President .
Thank you , Mr Evans .
Your comments will be passed on , not to the services , of course , but to the Bureau .
If you were also to add the cost of each of those votes to Parliament ' s budget , there would be even more cause for concern .
EU-Mexico Interim Agreement
The next item is the report ( A5-0066 / 2000 ) by Mrs Ferrer , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a Council decision on the Community position within the EC-Mexico Joint Council on the implementation of Articles 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 and 12 of the Interim Agreement on trade and trade-related matters [ 5965 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0076 / 2000 - 2000 / 0024 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the debate I am opening under the very long title you have just announced represents the final phase of Parliament ' s work , carried out in close contact with the Commission , to strengthen relations with Mexico on the basis of the principles and values which underpin our democratic system .
In May 1999 Parliament gave its assent to an Economic Partnership , Political Coordination and Cooperation Agreement , signed in 1997 between the European Community and its Member States , on the one hand , and Mexico , on the other . Once it has been ratified by all the Member States , it will replace the cooperation agreement signed between the Community and Mexico in 1991 .
In May 1998 Parliament gave its assent to a provisional interim agreement on trade and related issues associated with the 1997 agreement . The aim was to enable negotiations on liberalising the trade aspects of the global agreement falling within the Community ' s competence to begin as soon as possible , without having to wait for ratification by the fifteen Member States to be completed .
Now that these negotiations have been concluded and the Council has expressed its view on their content , it falls to Parliament , in response to the Council ' s formal consultation , to give its opinion on the results of the negotiations .
Here I want to thank the Commission for making this consultation by the Council possible in close cooperation with Parliament - I am delighted about that and I hope it will set a precedent . However , I am sorry it did not adopt the commitment of the previous Commission to keep us informed of the progress of the negotiations , given the importance of the issues involved .
Turning to the substance of my report , the first thing I want to highlight is that , although we are dealing with an implementation agreement exclusively concerned with trade , there is a political dimension to bear in mind in expressing our opinion .
This is the case because the text my report covers is set in the context of the Economic Partnership , Political Coordination and Cooperation Agreement , and that agreement is a reflection of the will to promote a genuinely democratic political system , respect for human , social and environmental rights and a fairer social balance , thanks to the greater economic development the liberalisation of trade will generate .
In fact , Article 1 of that agreement makes respect for democratic principles and human rights , in the widest sense , an essential factor and the very foundation of the agreement .
Again , the inclusion of a clause on fulfilment of obligations , providing for the agreement to be suspended in case of failure to meet the obligations laid down in Article 1 , also guarantees the commitment of the parties to democracy and respect for fundamental rights .
In addition , by institutionalising cooperation between the European Union and Mexico , especially on human rights issues , social affairs and the fight against poverty , an instrument is being created which could be extremely useful for reducing the social inequalities which persist in Mexico and for improving the living conditions of the less advantaged strata of the population .
My second point , relating to the content of the negotiations on the implementation of Articles 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 and 12 of the interim agreement , covering trade in goods , public procurement , competition , the consultation mechanism for questions relating to intellectual property and dispute settlement , is to highlight the fact that this package of measures represents a good agreement . Although for certain sectors there may be flaws - I am thinking specifically of the textiles sector , where the rules of origin issue causes great concern - the effects will be beneficial for both the European Union and Mexico .
For the European Union , because the establishment of a free trade area will enable it to rebuild the presence Member States had in Mexican markets before the NAFTA agreement came into force , involving new expansion opportunities for European companies .
For Mexico , because it will be able to diversify and introduce balance into its external trade , currently 80 % dependent on its NAFTA partners , and at the same time increase the volume of its exports to the European Union , with the consequent favourable impact this increase will have on the Mexican economy .
Of course , during the transition period , and until all products have been fully liberalised , the agreement will be more beneficial to Mexico than the European Union , but this asymmetry also takes account of the levels of development and competitiveness of the European economy as compared with Mexico ' s .
All the same , in spite of this asymmetry , Community producers will clearly be in a much better position to compete in the Mexican market than they have been up to now .
For all these reasons , ladies and gentlemen , and by a very large majority , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy recommends a vote in favour of the Council Decision on the result of negotiations whose benefits we must monitor to make sure they genuinely contribute to promoting a more democratic political system and respect for human rights and social justice .
Mr President , I should like to start by thanking Mrs Ferrer for her excellent report .
She has gone to a great deal of trouble and has used her report to set out the problems and the advantages and disadvantages of this project with Mexico .
This is a trade agreement which falls within the competence of the EU and , as you rightly say , we only have the option of saying yes or no .
We cannot renegotiate the agreement .
All in all , our Group will vote in favour of this trade agreement , which we welcome .
For the rest , I should like to say to Mr Folias , who worries about the problem of footwear that , generally-speaking , trade relations between Europe and Mexico have always proven their worth in the past .
We might have been able to dispense with the Lannoye report on chocolate yesterday had Mexico not given us cocoa in the past .
In fact , chocolate - " chocolatl " - is a Mexican word .
We can therefore use past experience to help develop future relations with Mexico .
The advantage to Mexico is obvious .
This agreement will enable Mexico to redress the imbalance of its one-way dependence on the USA to a certain extent .
I should like to remind the House that 85 % of Mexico ' s exports go north and only 5 % come to Europe .
Mexico stands to gain here by achieving a better trade equilibrium .
Mexico ' s automobile industry , which is partly of European origin , certainly also stands to gain from the possibility of exporting vehicles to Europe .
We too stand to gain , as does European industry , be it on the Mexican market or by exporting to the USA via the Mexican market .
As far as trade is concerned , there are advantages all round .
I should like to go briefly into , or at least touch on , two problems .
The first are social problems ; in other words , Mexico will certainly have to review its social policy because trade policies alone will not solve social problems .
When free trade increases , there are also losers .
Poverty in Mexico has risen rather than fallen .
Social policy is therefore an important area for Mexico and we should build this into the dialogue with Mexico .
The second is scientific and technical cooperation .
I think that there is potential here which can be exploited between Europe and Mexico .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Economic Partnership , Political Coordination and Cooperation Agreement signed with Mexico in December 1997 is back in this House for analysis of the trade measures negotiated in the context of the interim agreement .
A few weeks ago I visited Mexico for a number of reasons , one of which was to find out what Mexicans think of the new framework for relations between their country and the European Union , announced with great fanfare in most of the media .
After analysing what I saw , read and heard during my stay in the Republic of the United Mexican States , I came to the same conclusion as Mrs Ferrer , author of the report we are debating today , and I congratulate her publicly . This is the best agreement the European Union has yet signed to promote trade and investment and it will benefit both parties .
There have been certain changes in Mexico recently , since the announcement and approval of the agreement , largely in a positive direction .
I therefore support the rapporteur ' s conclusions although I am concerned about the impact of tariff liberalisation for cut flowers as this could have negative repercussions on certain European regions specialising in this type of agriculture , such as the outermost regions .
Coming as I do from the Canary Islands , a region located to the north-east of the continent of Africa , with my political soul divided between Europe and America , I am delighted to witness this debate on Mrs Ferrer ' s report . The opinion Parliament is expressing on the association agreement is not just about its trading aspects , but also about its political implications as we experience the extraordinary scenario of globalisation .
In my opinion , the implementation of this agreement will undoubtedly take the European Union and Mexico down a road which offers hope of improving the income levels and quality of life of the communities involved at a time and under circumstances which , despite the distances , evoke the legendary meeting between Suchil and Quetzalcoatl , immortalised in Don Salvador de Madariaga ' s " El Corazón de Piedra Verde " .
Nevertheless , when asked to vote for this report , we have some constructive points to make . First , the Community services and departments responsible need to be provided with more human resources to make trade actions more efficient ; and secondly , financial instruments should be made available to companies implementing the various trading aspects of the intended Euro-Mexican partnership , in the old ECIPs , for instance , which brought such good results for Mexico .
If that does not happen , there is a risk that this very significant agreement will not be worth the paper it is written on .
Mr President , this is the third debate on the EU-Mexico agreement and , given that it is the most comprehensive agreement which the European Union has ever concluded with a third country , the principles that mark the sort of cooperation which will be viable in the future should not be thrown to the wind .
Both we and the people of Mexico set great store by this agreement .
They see it as a chance to correct their one-way dependence on NAFTA .
They believe that , in the EU , they have found a partner which stands for democracy , human rights and social and ecological development .
Today we have analysed the contract and found that the agreement with the EU not only creates the same sort of relationship as with NAFTA , but that , in parts , it is even worse .
Like the rightly failed MAI , freedom of investment , reproduced bilaterally , does nothing to foster a democratically-controlled economy geared to local development .
Placing no limit on opening public procurement merely allows large suppliers to swallow up small suppliers all over the world .
Provisions such as domestic treatment and bans on conditions cut companies which , for example , prefer to employ women or engage in environmentally sound production , out of the running .
The EU has kept derogations open for itself here .
Mexico has none !
Here is another shortcoming in comparison with NAFTA : the latter has an agreement on employees ' rights with a sanction mechanism , while the EU agreement has not even heard of the Social Pact of the United Nations .
However , the opposite applies to trade disputes , for which a dispute settlement mechanism is provided together with the possibility of sanctions .
We know from the WTO that environmental laws are regularly sidelined as the result of such disputes .
" A free trade agreement at the cost of the Mexicans " .
It was under this banner that the Mexican civil society called a few days ago for the Senate to improve the agreement and not to rush into signing it .
Some points even contradict the Mexican constitution .
" We are not ' globalphobes ' they write at the end , " but we want globalisation which benefits mankind and a fair world order without social exclusion " .
We here in the European Parliament do not oppose an agreement with Mexico .
On the contrary !
We are unable , however , to vote in favour of this agreement for the reasons stated and must continue to fight for better agreements in the future .
One last word : we need a critical voice here in Parliament which continues to support the rightful concerns and demands of Mexican society .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Ferrer , for the recommendation on the implementation of certain articles of the EC-Mexico Interim Agreement on trade .
The report is thorough , but I am afraid that I do not agree with the choices and recommendations it makes , although we do welcome some of the criticisms mentioned .
However , these criticisms are decisive , and have led us to oppose the motion .
I refer , for example , to the insufficient democratic transparency displayed leading up to the agreement , and we , along with all the other Members I imagine , have received a great deal of criticism on this point from both Mexican and European civil organisations , as Mr Kreissl-Dörfler said .
We are particularly concerned by the fact that the rapporteur is satisfied with the progress made by Mexico in the area of human rights and democracy since the application of the global agreement .
We now have conflicting evidence revealing an increase in violations of human rights , supplied not only by civil society but also by UN representatives and officials , by Mary Robinson herself , by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and by many other sources .
The most serious violations include the systematic use of torture , illegal arrests , disappearances , executions by paramilitary death squads , the arrest of trade unionists , bans on strikes and allegations of enforced sterilisation in the State of Guererro .
At the same time , the Saint Andrés agreements and the rights of the indigenous peasants are not being observed .
All this is common knowledge and I need say no more .
We believe , along with the German and Belgian Governments , that we should enforce observance of Article 1 of the Treaty , which contains the fundamental principle , and adopt instruments and set in place practical controls to ensure its implementation .
There are many other aspects of this agreement which , we feel , require correction : I will give just one example - it reveals a European Union economic policy which does not take into consideration the social and economic situation in Mexico or its human development .
The EU-Mexico Agreement could have negative implications if it does not take into account the need for balanced development , and not uncontrolled liberalisation , which could lead to greater poverty and inequality .
Mr President , we regard the title of the agreement which is the subject of Mrs Ferrer ' s report as at best incomplete , at worst dissembling .
It would in fact be more accurate to refer to a European Union-NAFTA agreement rather than an agreement associating the European Union with Mexico only . For this agreement , which the rapporteur herself describes as the most important one the European Union has ever signed with a third country , will not only affect our relations with Mexico but will also have implications for our relations with the North and Central American countries as a whole .
The Ferrer report , following what is clearly now the fashion in this Parliament , sets itself the objective of helping to create a new framework that will enable European enterprises to compete on equal terms with the United States and Canada .
That is a totally unrealistic objective for the near future and it is quite obvious for whose benefit the measures advocated in the text are designed .
Indeed , it must be quite clear to everyone that the decline in European exports to Mexico is the result of the NAFTA agreement , which turns the entire area into a single free trade area .
Does anyone seriously think , for example , that whatever the details of the system we set up , European textiles and cars , which are currently taxed at 35 % and 23 % , will soon be able to compete on equal terms with American exports of the same products , which are taxed at 1.8 % ?
Under these conditions , how can anyone justify the fact that the respective markets will be liberalised at different rates , to the detriment of the Europeans ?
Finally , there is a real fear that this will have an immediate and tangible impact on employment in Europe in the sectors opened to Mexican products , especially in already vulnerable sectors - such as textiles , to name but one . These sectors do not need to face further competition , in return for opening up to markets blocked by the Americans .
Moreover , the supposedly reassuring formulation of the rules on protecting designations of origin , and more generally on intellectual property , are more likely to have the opposite effect ; their vagueness and wording seem more of a threat than a guarantee .
Mr President , the conclusion of trade negotiations between the European Union and Mexico , considered from a positive perspective , could mean a new and durable framework for the institutionalisation of political dialogue and cooperation , provided that this trade pact works to the benefit of both sides .
Unfortunately , the experience of NAFTA shows us that this target was not achieved automatically , because there is evidence that free trade has had an adverse effect on the lives of many people , exacerbated environmental damage , and marginalised wide sections of the Mexican population - all the more so as Mexican human rights NGOs have also reported a deterioration in the human rights situation since the interim agreement came into force in 1998 .
So , all in all , the on-going agreement has not allowed Mexico to protect vulnerable labour , intensive sectors and minimal environmental standards .
In the light of this we cannot be optimistic , because the procedure followed in the recent negotiations , without effective control either in this House or in the Mexican Senate , provides ample evidence that the agreement lacks those mechanisms absolutely necessary to ensure that the damage currently being done will not be repeated again in the future .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are about to vote on one more step down a new road , begun in mid-1995 , when , like anything new , it met with quite a lot of criticism and quite a lot of reluctance .
Fortunately , that criticism and reluctance is now a thing of the past ; unfortunately , however , we still hear some reservations , like those voiced in Parliament just now .
I think we need to realise that what we are doing is actually forestalling the fears expressed here , with an agreement which , in this case , is purely about trade .
So we are forestalling these fears about Europe losing ground in Mexico against the exporting power of the United States .
What is more , this agreement means we are also strengthening the country ' s democratisation process .
As a result of that 500 year-old meeting of civilisations , Mexico is a country culturally and politically bound to Europe .
But politically and geo-politically , the fundamental weight has essentially lain with the United States , its powerful neighbour to the North .
And until these agreements start to bite , the hegemony of the United States in terms of economics , trade and investment will remain virtually absolute .
But Mexico has also made great progress on human rights .
It has been granted permanent observer status at the OECD and in 1999 it reformed its constitution to grant autonomy to its National Commission on Human Rights
So , for both economic and political reasons , we urge approval of this agreement .
Mr President , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance does not have a common position on this issue .
The latter part of the group , representing , as you know , groups which regard themselves as defenders of nations and regions internal to the European Member States , take a different view and , of course , members of the group are free to adopt different positions .
Obviously we share a basic concern about everything relating to human rights and sustainable development , especially in a context which leaves no room for social exclusion .
However , many of us feel we cannot realistically and sincerely oppose an agreement like the one before us today , primarily because we believe it will create objective conditions for further development and greater democracy and because , in addition , this agreement includes a suspension clause for non-respect of human rights .
I also think measures can be introduced to monitor its effects at all levels , not just on tariff changes and so on .
I am more worried about the points Mr Sánchez García made : for example , that the agreement we are signing cannot be implemented because there are insufficient resources and services ; that it will have perverse effects because we have not provided financial instruments for companies .
So let us do all that and let us be vigilant about preventing what we want to prevent : the continued violation of human rights .
Mr President , first I want to congratulate Mrs Ferrer on her excellent report , but despite that I also have to record that , regrettably , we cannot vote for it this time .
Our decision has nothing to do with her work , it relates to the situation in Mexico .
Three weeks ago I met with President Zedillo in Madrid and expressed our concern about the news we were receiving on violations of human rights in Mexico , the situation at the university and the situation in the indigenous towns of Chiapas and other localities .
Mr Zedillo promised to let me have full details to prove to me that our concern was groundless .
The days have gone by and still the information from Mr Zedillo has not come .
Meanwhile , information is reaching us from many sources indicating that serious human rights violations are continuing in many places , increasing our concern .
We quite understand that the economic content of the agreement is intended to bring about improvements , but we also recognise that we have not been able to achieve our aim of shifting the tremendous weight of North American influence that bears down on Mexico and other Latin American countries like a jackboot .
Last time , we consulted with the parties on the left in Mexico on how to vote and we decided to abstain . This time we cannot even abstain , because the Mexican Government needs to be sent a signal - in friendship and solidarity - that it must be serious about respecting human rights , complying with the San Andrés undertakings and restoring democratic normality , as laid down in our democracy clause .
Mr President , I will not discuss the content of this agreement since many speakers , including the rapporteur , have already covered it . I just want to highlight the political significance of the signing of this free trade agreement between the European Union and Mexico .
First , from the strategic and political angles , it is important for the European Union to build up its relationship with a country that is so important in that part of the world and which , above all , is making progress in terms of respect for the values of human rights .
Mexico ' s membership of the OECD was just mentioned , and its observer status at the Council of Europe should also be remembered .
Nor should we forget the opportunities represented by this market of 100 million people .
But obviously this political symbolism can in no way allay our concern about environmental issues , social issues and above all human rights issues , and many speakers have already referred to them here today .
What we do know is that our concern must make us more rigorous in our relations with Mexico .
That is just what we will be in ten days ' time .
The European Parliament ' s delegation for relations with the countries of Central America and Mexico will be visiting that country .
We are not going just for institutional dialogue between partners , between the Congress and the European Parliament .
We are going to talk to non-governmental organisations .
We are also going to Chiapas to talk to the indigenous people and representatives of local society .
That is how rigorous we believe we need to be but it will not detract from our support for approval of this agreement .
Overall , I feel that we can but support this agreement , for the reasons expressed by Messrs Westendorp y Cabeza and Seguro , whose opinions I share .
However , today ' s debate has revealed that it does have shortcomings , such as the failure to make an adequate connection between economic liberalisation and the guarantee of the respect of human and democratic rights , the rights of trade unions and rights in the area of child employment . The report also contains an alarming derogating clause regarding the origin of products , which will obviously penalise European produce , in particular in the textiles , clothing and footwear industries .
Since this involves highly labour-intensive European manufacturing industries , it would be truly absurd if this penalisation were to benefit practices which run contrary to the principles of human rights or to benefit unacceptable working practices such as child employment or an absence of trade union protection .
It really would be absurd if , to the detriment of our own footwear and clothing industries , we were to work to the advantage of companies and situations which violate those human rights that we have always vowed to protect .
I therefore feel that the Council and the Commission should take great care when implementing this agreement , and continually monitor its application for as long as it is in force .
I support the agreement in its entirety , for it certainly represents a step forward .
However , I also call for scrutiny , care and prudence regarding this agreement for its entire duration .
Mr President , first of all I want to thank Madam Ferrer for the report and Parliament for the very constructive input with regard to the results of the trade negotiations with Mexico .
These results of the trade negotiations are based on the EU-Mexico agreement to which this Parliament gave the green light on 6 May last year .
This agreement is based on human rights and democratic principles .
It covers all our relations with Mexico , notably cooperation and political dialogue .
The negotiating results are balanced , ambitious and offer a window of opportunity for both sides .
All important areas are included , notably trade in goods , services , procurement , intellectual property rights , competition , capital movement , investment and dispute settlement .
EC operators will be very rapidly able to compete on the Mexican market on an equal footing with industries elsewhere , notably the United States .
As in all negotiations , compromises had to be found in certain areas but the results are a balanced package assuring market access while preserving specific sensitivities .
Last , but not least , I would like to express the Commission 's high appreciation of the very short time period of one month in which the Parliament will be delivering its opinion .
It is very important because it will pave the way for organising a meeting of the EC-Mexico Joint Council on the margins of the Lisbon Council next week .
This will allow for the rapid entry into force of the results which , as you recognise , are in both our and Mexico 's interest .
Thank you very much , Mr Liikanen .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Information society for All
The next item is the report ( A5-0067 / 2000 ) by Mrs Read , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the communication from the Commission on a Commission initiative for the Special European Council of Lisbon , 23 and 24 March 2000 : Europe - An information society for all [ COM ( 1999 ) 687 - C5-0063 / 2000 - 2000 / 2034 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , may I start by thanking the Commission for its timely , well-judged and well-forecasted document .
This is , of course , timed to coincide with the summit in Lisbon next week , and Parliament has had to work extremely speedily , for which I thank so many colleagues who have helped with this and , of course , the secretariat .
When I was a young child , a library was opened in a village where I was born and brought up ; when the head teacher of the village school opened the library , he said that there were over 4 000 books in the library , and I thought with all the wisdom of a six-year old child : well , that is all the books in the world .
Now , I personally own over 4 000 books , and , although this is hardly a knowledge revolution in itself , it is some indication , on a personal level extrapolated to a political level , of the pace of change in how knowledge is accessed , distributed , applied and refined .
We ought to put this into some sort of context , though , and remind ourselves that the majority of people in the world have never made and probably never will make even one phone call .
The Commission proposals and Parliament 's response give a clear acknowledgement that the market can and should be the motor for much of this change , but not in every case .
The challenge is to work out when the European Union should let the market do the driving , and when we should intervene and regulate - when we should intervene , in whose interests and for how long .
We should remember - and the Commission proposal and Parliament 's response highlight the fact - that third-generation mobile telephones , on which so much of our future depends , are an area where clearly the European Union has an important lead , and that this lead is partly , though not wholly , explained by intervention .
The adoption of the GSM standard has meant that the European Union has a tremendous advantage .
Our report mentions matters relating to social protection and the social implications of this change , and I am indebted to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and particularly Mr Cercas , draftsman of the opinion from that committee - the only committee that has been able to complete an opinion in the short space of time available - for his hard work .
If I can explain procedurally and very briefly , the Social Affairs Committee voted on Monday evening at the same time as the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy and , with the agreement of the draftsman , I have taken over some of his proposals and put them down in my own political group 's name .
I hope that there will be support for those , because they go into a considerable amount of important detail .
Other amendments are looking at matters relating to disability rights .
I have consulted widely about the need to ensure that certain fundamental principles about the rights of disabled users and disabled people at work are incorporated into this report , and I hope into future legislation under the 1999 review of telecommunications legislation , at a sufficiently early stage .
We have amendments about consumer protection - so important in the establishment of trust in e-commerce - on the future of taxation , on the implications for healthcare and for transport .
Particularly important are going to be the employment consequences already seen and I tried hard to obtain a balance : not to be too alarmist because , of course , some of these changes will mean unemployment , but , on the other hand , to look at the opportunities for new sorts of work that the changes will bring .
Whilst I was researching for these comments to make to you today , I looked for examples , because I think these illustrate so well to the citizens of the European Union how these developments will bring benefits to their lives .
It is important , too , that we in Parliament and in the institutions of the European Union also apply modern methods , methods characterised by transparency and openness , in our own deliberations .
I should like to use my final few seconds to draw to your attention three projects in my own area .
One of these is in Rutland , the smallest county in England , where a virtual Rutnet was set up , bringing together people in rural , isolated communities for purposes of leisure , transport , employment and social life generally .
Further north , the Nottingham rural community council have set up a similar project in an area of serious mining deprivation , and this is bringing enormous benefits to many of the people in that area .
On a broader basis , M-net , the European East Midlands network helping small businesses and craft enterprises and linking in with universities and colleges , is also important .
Finally , some comments , Mr President , on what the future holds .
It is interesting to try to look into the future , and I should like to quote from the words of a famous Louis Armstrong song , ' What a wonderful world ' : ' Babies are born , we watch them grow , they 'll learn much more than I 'll ever know ' .
I think for all of us the future for our children and grandchildren is a future of great opportunity , though also of great uncertainty .
It is praiseworthy that the Commission is looking to play a leading , pivotal role in this , and I commend the Commission proposals and my own report to you .
Mr President , Commissioner Liikanen , ladies and gentlemen , before starting on my speech on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I want to express our very sincere and warm thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Read .
We have been working against the clock and we have been dealing with an excellent and supportive fellow Member , who has been very open to accepting all the points our committee wanted to raise in this important debate .
Many thanks for your report and your skill , Mrs Read .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has welcomed the Commission ' s very important initiative , e-Europe , for the Special European Council to be held in Lisbon on 23 and 24 March , with support and optimism .
We naturally applaud the Commission ' s aim of making the information society benefit all sectors and all regions but now , with the Commissioner here , we also have the opportunity to consider the citizens ' viewpoint and remind the Commission and the public that rhetoric in announcing objectives and expressing desires is not enough . We want these words transformed as firmly as possible into specific objectives and precise financial commitments , because that is the only way to get a real strategy covering every aspect of the information society .
And the strategy will only be of use to the weakest groups and individuals , and those who are most at risk of exclusion from the new society , if there are concrete commitments .
No doubt the Commission has the noblest intentions , but , looked at from the viewpoint of the workers and the least advantaged people , it still has not answered the questions this Parliament has raised in many documents , for example , the report on the Green Paper entitled " Living and Working in the Information Society : People First " . We still do not have much idea of who is going to finance the massive programme to teach basic digital literacy which Europe needs to close the gap with the United States .
We do not have much idea of how the responsibilities can be divided between governments and Commission , or what role trade unions and civil society can play .
So we want supplementary analyses taken into account , we want firmer commitments , we want a specific point about strengthening employment and social cohesion in the information society - because there is nothing about that in the Commission ' s communication - and we want a strategy with guidelines , recommendations and indicators .
We want adults mentioned , not just young people , we want disadvantaged groups mentioned and we want you to remember equality of opportunity too .
The new society must not exacerbate inequality between men and women .
Commissioner , there are great opportunities here , but they must reach all the people .
And we want the European social model to be defended .
So we are asking for a step forward , with more specific commitments and far more adequate political and financial efforts .
Mr President , congratulations are in order today of course to Mrs Read on her excellent report and to Commissioner Liikanen .
This is a positive debate , very positive for Europe , and widespread interest has been shown , as evidenced by the large number of amendments .
Let me pick out the points that we think are most important : infrastructure , legal certainty - people must know where they are - and the skills offensive , which ought , please , to be targeted not simply at our schoolchildren and students but at groups which have been neglected , such as women and older people , who represent an enormous source of skill if it were to be exploited .
It is a disgrace that large countries in the past have not foreseen the need to train , and countries like Germany and the United Kingdom should not be having to bring in workers from elsewhere .
I know that we will have a very good advertising and information campaign , and that we will capture the imagination of the citizens of Europe .
We must not forget people with disabilities .
There is also the fact that the documentation is not available to partially sighted people , and that is an oversight which could be put right in future .
We must prevent divisions , divisions between the regions of Europe , between the households of Europe and between the individuals of Europe .
Business-to-business communications are doing well but we must enhance communications between business and consumers in the European Union , where we lag behind the United States .
Of course , to do that we have to ensure that people - customers - are convinced of privacy and security , and your measures will help to bring about that confidence .
Business-to-consumer communications are particularly important for the elderly , the housebound and for those with family responsibilities who are finding it difficult to juggle work and career , overwhelmingly women .
There are ethical issues which we must give regard to , but I am very optimistic , and I think that Mrs Read will continue her work alongside you , and we will find in this House many missionaries for the ' e-Europe ' communication .
Mr President , Commissioner , the present initiative is important for the purpose of making decision makers in general more aware of developments , but also because levels of development differ very greatly from one European country to another .
We can also see this from the follow-up document prepared by the Commission .
The initiative is important if we are to stop having to say that the United States is the overall leader within this developing field .
According to the " 2000 IDC / World Times Information Society Index " , published in February , Sweden has overtaken the United States as the leading information economy .
The United States occupies second place .
Finland , Norway and Denmark follow , in that order .
People may hold different views as to the value of this type of investigation , but I think it is important to emphasise that the US model is not the only one which leads to success in the IT society , something which far too many people have said in this House .
Scandinavia is acquitting itself well with its social infrastructure and also , perhaps , with its pensions systems .
We ought to bear this in mind , something I am convinced the Commission has done .
We should also remember that the EU countries are very different from one another and that developments are very rapid .
This must be reflected in the action plan .
It is also important that the countries which are forging ahead most quickly should not be checked in their development .
It is important that we should clarify what is being done at EU level and what is being done with EU resources and that we should be prepared to make changes to regional policy and redirect some resources for research in ways that benefit " e-Europe " .
In view of countries ' different levels of development in the IT sphere , I am also sceptical about information plans and campaigns at EU level . " e-Europe " means more than just " e-commerce " .
The Directive on electronic commerce deals for the most part with things other than trading on the part of consumers .
I should like to appeal to the Commission to pay attention to the question which is being discussed in an adjoining room with Federal Trade Commissioner Thompson : that of how we are to increase consumer confidence .
The consumer has to be king when it comes to electronic commerce . Otherwise , it will not properly take off .
When alternative ways of solving disputes are discussed , we ought to collaborate globally with the United States .
Nonetheless , we should also support the OECD in its work .
The issues of broadband communications and of good infrastructure are on the agenda in the majority of countries .
There is a need for diversity , but now more standards are being sought for Digital Subscriber Lines with the help of which it will be possible to upgrade the network .
It is widely maintained that telephone companies are not making use of the available technology because standards are lacking .
Smart cards , encryption , mobile phones and " e-Europe " constitute our strength .
We shall persist with developments in these areas but , when it comes to standards , we need to pursue further development .
It is not we politicians who should decide on these standards . Instead , we should allow industry to reach an agreement concerning standards where there is a demand for these .
Our task is to legislate more quickly and to make for new patterns of legislation where possible .
I am glad that this point is made in the report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , rapporteur , allow me to thank you for the open debate and , of course , the report .
I should like to turn my attention first to the policy approach of the e-Europe initiative and to the approach taken by the Read report .
The Internet , e-mail and mobile telephones will apparently do away with unemployment .
But the reality of the matter is somewhat different .
The IT boom is confronted by mergers and redundancies .
History teaches us that this approach has failed .
Industrialisation , atomic energy and biotechnology have not brought freedom and prosperity for all .
Initiatives and reports are informed by the concept that the playing field should be levelled for the youngest and best .
Unfortunately , this concept totally ignores the fact that this group already represents the winners , while the general mass goes away empty-handed .
What we need to do is to allow everyone to profit from technical innovation , irrespective of how old or how rich they are or in which region they live .
We should hold our principle of equal opportunity up to the light of truth .
A universal service points the right way , but the idea should not be implemented by providers which censor the Internet by using technical devices to deny their customers access to parts of the Net .
The Commission ' s proposal aims to create equality through market liberalisation .
That alone is nonsensical enough because liberalisation always starts from the premise that the strong will become stronger , while the state should only give the weak minimum support .
In the case of information technology , however , we start with a totally different set of coordinates .
For example , there are numerous initiatives to promote the Internet and computers in schools .
But if no account is taken of the fact that each class contains at least one pupil who knows more than the teacher , then the initiative cannot but fail .
The fact that strong anti-American arguments had to be used at numerous points of the Read report as an excuse for the liberalisation policy again illustrates the extent to which the interests of private industry have dictated the text .
That brings me to my next controversial point : civil rights .
What we in fact need is a concept for universal data protection .
Instead , the Commission and parts of the European Parliament visualise a smart card on which all your data would be stored .
Your medical health fund would know that you are homosexual and your employer would know all about your previous and expected future illnesses and your forefathers .
It means a step in the direction of see-through man and yet more state interference in our private lives .
It is being used to deliberately plan and implement a further massive restriction of fundamental rights at European level .
It is being sold as an innovative policy at the same time as Parliament is arguing with other institutions for a Charter of Fundamental Rights .
How can these two things be reconciled ?
In the light of " echelon " , I am calling for a rethink of this matter .
Data protection and encoding are what we need .
For the rest , the citizens must control the state , not the other way around .
Mr President , in the original paper in English , the Commission uses the words ' information society ' and not ' knowledge society ' .
These are two different things .
Information is only a raw material of knowledge .
Information is chaos , while knowledge is order : order out of chaos .
The information society is the chaos society .
The knowledge society is more than that , and it may also be a society of social order , cultural diversity and human solidarity .
The information society has to date made its presence felt in the form of price quotations on a chaotic stock market .
The prices of shares in technology have risen in a such a way which cannot be justified economically .
Neither has the money often gone into new investment for business but to the owners , who have become millionaires and billionaires .
In that way the information society emerges as a bubble economy , a symbol of social inequality and imbalance .
The information society has been a matter of millionaires causing a social revolution : they have innovatively destroyed the old structures of society .
Their revolution has been to sell computers and software to everyone .
The rest of us should start a counter-revolution .
We should set our aims higher than the Commission has done .
We have to demand a knowledge society for all rather than the chaotic information society we are getting .
It cannot just be a question of whether everyone has a mobile phone , how e-mail gets sent and what to buy over the Internet .
At its best the knowledge society can be a social dimension of the new capitalism .
The information society for all is too undemanding , too commercial and too culturally restricted a goal .
We should want a knowledge society for all : that is democracy .
Mr President , ' the best is the enemy of the good ' , as they say in France , and I do fear Mrs Read ' s report is a striking illustration of that saying .
Indeed no one will deny that means of communication , and in particular the Internet , are most important to the future development of our societies , or that the EU Member States are currently trailing behind the United States in this respect , or that we need to legislate to control the potentially anarchic development of these means in order to limit the excesses to which they can give rise and ensure that they are as successful as possible for our people .
Yet I fear that the catalogue of good intentions before us today may , in fact , make it more difficult to achieve the objective we are seeking .
Rather than moving ahead one step at a time and setting the Member States a concrete and quantifiable short or medium-term objective , Parliament is sending out a confused and confusing signal , largely , it is true , because of the rather bizarre committee work .
We would have liked to see more precise details about the specific nature of the European approach to this subject and , in particular , on how the Commission proposes to help the Member States to check the headlong race towards standardisation , an exact blueprint of the American model , which is bound to encourage the development of these tools on the basis of purely technical and commercial considerations .
The educational and social concerns set out in the report are , no doubt , laudable ones , but in the end they will have little impact given the immediate repercussions that the extension of this tool will have for the people of Europe .
In what way is the Commission ' s document compatible with the existence of tax provisions in the field of commerce and employment specific to the various Member States ?
How can we ensure respect for our concepts of the freedom of the individual and freedom of expression , which have not yet been harmonised at world level ?
What guarantees are there for the security of our states in the context of the development of a technology operated chiefly by a big power which , while teaching the whole world the lessons of liberalism , never forgets to ensure that its own enterprises scrupulously respect its concept of the national interest ?
It is rather surprising , Mrs Ferrer , to read in paragraph 55 of your report that this Parliament expressly supports ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , Commissioner , it is a very positive sign that Lisbon will see focused discussion on the development of the information society in Europe .
The ' new economy ' is here to stay , in Europe too .
The European response to new challenges and exploiting opportunities has , however , been a long time coming .
For that reason , the e-Europe initiative is in a more crucially important position than ever before with regard to Union competitiveness and , consequently , from the point of view of our citizens also .
The proposals for reform in the initiative are ambitious , but do not even necessarily go far enough .
The goals are too modest , especially for my home country of Finland , where , in many respects , we are ahead of our European partners in networking .
The initiative should also be supplemented by the future challenges facing those countries with a more advanced information society .
Commissioner , I appreciate the amount of work that you , to your credit , have carried out regarding these issues relating to the information society .
We Members of the European Parliament cannot stand by either , while Europe continually lags behind its global competitors in the world of the Internet .
The clear lead Europe enjoys in the world of wireless communications is not enough for us to stop caring about the future of the European information society and about whether we really can keep up with the competition .
Being in a key position when creating the information society encourages real competition in telecommunications networks .
Competition cuts costs , and we have to bring down these very costs of communications , so that consumers and SMEs can derive full benefit from the electronic revolution .
Apart from reduced costs , the growth in electronic commerce also means that questions of security should be able to be resolved to the satisfaction of consumers and that defects in legislation should be corrected .
I think it is particularly important to take measures to increase venture capital projects for SMEs in the high technology sector .
The EUR 20 billion currently being used in venture capital projects in Europe each year is only one quarter of what the United States spends over the same period .
The amount is much too small .
Fortunately , the Commission has shown initiative in this matter , however , and has focused attention on accelerating developments here .
Speedy developments in the information society will drastically change our environment and our working and living conditions .
As European legislators , we have before us an immense challenge , if we intend to keep legislation abreast of the times .
The legislator does not always even have to interfere in developments : in certain matters industry and the players themselves may quickly resolve problems through cooperation .
Examples would be the positive experience that was gained from the common standardisation of second generation mobile phone systems and which is directly visible now in the strengthened competitive position with regard to third generation output .
Control of the new operational environment will also require increased technical and pedagogic facilities and resources in training schemes .
Consequently , there will have to be more focus on the training of teaching staff in European educational and training programmes .
Finally I would like to say that I support the introduction of benchmarking with regard to the development of the information society .
With regard to the concrete proposals contained in the e-Europe communiqué , I can only wonder why the Council has not discussed them before , so as to ensure commitment on the part of Member States .
Mr President , with regard to the Commission ' s communication on the information society , I feel that it is particularly important to underscore the emphasis placed on the need to provide all European citizens with access to new technologies .
This is more than an economic challenge : it is a process of profound cultural change which must filter down to every family , every school , every company and every public authority .
In order to achieve this objective , although , on the one hand , we do need to promote the spread of new technologies , on the other , it is essential to implement the necessary measures and reinforce the confidence of consumers in the major opportunities presented by e-commerce .
There is a genuine need for this , given the suspicion with which our fellow citizens approach these new tools .
A high level of protection is essential for the effective spread of the use of new technologies to the daily lives of millions of people , and clear rules will have to be defined if European citizens are to be able to take full advantage of the benefits .
In this regard , I had submitted a series of amendments for the attention of the Committee on Industry intended precisely to stress the importance of consumer protection in the project for disseminating new technologies put forward by the Prodi Commission .
It was with regret that I learned that only some of these amendments had been included in Mrs Read ' s report . I am , however , in agreement with the main points of the report , and I do hope that this omission was due to the unfortunate circumstances which meant that my Committee , which deals with consumer protection , did not have time to produce an official opinion .
I trust that during work on the action plan , following the Lisbon Summit , there will be more effective cooperation between the two Committees .
Mr President , Commissioners , if every possible attempt is made - and rightly so - to establish ways of creating an information society for everyone , we should make just as great an effort to ensure that we do not end up recreating a dual society with IT literates on one side and IT illiterates on the other .
Moreover , I set great store by protecting small and medium-sized businesses , with special emphasis on the small businesses .
In this connection , it is important to ensure that guarantees are provided for advertising purposes .
Indeed , due to a lack of a harmonised policy on commercial communication , obstacles could well surface which cannot be negotiated , particularly by small businesses .
Far-reaching harmonisation concerning commercial communication is therefore urgently needed .
In the last instance , I would also like to underline how important it is that at least the parties involved , i.e. the consumer and entrepreneur , must always be able to make prior arrangements regarding the applicable legal system .
After all , if it is stipulated that consumers can take legal action within their own jurisdiction , then this situation will be untenable for small businesses , which will need legal assistance in 14 other Member States . Needless to say , small businesses cannot afford to make this kind of arrangement .
Mr President , with the e-Europe initiative , the Commission is reminding us that Europe is lagging behind in the development of the information society .
That means it is lagging behind the United States which , indeed , no one would deny .
But having said that , we should evaluate the quality of this backwardness : economic , political and social .
How do we measure it ?
The Commission says it wants to launch a political initiative , so let us take it at its word .
Yes , Europe is backward in terms of access to the information society as a tool , a tool of knowledge , a tool of creativity , a tool for exchanging information .
Yes , it is backward in terms of the development of e-commerce made possible by the Internet .
But are these two forms of backwardness the same ?
Some might say ' no matter ' , we must strive for the wholesale development of the magnificent tool of digital information and that is an end in itself .
That is the impression the Commission ' s initiative could give .
But is it enough to set out a list of objectives , where the development of small enterprises is put on the same footing as the development of the public services , where electronic commerce vies with university education ?
The question that has not been asked is about the content of the information that is supposed to circulate thanks to this digital tool .
Will that content be standardised or will it reflect the cultural and linguistic diversity of Europe ?
Will it be a social content or purely market-related ?
Even now , the information society is creating social networks , giving rise to new cultural experiences , producing sites for political debate and exchanges of view .
We need to evaluate them properly .
The Commission refers to Europe ' s backwardness and the need to make up for it .
Between considerations of backwardness and urgency , we must not confine ourselves to speeding up this process but must instead consider the democratic and political conditions under which it takes place .
Technological progress is an all-too familiar slogan .
In fact , the transformation we are witnessing is reminiscent of what happened with the invention of printing .
We need to reflect very seriously about the challenges and changes it is bringing about .
If the objectives are to strengthen employment and improve democratic access , as so clearly elucidated in Mrs Read ' s report , it would be a pity to evaluate them solely in terms of the market and of economic development .
Mr President , it is difficult to summarise in three minutes the thoughts and feelings which naturally present themselves when one is to comment on such a broadly based and interesting initiative such as that which Mr Liikanen has prepared .
The new technologies which we are debating here have , for the most part , radically altered the bases of production , service , distribution , trade , research , use of information etc. in our societies .
Productivity is increasing , as is the quality of various products . Moreover , one of the reasons why we have relatively high growth in the world economy and , at the same time , low inflation lies precisely in these new technologies .
I think we are all fascinated by all the new products and applications which are being made available .
It is nonetheless important that , in our capacity as politicians , we should pay attention to the prior conditions which are being created for using these new technologies to help solve urgent problems for society with which the market economy will not automatically concern itself .
One such example is , of course , the area of education .
We live at a time when education is becoming ever more important as a factor in production .
One aspect to which little attention is paid in this area is that knowledge , unlike other production factors ( such as capital , minerals , and agricultural and other land ) , is not a scarce resource .
Knowledge has a clear tendency to increase or to expand when it is used .
It opens the door to incredibly exciting developments where democracy and justice are concerned .
We are all born with the potential to learn and acquire knowledge .
This cannot , however , occur without good prior conditions for education and learning .
That is why the proposal in this report , according to which resources for education and learning would be made available , is so important .
It is not , however , just a question of technical equipment . It is also a question of developing new teaching methods and distance learning .
This is important in our own part of the world but is also , of course , especially important in poor countries .
I hope that the experience which will be gained by the EU in this area will also be used as part of our collaborative work on development .
I would urge Mr Liikanen to have a detailed discussion with Mr Nielson on that issue .
Another area which is just as important is that of the opportunities for using the new technologies to make the use of energy and materials more efficient .
Commendably , in my view , the present programme refers to the area of transport .
Do not forget , however , that it is also possible , to a significant degree , to achieve an actual physical reduction in transport needs , which is something we should be trying to come to grips with .
Finally , where e-commerce is concerned , it is extremely important that a framework should be created which ensures that consumers can feel secure in engaging in this form of trade , that commerce within the EU is facilitated and that due attention is paid to the tax issue and to the risks concerning integrity .
We are only at the beginning of an important discussion , and I look forward to further stimulating dialogue .
Thank you , Mr Liikanen and Mrs Read , for an interesting report .
Mr President , Commissioner , metaphorically-speaking , what we have in the new I + C technologies is new fuel for our economic locomotive to re-heat our eco-system .
However , I should like to raise three points which perhaps merit our attention .
First : Article 6 of the Treaty of Amsterdam clearly calls for the principle of sustainability to be integrated into all policies .
To be honest , Commissioner , on reading the communication , I find too little account has been taken of sustainability , the question of ecological products , incentives for an ecological lifestyle or the question of the impact which I + C technologies have on environmental protection .
Improvements are therefore needed here .
Secondly : how will our working life and employment relations change ?
Will people be able to influence how they are organised ?
We need to consider if we need new joint-decision structures in the face of these revolutionary developments , new structures for listening to employees and making decisions .
Greater account needs to be taken of this .
Thirdly : the Fifth Framework Programme on research contains a great deal of socio-economic research , the purpose of which is to analyse what holds Europe together in the area of I + C technologies .
We cannot fill and heat our locomotive with ordinary fuel and , at the same time , carry out socio-economic flanking research under the framework programme which makes no reference to this communication .
In short , we need to heat the locomotive but not to allow it to travel anywhere it pleases . This locomotive needs rails .
Mr President , colleagues , not since the spread of universal suffrage in the last century has our society faced such a big potential transfer of power .
The information society has potential to transfer power from government to individual , from bureaucrat to citizen and , of course , from business to consumer .
It opens up a global market place and almost limitless information to anyone with access to a computer screen .
It is the biggest engine to break down barriers between communities and nationalities that we have ever seen - bigger than any EU directive can possibly be .
It offers more power , more choice , lower prices to citizens across Europe and indeed across the world , and in my view the best thing that governments can do in cyberspace is to stay out of it as much as they possibly can and let consumers , businesses and citizens get on with their businesses and their lives .
Legislators cannot keep up with this technology even if they try to .
Technology and industry are better equipped to respond to consumer concerns in what is an immensely competitive market .
It is that competitive market which will ensure that consumers are protected , not heavy-handed legislation which might stunt e-commerce and leave others around the world to reap the benefits of a revolution in our economy which is unparalleled since the industrial revolution of the nineteenth century .
But we all know that we need a base line of government involvement .
We need a basic legislative framework for e-commerce .
I hope it will be a light-touch framework , but we need to drive it through quickly because the e-clock is ticking and there are many organisations around the world fighting for this business .
It is in our interest to make sure that we get the answers and our legislation right , but also to get them through quickly .
We in this House should drive through the e-commerce directive with its country of origin principle as fast as we possibly can .
We should adopt new rules on jurisdiction which trust consumers to make an informed choice about which jurisdiction they want to opt for .
We should drive through the liberalisation of the telecoms package , because it is only with a low-cost competitive telecoms market that we can deliver this power , these low prices and these big opportunities to our consumers , because that is the only way to get low prices for our consumers .
We want to build on Europe 's lead on mobile telephony and adopt the examples of such great global players as Finland 's Nokia .
Member States should build on the IT skills concepts in their schools , but we must do this quickly because if we do not , others will take the prize on offer here , which is dominance in the global e-commerce market .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all let me thank Mrs Read for this report and point out at once that I will simply concentrate on the social aspects which , in our view , deserve a closer look .
With the Lisbon Summit coming up in a few days , I think the European Parliament needs to send out a clear signal to the Member State governments that Europe ' s entry into the digital age , and therefore into a new economic area with very considerable potential , must not be at the price of social cohesion .
The need for solid social foundations and for consideration of the people ' s real needs are , in my view , the sine qua non of the success of the information society , as we understand it in Europe , i.e. a society that cannot be built only on market forces .
We must take the utmost care to ensure that all sectors of society benefit from the information society and that we do not create a society in which social inclusion or exclusion depend on access to the new technologies and the use of their potential .
I think three points need to be noted , as well as the risks and concerns to which they give rise .
The first relates to the users and the risk of a gap emerging between the various victims of social exclusion .
The cost of Internet access , the sidelining of entire sectors of society ( the young unemployed , housewives , the elderly ) and the shortcomings in education and vocational training are serious obstacles to an information society meant to benefit everyone .
The second relates to the individuals working in this sector ; given the flexibility that is a feature of the sector , organisational structures must be set up for the employees , together with guarantees of their rights , in relation to social security , pensions or the necessary job-security provisions .
My third and last point relates to the question of public service and improving the democratic systems to develop procedures ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , Commissioner , e-Europe is a really important programme for everyone en route from the industrial society to the information society .
I would therefore like to congratulate the Portuguese presidency on its decision to make this issue the focus of the special summit .
I should like to congratulate the Commission on its proposal and the rapporteur on her report and I should like to explain why I have praised you and why I should like to take you all at your word .
The focal point of the report and the prime objective of the Commission ' s proposal make it clear that we need to achieve equal opportunities for , and equal participation of , all citizens in the information society . According to the text , e-Europe should , first and foremost , show each citizen , each household , each school , each company and each administration the way to the digital age and the Internet .
This goal , in my view , does not justify the concerns raised here about a possible division in society between the haves and have-nots as far as access to information is concerned .
I have highlighted this objective because I believe that it illustrates to particularly good effect how the citizens stand to benefit from European Union intervention in the information society , but , of course , only if we keep our word and fulfil the promises which we have made them . If we really do ensure by the end of 2002 that all schools - and this is in the programme - have high-speed access to the Internet and to multimedia resources in the classroom , if we really do ensure that by 2003 every citizen , rich or poor , has comprehensively guaranteed access to our health system and if we really do promptly take the action urgently needed in order to promote our SMEs , i.e. hedge the joint risks for venture capital in the Community .
That is a task for the Council , Parliament and the Commission .
I wish us all a great deal of success in the interests of our citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for the successful work that has been done in so short a period of time .
An information society for all is certainly an area of focus for the Commissioner in this process .
It is important , and I thank her for it .
Agreement should be reached at Lisbon on the principles of the sustainable funding of social security on account of this notion .
We also have to reach agreement with management and labour , for example , on the subject of remote working and vocational training , if what we are talking about is an information society for all .
It will not be so if the basic rights of employees are not safeguarded .
There is a threat that , because of the Internet , services will become self-services , and that again is a major employment issue .
Another matter is that we have been deregulating the telecommunications industry for around ten years , and now , with these massive Internet players merging there is a fear that they will once again start regulating the market .
This , I think , should be stopped .
It cannot be allowed to happen and I expect the Commission to sit up and listen and take the necessary action .
Thirdly , the quoted share value for a certain Internet company rose by a sudden 4 000 % in one month , and this came about merely because unsubstantiated information was given about it for the stock market .
With many companies in the same position , or almost the same position , there is going to be a bubble effect in the industry , and when the crash comes I hope the taxpayer will not be footing the bill .
Has the Commissioner a remedy in mind for if and when the air balloon companies in this sector burst so that the taxpayer does not have to pay out , as is the case with crises in the banks , for example ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is very important for the European Parliament to take part in the debate on the European Union ' s attitude to the opportunities opened up by the information society , an item on the agenda for the Lisbon Summit .
While stressing that many people had hoped for clearer answers in this area from the employment summit , I do not undervalue the relevance of the issue and the need to define a European strategy for the sector .
We all know the Union is lagging far behind the United States in this sensitive area , which is so vital to our future .
I concur with Mrs Read ' s report and , borrowing an expression used here by the President of the Council , António Guterres , I want to highlight the three main deficits in the sector .
First there is the pragmatic deficit .
As the Read report correctly points out , the document put forward by the Commission is full of general guidelines and laudable intentions , but it is weak on concrete measures and ensuing actions .
I would not like to believe the Council ' s conclusions will be restricted to this list .
On this issue , as on others , we do not need more statements and speeches , we need measures and decisions that can reduce the huge lead the United States has on us .
Then there is the democratic deficit - which has been greater , admittedly - but it is important to combat the division between those who have access to the Internet , the new technologies and the benefits of the information society , and those deprived of them either for economic reasons , or because of insufficient technological information and education .
Our first concern must be to prioritise our commitment to the educational system and in the carrier and telecommunications structures which make access to the Internet cheaper , faster and more powerful .
And finally there is the investment deficit .
As the report rightly affirms , the response to these problems cannot be left to the market alone .
A great deal can and must be done in the health system , in public administration , in relations between governments and people , and in public services generally to ensure that Europe takes the qualitative leap we all recognise to be necessary today .
Mr President , the point of the special summit in Lisbon next week is to define the European way in the future world of employment .
How can we become more competitive ?
How can we create new markets ?
How can we create permanent , more highly-qualified jobs ?
We can take one of the leading roles in tomorrow ' s global information society , provided that we learn the script .
Europe has talents .
Europe has skills .
Occasionally we lack competent directors to motivate us .
I personally feel that it is important for broad target groups to take an active part in these serious changes .
They need to familiarise themselves with the Internet and data bases from an early age .
Mrs Hieronymi pointed that out .
Schools without computers must become the exception .
We need a qualification offensive with computer-aided learning and active use of networks .
The European Parliament ' s Committee on Employment and Social Affairs is calling for the information society to become the common property of all citizens , including the socially weak , the disabled and older people .
The pace of change is hotting up in the European economy .
Undertakings are subject to constant restructuring , new holdings , strategic alliances and friendly or hostile takeovers .
The consequences for both employees and managers is the same : greater mobility and faster and faster adjustment .
Independence is increasing , as is pseudo-independence .
Within companies , responsibilities are changing .
Teams have shorter and shorter sell-by dates .
That has repercussions for the internal composition and the representation of the interests of employees .
Many companies are too small to set up works councils or are so large that relationships are not even forged and employee representatives become roving ambassadors .
People in ICT professions who have a great deal of freedom , analysts , engineers and creative planners , want to be their own bosses .
They are fighting for new working time regulations and new variable contract-based tariff and remuneration systems .
In addition , trade unions in other areas fear that unregulated structures will spread and social standards will drop .
Citizens must be familiar with new forms of work and working relations in the information and communications industry , be they in the hardware sector , the software sector , services or consultancy .
Once they are able to share in innovation , once they can be won over by the information society , then it must be made clear that this is a success or an advantage not just for private- and public-sector undertakings , but for consumers and employees alike .
Mr President , I want to begin by thanking Mrs Read for all the work she has put into the present report .
It is wonderful that there should be such a lot of interest in this area .
I believe it is important that , here in the European Parliament , we should now promote further knowledge of these complex and exciting developments and create a readiness to implement the necessary changes .
Commissioner Liikanen , with his personal commitment , and the Commission ' s " e-Europe " document represent a positive vision of the new economy and a growth-orientated policy which I wholeheartedly support .
It is unfortunate that certain Members see the burgeoning information society as a threat , rather than appreciate the opportunities it involves .
The significance of e-commerce is difficult to overestimate .
Until now , the single market has only been a reality for major companies. e-commerce means that the single market will become accessible in a quite different way to smaller companies and , above all , to individuals , customers and consumers , who can now finally benefit from the whole of the European single market .
In the wake of technological change , there will not only be changes to patterns of trade , but new opportunities will also be created where the arts , entertainment and personal contacts are concerned .
In order to best support the new economy , it is important that we as politicians should not believe that we can foresee companies ' and people ' s every need .
We must allow the market , that is to say purchasers and vendors , to choose for themselves .
In view of the way this part of society and of the economy looks , it is even more important not to engage in a fever of regulation by controlling activities in every detail .
Instead , we must further deregulate markets so as to increase competition with a view to reducing prices .
That is definitely the best way of making information services available to all citizens .
An important part of creating growth in the new economy is to increase the flow of venture capital for newly started-up and expanding businesses .
We must increase competitiveness and the development of ideas in our part of the world , that is to say in Europe .
The most important thing that heads of State and government can do in Lisbon is to begin reducing taxes on capital in their various countries , for it is these which now constitute the greatest obstacle to an increased flow of venture capital .
To the left-hand side of this House , I would say , following the present debate : try to affirm the opportunities available to people because of the information revolution .
Avoid being so fearful and negative .
Take Mrs Villiers ' insights on board .
Adopt Mr Wijkman ' s global and positive attitude , and learn from young Mrs Kauppi ' s experiences .
I do not think we should underestimate the problem of making the relevant adjustments , but do not bury this initiative in your old conceptual world .
That would be Europe ' s loss .
Mr President , I want first to thank Mrs Read and Parliament for the report , which has been produced extremely rapidly and is very important , because the extraordinary summit will take place next week and the e-Europe initiative is one of the fundamental documents there .
The subtitle of the e-Europe initiative , " An Information Society for All " , or we could also say as Mr Seppänen has said here , " A Knowledge-based Society for All " , is an indication of the far-reaching objectives of this initiative .
We welcome the contribution of Parliament to this very important policy debate .
The Commission is currently contributing to the preparation of next week 's summit in Lisbon .
To this end , the Commission has adopted several communications including a progress report on e-Europe last week and a paper setting out an agenda for economic and social renewal for Europe two weeks ago .
I find it very important that Parliament is participating through today 's debate in the discussions before the Lisbon Summit .
The debate has been really illuminating and has shown the great interest and also the expertise of Parliament on this issue .
We hope that the Lisbon European Council will endorse concrete , focused policy actions providing a strong signal that European leaders are determined to transform Europe into a dynamic and competitive economy .
As to the content of your reports , I note that you have expressed concern that mechanisms through which the targets of e-Europe are to be achieved are not made explicit in our initial document .
In this context , the progress report submitted by the Commission to the Lisbon Council last week and also submitted to you last week will provide further details .
In addition , there will be an e-Europe action plan by June as requested at the Helsinki Summit .
I hope that these documents will answer many of your concerns in relation to the realisation of the goals of e-Europe , but it may be that some of the issues will not be addressed , because we must try to remain focused in this initiative .
I am particularly pleased to see that the report shares the Commission 's view on the key elements of e-Europe .
It is essential to create a modern multimedia high-performance e-infrastructure , to create legal certainty in e-commerce , to counteract the skills shortage and to improve the availability of risk capital to stimulate innovation .
Your support to move forward on these key elements of e-Europe is most welcome .
I find the idea of organising an e-government conference highly interesting .
It is important that we in the European institutions , along with Member States , develop effective means of exploiting the potential of regional technologies , to increase both the efficiency and transparency of our interactions with citizens .
I can report to you that this will be one of the main topics of a ministerial conference organised by the Portuguese presidency in Lisbon in early April .
I would also like to add that the White Paper on the Commission 's internal reform contains an " e-Commission " action .
The aim is to enhance the Commission 's IT and communications infrastructure in order to provide better service by means of the Internet .
I would like to briefly respond to some items where the emphasis of the discussion has perhaps been a little different from the Commission document .
The Commission is asked to include an eleventh action line on employment and social cohesion .
I fully accept that these are very high priorities , and for that very reason particular communications have been accepted on these subjects .
I would like to mention especially the communication " Strategies for Jobs in the Information Society " .
I also agree with you that the information society is perhaps the biggest opportunity for structural policies and policies for cohesion that we have had , because it means the death of distance .
The " e-Europe " communication focuses on the actions necessary to accelerate the transition to the information society .
These actions will result in increasing numbers of jobs and will thereby reduce the principal cause of social exclusion , namely unemployment .
Your report expresses concern about the smart card action .
I would like to assure you that this action is not intended to intervene in an area that , the report rightly notes , is market-driven .
The Commission 's role is purely a facilitating one , bringing together the key actors and enabling them to move towards agreement on standard approaches .
The aim is not to disadvantage other technologies .
It is not clear how the Commission can guarantee ethical security of services , but I fully share the view that we should take all measures to ensure respect for human rights ; existing actions , primarily the Internet action plan , address this issue .
Finally , I would like to close by thanking you once again for your work in this area .
The efforts which you have made confirm that you share with us a sense of the importance and urgency of this issue for Europe .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Vote
Mr President , the debate on my report on the European Union ' s action plans on asylum-seekers and migrants has been postponed until this evening at 6 p.m. , and the vote until tomorrow at 9 a.m.
I would like to see the importance of the issue reflected in the debate and vote in this House .
So I would ask you to put it to the House that the debate be deferred to the next part-session in Brussels .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
Before these votes are taken , I think it is important for this House and the Bureau to decide , finally , whether the Strasbourg sittings finish on Thursday or if there should still be sittings on Fridays .
It does not make any sense for us to be amending the agenda here for the convenience of people ' s travel plans only to pack the agenda for the Brussels mini-sessions which are always very full as it is .
Report ( A5-0064 / 2000 ) by Mr Duff and Mr Voggenhuber , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the drafting of a European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights ( C5-0058 / 1999 - 1999 / 2064 ( COS ) )
Mr President , I have asked to take the floor simply because the Italian translation of paragraph 6c is very strange .
We have sent a note in this regard , but nothing has been done about it , and so I would ask you now to investigate the matter .
The text appears to be saying that violations of fundamental rights are permitted if the European Parliament is in agreement , which seems rather absurd to me .
Mr President , I would like to draw attention to the text of paragraph 6 ( c ) , in line with the doubts raised by Mrs Frassoni .
We have made a quick check here and the Portuguese text seems to have the same meaning as the French text , implying that the majority of this House believes fundamental rights can be violated if the European Parliament agrees to it .
I do not know if this is a language problem or a political problem , given the speeches we have heard here about Austrian political rights .
However , this is a very sensitive issue , and I want to raise it with the Bureau , so that the matter can be clarified , because if that is what we are supposed to have voted for , I think an extremely grave political precedent has been created .
We always have a check on the language versions to make sure they conform to the original language version at the end of the votes .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , one other brief point .
I must respect the fact that we have just deferred the report by Mr Hernandez Mollar by a majority , but I would ask that we refrain in the future from simply changing the agenda between two reports during the vote without any speakers for or against and without thinking through the consequences .
It violates the Rules of Procedure and should not happen again .
I have some sympathy with that remark .
Perhaps we should ask the Rules of Procedure Committee to look at the precise procedural methods we use here .
It is very clear that if a report has come from a committee , the committee can request referral back .
But when it has been set on the agenda at the beginning of the week I am not clear that Members can move deferral .
I was not sure , so we should refer it to the Rules Committee .
Mr President , before we vote on the Jackson resolution on the Structural Fund programmes , may I draw Parliament ' s attention to the French Council of State decree dated 27 September 1999 which cancels the notification of 500 sites that could be designated as special conservation sites and therefore pose a problem .
The Commission has not expressed its opinion on that .
The Council of State ruled that the procedure had not been respected , i.e. that the mayors and regional and local authorities , organisations and associations concerned had not been consulted .
We do not know exactly what the situation is at present .
To ensure that Member States are not unjustly penalised , I move that the vote on this report be deferred until the Commission has delivered its reasoned opinion on action to be taken following the Council of State decree .
I also think Parliament cannot be both judge and judged .
We could have a long debate about this but rather than get into a procedural wrangle , you are not , strictly speaking , entitled to move this .
I am not going to debate it .
The easier thing is to put it to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the proposal )
Mr President , let me repeat what I said yesterday , namely that the French Socialists will not take part in the vote because they believe that this is not the correct procedure , since the only environmental directives referred to are those on wild birds and on Natura 2000 and a more balanced approach should have been taken .
My second point is that we do not believe it is in the remit of the legislative authority to decide whether the laws have been transposed . That is up to the Commission and also the Court of Justice .
Mr President , I simply wanted to say that if Mrs Lienemann was so worried it is a pity she did not take part in the debate and make her points to the Commissioner during the debate .
Mr President , I agree with that remark , for I am surprised at some of the statements made here .
This is in fact the first time this kind of observation , which was not heard in committee , has been made , and I regret it .
Today we are to vote on this resolution , which is why we are asking for a vote on the work done in committee .
I think it is excellent that we are trying to adhere to the Rules of Procedure and , on the basis of what was stated by Mrs Lienemann a moment ago , it is quite obvious that there are circumstances which have not been dealt with in committee . With reference to the Rules of Procedure , I would therefore take the liberty of proposing that the matter be postponed and referred back to committee .
Mr President , I wish to make a personal statement and remind Mrs Jackson , who certainly has a lot of work as chairman of the committee , that , at the first committee meeting at which we discussed this subject , I said I disagreed with the biased way certain directives were selected and not others .
Moreover , Mrs Jackson , I tabled numerous amendments calling for the series of paragraphs you had proposed to be deleted .
My amendments were not adopted in committee and I therefore felt it was not acceptable for us to continue on these bases .
Mrs Isler Béguin was not in committee on the days we discussed these subjects .
You will find exactly the same arguments I have put forward today in the Minutes of the committee meeting and in my amendments .
I know we have a great deal of work in committee and that colleagues cannot always remember amendments in detail , which I fully understand .
However , I wanted to point this out .
Mr President , before we vote on paragraph 45 , I would like the rapporteur to hear what I have to say .
The Italian version of the second part of the paragraph refers firstly to physical , psychological and sexual abuse of children , and then the final part reads " urges them not to imprison child abusers , except as a last resort " .
I would like to know whether this clause has the same meaning in his language .
Would the rapporteur be so kind as to inform us whether his version is the authentic version , for , if so , the meaning is the complete opposite to the Italian .
Mr President , I believe I can shed some light on the matter .
I have read the French version of the text , and it is completely different from the Italian version at this point .
The Italian says " not to imprison child abusers " , which seems absurd to me , whereas the French reads : " not to imprison young people who commit offences " which , I think , must be the original meaning .
This a serious translation error .
I feel sure that the Italian is a mistranslation .
The original version probably said " not to imprison young people who commit offences , except in special cases " . I think this is the root of the problem .

I am able to confirm that it is Mr Imbeni ' s interpretation which is the correct one .
The French , Danish and English versions are correct .
The phrase is to be understood as Mr Imbeni said .
Mr President , if we change the meaning of the paragraph , the debate will start all over again .
It is a common occurrence in this Parliament for texts not to correspond .
Do you remember when , a few months ago , we were told to distribute condoms to priests ?
This time , according to some versions , we are told to protect child abusers .
If we change the English version as well , Mr President , we will have to start the debate afresh and , seeing as your plane leaves at 4.30 this afternoon , this does not seem appropriate .
Maybe it would be better to stop at the comma , after " physical and psychological abuse and all kinds of discrimination " .
We could then deal with the behaviour of young people who commit offences later on , in one of the many other reports which are churned out by Parliament .
Mr President , the rapporteur clearly explained the meaning of the text in the sense referred to by Mr Imbeni .
You have read the English version of the text , which is accepted by the overwhelming majority of those present .
I really must ask you to allow us to continue the vote , especially as these little semantic games always come from the people who take no part in the technical work in committee .
If the House could agree we could overcome all the difficulties that we have with the language versions by putting in as a separate paragraph itself - either as a sub-paragraph of 45 or as a new 45 ( a ) - which says " and urges them not to imprison young people who commit offences , except as a last resort " .
That would overcome all the difficulty .
There is no ambiguity , there is no uncertainty .
Mr President , a number of words have been omitted from paragraph 61 of the Danish version .
It is the English version which is correct .
In the Danish version , the following words should be added after the words " trade unions " : " as well as the rights of individuals vis-à-vis trade unions " .
It is , then , not only a question of the right to form trade unions but also of rights vis-à-vis these trade unions .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I should like to make a point of order .
We voted on this report in committee , a committee on which all groups are represented .
We dealt with 170 amendments to this report in committee .
We have now been presented with 66 amendments in plenary .
This is not a legislative report .
If the House continues to organise its business in this way we will not only be a laughing-stock but we will fail to get through the very serious business that we have .
We ask the appropriate bodies in this House to look again at the way in which we organise our work .
As it happens , we have a report by Mr Provan in which the Bureau is looking at how the plenary functions .
We had a debate on that in the Bureau on Tuesday and I made exactly the point you have just made .
So I agree with you one hundred percent .
Mr President , this is only the fourth point of order I have raised in nearly eleven years as an MEP , so I hope you will listen .
I want to ask you and those others who preside over these sessions to be much more strict about points of order .
We lost nearly half-an-hour this morning and many of the points of order that were raised then , and are often raised here , are things that Members have just thought of that they would like to share with others .
That hardly constitutes a point of order .
I suppose I feel particularly peeved because my own report on e-Europe , which is the only thing from this Parliament before the Lisbon Summit , has been squeezed off to a time when there will be a relatively poor attendance .
I ask you - and I echo Mr Watson 's point of order - to take those points back to your President and co-Vice-Presidents and ask them to be much tougher .
It might make you unpopular in the short-run but I think it would make you loved and admired in the long-run .
I am usually accused of being too brusque with Members who want to make a point of order .
I suppose I cannot win .
The trouble is that when people ask for the floor on a point of order you do not know if it is a valid point until they have made it .
Mr President , you mentioned that you wanted to break off now .
I urgently request that you continue the vote .
We are fed up with constant changes to the agenda and postponements at short notice .
I therefore ask that you quickly resume and complete the vote on the Ludford report and the rest of the agenda .
I agree with Mr Pirker , and it is probably the only thing I will agree with him on if we do vote on the Ludford report .
It is going to be an interesting vote .
It is unreasonable at this stage to postpone it to a time when a lot of people will have left .
If you are intending to postpone it to 5.30 p.m. , it will totally distort the vote on this report .
I urge that we carry on now , understanding all the difficulties that you have mentioned .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I understand what is being asked here .
But what I have to say to you is this : take a look around the House , it has already voted , with its feet !
The members have already left !
We cannot work seriously if we follow the procedure which you have suggested , Mr President ; nor can we do so if we work here with random majorities .
Now more members may have left from one group than from other and that may well distort the vote on the Ludford report .
Even the rapporteur does not want that .
For the rest , we can still vote at 5.30 this evening .
That is quite in order .
I think we should work here with a properly-ordered procedure .
We have already overrun by 45 minutes .
I suggest that we vote this evening .
Mr President , if every time there are amendments to be made to the Rules of Procedure the whole of Parliament is going to act as you have done , giving me the floor at the end and treating small groups as you have done , then I would rather everything remained exactly the way it is .
In fact , every time Parliament decides to deal with the issue of long voting sessions it ends up suppressing the rights of the individual Members .
The point is , that part-sessions run from Monday to Friday , and if you have to leave earlier for some reason , then that is your problem , not the fault of the voting session .
Mr President , I should like to request that it not be taken this evening .
The vote will be totally distorted .
We know that a lot of people will leave this afternoon .
They do not expect this kind of vote on a Thursday afternoon .
Could we not postpone it until the April plenary session in Strasbourg ?
I am afraid that would have to be decided before we take the vote this evening .
Mr President , there are other categories of worker whose jobs are much more tiring than ours and whose work compels them to postpone their mealtimes , and yet they do not complain and they do not leave their work unfinished , as we are about to do .
This is shameful .
We have been here for less than two hours and we have already had enough .
What would sailors , pilots , drivers , petrol station workers and doctors say ?
I find it absolutely absurd that we are not able to work for more than two hours at a time .
You are just making the point that I made when I said we could not carry on with the votes .
Mr President , I think the translation of Mr Speroni ' s speech may not have been entirely correct .
He appeared to me to be saying the complete opposite regarding the decision taken .
If the Members had been prepared to wait half an hour longer before eating , this would not appear to have been too great a sacrifice .
Effectively , it does cause problems when you randomly move important measures to a Friday sitting .
For example , we voted on drugs , which is a highly disputed issue , on a Friday . We will vote on these measures either this evening or on Friday .
This appears to us to be a political manoeuvre to influence the majorities in this Chamber . You arrange our agenda and our timetable according to whether you want a particular measure to be adopted .
Mr President , in order to be completely fair , you should have called for one intervention for the decision to suspend the sitting or continue and adhere to the scheduled voting time and one intervention against .
Once again , the wishes of the Chamber have been disregarded .
Democracy only exists on paper : it is not applied within this Parliament .
Mr President , I am sorry but I asked for the floor at the start .
Two specific points .
First , I wanted to vote for , not against proposed amendment 24 .
Secondly , I should like to say that there is a rule here , that it is standard practice to vote up to 1.30 p.m. on Thursdays and to leave the rest until 6.00 p.m. , after the urgent votes .
We have done so for years and we can be flexible one way or the other pretty much as we please .
Perhaps all the members should be reminded of that .
Members are supposed to work here through to Friday , so that we can use the afternoons to see our visitors .
Mr President , perhaps I can be of help here .
The rapporteur has stated that she agrees with your suggestion , i.e. with the President ' s suggestion .
Allow me to recapitulate : the President said that we are to vote at 5.30 this evening on whether or not to postpone the vote until the next plenary session .
Please let us proceed thus .
Sarah Ludford has stated that she agrees with that .
So , we vote at 5.30 p.m. on postponing the Ludford report to the next plenary session .
That is my motion .
There is absolutely no problem with that .
It is well within the Rules . It can be done immediately before the vote .
It is normal procedure .
That is why I cannot take it now . The Rules say you move postponement before the vote on the matter .
That concludes the votes .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE - Graefe zu Baringdorf report ( A5-0044 / 2000 )
We need to pay close attention to the issue of animal health , particularly that of bovine animals and swine , hence the importance of sanitary inspections in intra-Community trade in these species .
This approach must also take account of the need to put more effort into the total eradication of diseases like leucosis , tuberculosis and brucellosis , and into adequate health procedures .
But it is also vital to remember that producers need proper support , with special attention being paid to small farms and family farming given that , as in Portugal , the already low incomes of small farmers are often profoundly affected by these diseases and this is not generally made up for by the low level of compensation .
So it is essential that intervention in future makes it possible to protect both the interests of consumers and the interests of producers , especially of small farmers .
Ferrer report ( A5-0066 / 2000 )
- ( DA ) We cannot vote in favour of the report since there are gross abuses of human rights in Mexico .
That has most recently been demonstrated in an Amnesty report from December 1999 which draws attention to , among other things , the serious problems in the Chiapas region .
We think it is splendid that the trade agreement has had built into it a demand to promote democracy in Mexico - including the observance of human rights - but , as long as this demand is not followed up by concrete action , it is merely a case of empty words .
A democracy clause was also built into the old trade agreement with Mexico , but this was not complied with .
Pressure must therefore be exerted upon Mexico through international organisations such as the UN and via individual nations . Only after that , and when there have been significant improvements in the area of human rights , do we think that we can enter into a new trade agreement with Mexico .
- ( FR ) At its meeting of 7 May 1999 , the European Parliament adopted the EU-Mexico Global Agreement even though none of its Members knew the terms of negotiation of its trade aspects .
Furthermore , we continue to see cases of impunity , violations of human rights , the repression of social protest movements and an undeclared war against the indigenous people of Chiapas .
All this has been condemned by , among others , the UN High Commission for Human Rights and the Inter-American Commission for Human Rights , and these practices conflict with the undertakings the Mexican authorities entered into under this agreement ( Title I , Article 1 ) .
The association agreement was designed to serve the interests of the large transnational firms on either side of the Atlantic , as shown by the wording of its Title IV , which refers to capital movements and related payments .
Under the heading of trade , we find a repeat of several of the most dangerous points of the MAI ( Multilateral Agreement on Investments ) .
Finally , this agreement ignores most of the proposals put forward by social , trade union , human rights and environmental organisations in Mexico and the European Union which , for their part , aim to ensure that social , cultural and political cooperation take precedence over mercenary aspects .
For all those reasons , we shall vote against ratifying this agreement .
Mr President , I want to give the explanation on behalf of the Liberal Group in respect of the Commission 's legislative programme .
We abstained as a group throughout this vote .
The reason , as we made clear during the debate on Tuesday , is because we believe the process to be flawed , not because we necessarily have any quarrel with the content .
Having put this marker down for this time , in the future we would like to see the process reviewed so that it amounts to more than just ourselves as a Parliament swapping lists with the Commission .
We want something more substantial and meaningful .
- ( FR ) We voted against the joint motion for a resolution because it means granting a full discharge to the European Commission in advance and we disapprove of that in terms of both form and content .
We abstained on the GUE resolution because , although we agree with a number of its criticisms of the Commission , in the recitals the Commission is described as an " indispensable interinstitutional instrument " , which is not how we see it .
Duff / Voggenhuber report ( A5-0064 / 2000 )
Mr President , we heard many speakers from the federalist majority of this Parliament say here yesterday that the Charter of Fundamental Human Rights under preparation would give a big boost to citizens ' rights .
However , the conditions under which this initiative was put forward tend more to reflect contempt for the life of the citizens and give us cause for serious concern about what will happen next .
First of all , a few months ago , we discovered , tucked away in the Cologne conclusions , in paragraphs 44 and 45 , the decision to start drafting a Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Who was consulted beforehand ?
No one , and certainly not the national parliaments , who had never heard of it .
All the same , however , we must remember that basically fundamental rights come within the remit of the national parliaments and , as a whole , of the various peoples of Europe .
Of course , some people will say this was merely a new formulation of existing rights , but it is clear that this operation will go much further , with the European Parliament already calling for an innovative Charter .
In any case , whatever its final form , the national parliaments should not have been sidelined .
They are now involved in the Convention to draft the Charter , but only as one partner among others , which will guarantee an imperfect job .
Worse still , they will not even be involved in the final stage , since the Cologne conclusions provide that the Charter will be proclaimed jointly by the Council , the European Parliament and the Commission .
Yes , I did say " the Commission " .
So the national parliaments find themselves sidelined and replaced by a body of officials who will ' proclaim the Charter ' .
That is quite ludicrous !
Democracy is sidelined , supposedly for the good of the citizens .
But then is that not how Europe usually works ?
Mr President , I voted for the report despite many misgivings because it included Mrs Morgan ' s excellent proposed amendment on minority languages and cultures .
I would also like to have seen support for Mr Vidal ' s proposal .
But I think that we have taken an important step here towards greater protection of minorities traditionally present in the European Union .
We cannot keep setting criteria for candidate countries which we fail to meet ourselves .
Mr President , my party , the Socialist Party in the Netherlands , is in favour of democratic cooperation from the bottom up among the European peoples , but not of a large European superstate modelled on the United States of America .
A European constitution could provide the initial impetus for a superstate of this kind .
I have , therefore , supported a number of amendments tabled by the UEN Group and the EDD Group with regard to the Duff-Voggenhuber report .
This does not apply to similar amendments tabled by the TDI Group , although I completely share the criticism expressed therein regarding the fact that national parliaments are being overlooked , the lack of referenda , and the attempts to turn the European Union into a superstate .
If the parties of the TDI Group had taken a consistent line on the equivalence of all people and on democracy , I would certainly have supported their amendments .
However , I had to consider their view of the world in my deliberations .
Of all the groups represented here , it is their view that takes least account of equivalence , democracy and human rights .
This is why I was unable to support their proposals .
Mr President , this week Parliament has dealt with the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights and we have specified - adequately I believe - the civil rights of individuals .
For me , however , as a representative of the Basque Country , collective rights are still lacking - and I hope they will soon be included - for example , the right of self-determination for European peoples and nations with a collective consciousness as such , so that , if a majority of their citizens so decide , they can join the European Union directly and not just through the existing Member States .
We also approved the inclusion of the right to protection of the diversity of European languages and cultures , especially the less widespread and less used national and regional languages , which also gives due recognition to the official languages of the autonomous communities and regions , like the Basque language .
In this increasingly global world , some people want to impose homogeneity on us , as if we were all soldiers or units in a production chain .
So I want to claim the right to an individual and collective identity , the right to diversity and difference .
That is definitely a fundamental right worth defending in the European Union .
- ( DA ) The Danish and Swedish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the report by Mr Andrew Nicholas Duff and Mr Johannes Voggenhuber regarding drawing up a European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights .
We are in favour of the drawing up of a Charter of Fundamental Rights in the form of a political document .
In this period of reforms of the EU , including its enlargement , it is important to focus upon the fact that the EU ' s raison d ' être is to protect individual citizens .
A Charter could make a positive contribution to this .
In drawing up a Charter of Fundamental Rights , there is always a certain danger of citizens ' viewing it simply as a meaningless piece of paper , to be waved on state occasions but destined to disappoint .
A majority of the European Parliament is therefore calling for the Charter to be of binding effect and to be incorporated into the Treaty , in other words for the agenda of the current Intergovernmental Conference to be extended .
In connection with previous votes on this subject , we have clearly expressed our view that there should be no more issues on the agenda than it will be possible to resolve at the Nice Summit in December .
We have already emphasised that no more obstacles should be put in the way of enlargement of the Union .
Drawing up a set of binding , fundamental rights would raise a series of very difficult questions of principle , in terms both of the content of these rights and of their relationship to other sets of fundamental rights , for example the European Convention on Human Rights .
It is therefore unrealistic to expect the issues to have been resolved by December .
For that reason alone , we do not think that fundamental rights should be on the agenda of the current Intergovernmental Conference .
We have made this known in the individual votes en route to the report .
If we nonetheless choose to vote in favour of the whole report , that is because we believe that fundamental human rights are one of the foundations upon which the EU is built and because we want a Charter concerning these to be drawn up in the form of a political document .
Whether it is subsequently to be incorporated into the Treaty in a form that is binding will depend upon an assessment of whether the content of the Charter would provide citizens with better protection than that which they have at present .
- ( SV ) The most important development for the EU ' s future right now is that the Intergovernmental Conference should reach agreement concerning the reforms which are required in order to facilitate the enlargement of the Union in accordance with a fixed timetable .
It is therefore a matter of urgency that the Nice Summit should be able to make decisions concerning the Amsterdam leftovers .
We have voted in favour of the EU ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights being introduced as a matter to be considered by the Intergovernmental Conference , thereby guaranteeing , among other things , citizens ' rights in relation to the EU ' s institutions .
The Charter is an expression of the EU ' s ambition to bring the EU closer to its citizens .
Our point of departure is that the work on reviewing the treaties must progress following the Nice Summit and that the EU ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights should form part of this on-going process .
- ( DA ) The European Parliament ' s report on the Charter is characterised by one pervasive idea : the desire for EU citizenship in a supranational State , whether one likes that term or not .
This way of thinking is fundamentally different from our own vision of a European Community .
The Union is , and should remain , a union of States .
It must therefore be ensured that the Charter does not in any way interfere with the Member States ' national constitutions or equivalent arrangements for establishing fundamental rights .
This is not to support the view that those in power can do as they like within a given country ' s borders , but an expression of the view that human rights are nothing less than universal and require universal tools by way of protection .
Moreover , we do not wish to see two sets of rights on the European continent - one for citizens of EU countries and another for citizens of non-EU countries .
It is therefore crucial for any EU Charter not to affect existing international conventions and declarations of rights , but merely to require that EU countries sign these .
Growing problems arise when the EU acquires more and more powers as a State but cannot be bound in relation to , for example , the European Convention on Human Rights .
We do not , however , see it as a solution for the EU to accede to the Convention on Human Rights as a juristic " person " , since we do not share the view that the EU is , or should be , identified as having the status of a separate politico-governmental body .
Nor do we support the constitutional process of which the adoption of a Charter is an integral part .
We prefer the Treaty to state that the EU ' s authorities respect the competence and decisions of the Court of Human Rights .
Legal practice of this kind makes it possible to condemn an aspect of Community law which is open to criticism and which has arisen through a Member State ' s use of that law .
The European Court of Justice should not have jurisdiction over areas already covered by the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg or by other international bodies .
If the existing conventions are found to be inadequate , for example , because bio-technological developments give rise to new problems , then this is an international problem to which international solutions should be sought .
It is not solely a concern of the EU , and we must seek international and global consensus in international forums .
We are therefore voting against the whole report .
- ( FR ) Our abstention from the vote on the Charter certainly does not mean we are opposed to its European character .
On the contrary , we are persuaded that in future we shall see a Europe without frontiers between unified nations , from one end of the continent to the other .
However , the European institutions , like the national institutions , tend far more to represent the interests of big capital than the interests of the people as a whole , and especially of the working people .
Democratic rights and freedoms , like democracy itself , can only be genuinely expressed so long as they do not conflict with the interests of large industrial and financial groups .
Whichever of the two institutional trends implicitly reflected in the debate about the Charter we look at , these groups can take entirely sovereign economic decisions that spell disaster for an entire population , leading , for example , to factories closing down and to the ruin or pollution of an entire region .
We therefore believe that a genuinely unified and democratic Europe is possible only if we can rid it of the de facto power of the large industrial and financial groups , which is the necessary condition for real and democratic control by the people over their institutions .
- ( FR ) I was very happy to learn , last June , that the Cologne European Council had decided to convene a Convention ( made up of representatives of the Heads of State and Government , the European Parliament , the national parliaments and the Commission ) that would be responsible for drafting a Charter of Fundamental Rights .
That Charter will be a vital step towards the political deepening of the European Union , under the appropriate conditions .
It will , in fact , enable us to make up for shortcomings that have existed ever since the growth in the powers of the European Union and the European Community , with the European institutions taking decisions that affect the life of the people of Europe more and more directly .
These people need a document to which they can refer when they take their case before the European Court of Justice .
So we must provide for direct resort to that Court in accordance with certain procedures .
The Charter will also help define a ' collective patrimony of values and principles and a shared system of fundamental rights which bind citizens together and underpin the Union ' s internal policies ' , a patrimony we must constantly defend against the racist and xenophobic tendencies that have , alas , not disappeared .
As the representative of the people of the European Union , our Parliament must take a very careful look at the contents of this document .
The people of Europe expect us to take a very bold approach here .
Our demands are quite clear .
The Charter must have fully binding legal status by being incorporated in the Treaty .
To that end , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs calls on the Council to put the Charter on the ICG agenda .
Any amendment of the Charter must come under the same procedure as its original drafting procedure , which means it would require the assent of the European Parliament .
The European Parliament must approve any secondary legislation that might have a bearing on these fundamental rights .
The indivisibility of these fundamental rights must be recognised by making the Charter applicable to all the European Union ' s institutions and bodies and all its policies , including those contained in the second and third pillars , in the context of the powers and functions conferred upon it by the Treaty .
The Charter must be binding upon the Member States when applying or transposing provisions of Community law .
Turning to the actual content of the Charter , it would seem advisable to divide up these rights into three categories .
The Charter would enshrine the civil rights directly related to European citizenship , such as the right to vote , the right of petition , the right to appeal to the ombudsman ; the rights of the individual , i.e. all the rights protected by the various international organisations and the new rights ( bioethics , protection of personal data ) ; and the social rights , i.e. the right to a minimum wage , the right to strike , the right to unemployment benefit .
Let me conclude by saying that this Charter must form the key component of a process leading to the drafting of a European Union constitution .
- I wish to state the reasons why I felt obliged to abstain on the final vote , even though , in common with other Members , I am totally in favour of the protection of fundamental freedoms and rights , and with ensuring that future social developments can be taken account of .
Already , within the European Union , Member States have ratified and transposed into their legal systems the European Convention on Human Rights , which , although the document is nearly 50 years old , has shown itself capable of evolving in line with changing conditions as well as developing new rights .
I believe that what is now proposed with this ' Charter ' will eventually lead to conflict between the interpretation of rights under the different documents , which could create a legal vacuum and , ironically , reduce the rights available .
We need more time and debate on these potential conflicts .
- ( SV ) At the Council ' s meeting in Cologne , it was decided that an EU Charter of Fundamental Rights should be prepared .
The Charter was to assemble and establish the rights which are to be found in the treaties and make them clearer and better known .
We welcome such a Charter of Fundamental Rights which can also , of course , include rights under existing international conventions signed by the Member States .
At the same time , human rights must be regarded as an international and global issue and not only as a matter for EU citizens .
We are , however , hesitant about making such a Charter legally binding before it has been fully clarified what that would mean in practice .
The relationship between the European Court of Justice and the European Court of Human Rights appears , for example , to be legally complicated and could undermine the European Convention on Human Rights .
We believe that there are a number of questions which ought to be investigated before one particular model is opted for exclusively .
We are therefore abstaining from voting in the final vote .
- ( DA ) The Danish Liberal Party ' s five Members of the European Parliament , Bertel Haarder , Anne E. Jensen , Ole Andreasen and Niels Busk have today voted against paragraph 14a of the report , since they wish to keep the issue of the Charter off the agenda of the Intergovernmental Conference .
- This report confirms our worst fears about the intentions of some people in relation to the Charter and that is why we have voted against it .
We are not voting against a Charter itself , but so far the process seems to suggest a wasted opportunity to protect the citizens of Europe from the overburdening powers of the European Institutions .
There is a gap to be filled in providing fundamental rights to citizens of the Member States concerning European regulation and legislation .
This report turns its back on this need and thereby devalues the potential of the Charter .
In the process of voting against , we have , of course , tried to improve the contents in the interests of the members of the nation states of Europe who might be affected , and some of the amendments which we have supported are aimed to do this .
Conservative MEPs will continue to examine the progress of the proposed Charter through our representative on that body , Timothy Kirkhope , MEP , ( Yorkshire ) , and in discussions with our colleagues in the European Parliament , and we will be as positive as possible in this exercise .
However , we do not hold out too much hope of converting this whole exercise into something which could be really positive in turning back the tide of legislative bureaucracy and over-regulation , and genuinely protecting the human rights of the citizens of Europe .
- ( FR ) The discussion about the Charter of Fundamental Rights shows the lack of legitimacy and transparency in the construction of Europe , for today the laws of competition and profit are quite evidently taking precedence over human rights .
We prefer a different approach , under which economic aspects must always come second to the satisfaction of human and environmental needs .
The Charter should be drafted on the basis of a broad public debate among all the people , including those in the candidate states , and also involve the unions , the associations , the women 's movements and the unemployed , in a constituent process .
A Charter of this kind should be based on the most progressive acquis and combine social and democratic rights .
A radical reduction in working hours which must lead to more recruitment and not flexibility ; a ban on redundancies ; requisitioning empty housing ; equality and the right to choose for women ; the right to vote and freedom of movement for immigrants : that is what should have featured in this text .
A Charter of that kind would offer support to all those men and women who are fighting against a Europe that lays off workers or expels immigrants who do not have the proper identity papers .
- ( DE ) I did not vote for the resolution , despite the fact that I am in favour of a charter of fundamental rights , because it contains demands which overshoot the mark and risk causing considerable confusion by formulating the same rights differently and , more importantly , jeopardising the universality of human rights .
I do not take the view that this charter should contain enforceable economic and social rights .
These are subject to the employment law of the Member States and the autonomy of the social partners .
Those who want to overload the cart , for example , with new basic rights in the information , bio-technology and environmental protection areas , are doing little to promote the endearing concept of a Union charter containing subjectively enforceable basic rights .
I would much rather see the European Union and , of course , all the Member States , quickly accede to the 1950 Human Rights Convention as opposed to the inevitable dispute regarding the new wording of the fundamental rights of Union citizens .
In order to safeguard uniform case law and prevent differing interpretations , case law should continue to be the preserve of the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg which , thanks to the quality of its case law on the 1950 Convention over the past 40 years , has provided a dynamic instrument which takes full account of the social , economic and ethical developments within our society .
The discrepancies or inconsistencies which might result from various ideologically informed views can be seen in the position of the Committee on Women ' s Rights which is calling , for example , for the Charter of Fundamental Rights to contain a clause banning discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation but maintains that family rights as such do not exist .
We need to be wary of perhaps well-meant , generous proposals if we want to prevent decision processes in the EU being crippled by a plethora of recourse proceedings which would mean more than doubling the number of judges at the European Court of Justice , and nobody would know where to enforce their basic rights any more or how long they must wait for a judgement .
- ( SV ) We welcome the work which has now begun on preparing an EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
A Charter of this kind will have a very important symbolic value and will strengthen the confidence of our citizens in the EU and in European integration .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights should be seen as complementing the European Convention on Human Rights , which we believe should be incorporated into the Treaty .
The Charter should concentrate on the relationship between citizens and the European institutions .
Its primary objective should be to guarantee that the Union is governed openly .
The Charter should be legally binding through its also being incorporated into the EU ' s Treaty .
The Charter must not only be a declaration , but also entail obligations of some kind on the part of the EU ' s institutions and Member States .
We would emphasise the subsidiarity principle and the fact that the Charter should concentrate on the fundamental freedoms and rights of citizens , as presented in accordance with the Member States ' common constitutional traditions .
We would emphasise the importance of the social dimension in the EU ' s activities but consider that social policy is mainly a question for each individual Member State to decide upon .
- ( FR ) The Charter of Fundamental Rights is the latest manifestation of the drift of Community legislation towards a constitution .
In fact , the significance of this document is obvious if it is regarded as a potential preamble to a European constitution ; conversely , it would be redundant in those Member States that already include these rights in their own constitution and legal traditions and confirm them by ratifying international texts such as the European Convention and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
It is easy enough to think of ways to improve the application of the existing texts ; but the technocratic nature of the process of European integration becomes quite obvious again today from the decision to draft an additional document , which could hardly be anything but repetitive .
Yet what worries me most is the content that is to be given to these rights .
Indeed , at this same part-session we are discussing reports by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms which reflect a libertarian vision of society .
Their aim is not so much to defend and promote human rights as to make a clean sweep of all the points of reference on which our societies are founded and replace them with an individualist jumble ' with neither lord nor master ' .
This kind of Europe is based on a new totalitarianism in which man finds himself alone facing a Community administration that is as remote as it is impersonal , in which the intermediate structures - and in particular the most vital one of all , the family - have been gradually destroyed .
Our society will no longer have a common destiny ; instead it will be based on a juxtaposition of ' minorities ' which each have their own rights but no common obligation .
The conclusion I draw from these texts is that the just fight for human rights has become the ideological plaything of irresponsible and selfish individuals .
What they are proposing to us today spells the death of the common good and , over and above that , of the very meaning of life ; for they are concerned only with human rights and have forgotten what man is first and foremost , and what his roots and aspirations are .
- British Labour Members fully support a Charter of Fundamental Rights which makes visible citizens ' rights across the EU .
However , we are at a very early stage in the process of determining the Charter .
It is therefore too early to say what should be legally binding .
This decision will be made at a later stage as recognised by the report itself in Paragraph 6 .
That Paragraph also states that any legally binding status recognises that Fundamental Rights are indivisible by making the Charter applicable to all the European Union 's institutions and bodies and all its policies .
This is a recognisable aim which British Labour Members would support .
As the final Charter text is not available , we are supporting the Charter in principle but awaiting the final version .
This is a complex process which needs clarity and precision at all stages to ensure that the end result is a positive and visible step forward for people in all EU countries .
Our abstention on this report on the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights derives primarily from our view that it might be part of some federalist rationale which we oppose , and which could find clear and definitive expression in providing the European Union with a constitution , as proclaimed in the report , with this Charter as an important component .
At the same time , as we agree with many of the rights targeted for inclusion in the Charter which , by the way , are part of the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic , we decided we could not vote against the report , although we do think the set of rights under consideration could and should unequivocally include the social domain , as would be ensured by approval of the amendments tabled along those lines by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left .
- ( DA ) The European Union rests upon fundamental principles of freedom , democracy and respect for human rights .
If , however , I have misgivings about introducing a new set of human rights into the EU Treaties , this has to do with the confusing signals which would in that way be sent out and with the fear that existing instruments which are operating well would be put at risk .
In my view , a declaration would be more appropriate .
The European Convention on Human Rights is an excellent tool for protecting human rights in Europe .
It involves enforcing these rights on the basis of judgements given by the Court of Human Rights , which has developed considerable expertise in this area , as well as extensive case law .
The Convention also has the advantage of not being limited in scope to the area of the EU but of operating in relation to almost the whole of the European continent .
At the same time , it is the European Court of Justice ' s practice to take account of the national fundamental rights applicable in the Member States .
This practice could be affected if the EU were to obtain its own set of fundamental and human rights .
Jackson resolution ( B5-0227 / 2000 )
My Group voted in favour of the Jackson resolution on Structural Funds in the environment because we believe in the principle of ensuring effective implementation of environmental law - in this case , the wild birds and habitats directive .
However , we are surprised that Members of this House voted for the original proposal in paragraph 7 to cut off funds to some of our poorest regions in the EU .
Indeed , the Commissioner , in a response to the debate , said she would not be stopping approval of key funding programmes .
Members of the Environment Committee clearly cannot be aware of the undue delays that any non-approval of Structural Funds programmes would create , nor indeed of the new budgetary procedure that could involve not only delays but the loss of millions in funds in the case of the UK to Merseyside , South Yorkshire , the Highlands and Islands , Northern Ireland , Cornwall and the Isle of Wight .
These are vital life-line funds for jobs and growth .
I therefore welcome the fact that this House voted by a majority against cutting off resources .
The Commissioner would , in any case , have had no legal competence to stop approval and therefore I am glad that , at the end of the day , common sense has prevailed in our vote .
- ( DE ) It would appear that Community environmental protection does not have its own lobby at the Community institutions .
There is no other explanation as to why the Commission gave way yesterday and suddenly decided to reinterpret the Structural Funds regulation .
Having given itself real teeth last year and called in notifications of FFH areas for the joint " Natura 2000 " project which had been overdue for years , the Commission has now tripped itself up by accepting that notifications can be submitted ex-post .
That was unnecessary in that the regulation fully covered the Commission ' s demand for FFH lists to be submitted together with the plans at the latest and per se leaves the Commission no room for manoeuvre here .
The Structural Funds Regulation - decided unanimously last year by all the Member States - clearly states that the ex-ante evaluation is a prerequisite to the programme and the planning documents which the Member States submit to the Commission for approval .
The Structural Funds regulation also states that this ex-ante evaluation should include an assessment of the environmental situation , especially in areas which might be influenced by Structural Fund intervention .
The Commission is therefore duty bound to ensure that the documents notify it of potential areas subject to European nature conservation before it approves the plans .
Submitting FFH lists once plans have been approved makes no sense from the point of view of content , because the protected areas will be reduced and adjusted to planned investments ( rather than representing the framework , as required under the regulation ) , nor does it make any legal sense from a legal point of view because then , of course , exactly what the Commission wished to avoid will happen , i.e. planning conflicts will result in long-winded disputes .
The Commission is deluding itself if it thinks that it can use Article 39 to recoup what it has failed to obtain during ex-ante evaluation .
How can the Commission be credible vis-à-vis the European citizens if it is unable to implement its own requirements ?
By giving in , the Commission has lost the confidence of many who see sustainable development as a chance for the next generation .
- ( FR ) The French members of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group are very concerned with preserving the natural heritage in general and the environmentally sensitive areas in particular .
We share the desire to protect an environment which it is our duty to pass on intact to our children .
That is a laudable and necessary ambition .
Yet the Commission , ever faithful to its nature and its habits , cannot stop taking every opportunity to overwhelm the states and their citizens with new directives and pernickety little rules , which often bear little relation to real local conditions .
The only result of this kind of overload is to paralyse the economic players a little more each day and to hold back freedom of enterprise .
This happened , for instance , with the CTEs which are designed to turn our farmers into environmental officers , rewarded not by the fruit of their labours but by subsidies paid in return for their submission to the Gosplan of Brussels .
We therefore categorically reject Mrs Jackson ' s proposal to link payments from the Structural Funds to the transposing by Member States of EU environmental legislation .
That would be a very dangerous mixture of unrelated things and would pave the way to the generalised practice of financial blackmail , a blackmail that is all the more inadmissible in that , as we must remember , the money from the Structural Funds remains above all the product of the contributions the Member States pay into the EU budget .
Malmström report ( A5-0060 / 2000 )
Mr President , I would like , as a matter of priority , to thank Parliament for lending its support to aid for Mongolia .
I hope this will lead to a much more proactive approach on the part of the Commission , as I have not seen a sign of this yet .
It is unacceptable for the Commission only to take a lukewarm interest in a country which probably has no mineral resources , which , in terms of human rights , is doing a relatively good job in the region , which is small and very much agriculture-based .
It may not occupy centre stage but is very needy despite this .
This Parliament has noticed this and offered its support , and I urge the Commission to take this message extremely seriously and to grant this aid .
While agreeing with some of the concrete concerns expressed in the report about , in particular , women ' s rights , and while approving some amendments which point the way to progress , we do not intend to support the European Union ' s claim that ' respect for , and promotion of , human rights and fundamental freedoms ... constitute fundamental objectives of EU foreign policy ' .
Within the European Union , one of the fundamental rights of man , the right to make an adequate living from his labour , is being trampled underfoot for nearly 20 million men and women .
A fairly substantial proportion of immigrant workers , those regarded as not having the proper papers , is being deprived of any legal existence .
All the while , outside the European Union , several of its Member States , among the most powerful of them , are supporting , arming and financing vile dictatorships , especially in their former colonial empire .
And what about that manifestation of respect for human rights that took the form , for several weeks , of bombing Kosovo and Serbia ?
Under these circumstances , we are abstaining from the vote on this report .
- ( FR ) In this joint debate on human rights , the report under consideration here analyses the instruments available to the Union to promote these rights in the world and their concrete application between 1 June 1998 and 30 June 1999 .
As you know , the EU ' s international action to promote and protect human rights is based on several instruments , including the CFSP and development cooperation .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , the European Union has become more visible on the international stage thanks to the appointment of a CFSP High Representative , in the person of Javier Solana .
The Treaty of Amsterdam has made respect for human rights one of the main objectives of the EU ' s common foreign and security policy .
The European Union has many instruments available in this field .
There are the common strategies ( a new instrument created since the Treaty of Amsterdam and designed to enhance the overall coherence of EU action at international level ) , the common positions ( which define the EU ' s approach to a particular matter ) and the common actions ( which relate to certain specific situations and involve immediate reactions , on the model of humanitarian aid ) .
There are also specific and horizontal actions relating to a given policy .
They include , in particular , the fight to abolish the death penalty .
Finally , what is known as the ' human rights ' clause , which has been incorporated into most cooperation and development agreements with third countries since the 1990s , enables the EU to keep up the pressure , in respect of human rights , on the countries with which it is linked .
This clause does not change the fundamental nature of these agreements but does enable both parties to reaffirm respect for certain common values and principles as the precondition for any form of cooperation , economic or other .
Yet the rapporteur feels that the current European human rights policy is fragmented and needs to be replaced by a coherent common strategy marked by closer interinstitutional cooperation .
Obviously I agree with that .
I think initiatives such as establishing an advisory group to discuss the strategic aspects of human rights activities , comprising representatives of the EU institutions and the Member States , together with human rights specialists , would lead to greater coherence and therefore effectiveness .
In the same context , the proposals that the EU should develop its own indicators to gauge respect for human rights , that a special European Parliament envoy should be nominated for prisoners of conscience and that a human rights website should be launched on the Europarl site on the Internet , are well worth considering .
The report also emphasises that the EU strategy must give priority to systematically abolishing the discrimination suffered by women .
I want to express my unconditional support for that demand !
- The European Parliamentary Labour Party voted against Amendment No 7 because we do not feel that a reference to the supposed ' Echelon ' network is appropriate to this report .
Allegations that such an ' Echelon network ' exists are based on hearsay and circumstantial evidence .
Furthermore , the democratic oversight of national intelligence services is , in any case , primarily a matter for national parliaments .
The United Kingdom has one of the most effective systems of democratic oversight , both political and judicial , of its intelligence services in the world .
Political oversight is exercised by a House of Commons committee , which has full access to documentation .
Moreover , the intelligence operations of third countries , including the United States , operating in cooperation with British intelligence services within the United Kingdom , are also subject to the same democratic oversight .
- British Conservatives are in the forefront of those seeking to improve human rights in many parts of the world .
While there is much in the Malmström resolution that we can support , unfortunately there are significant elements that have been included which we find unacceptable .
For example , we do not share the enthusiasm for an EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
We are sceptical about demands for substantial increases in expenditure and bureaucratic activity and in the role of EC-funded NGOs .
We are concerned that it is minority differences that are stimulated , with little emphasis on integration .
We are concerned at the extension of the concept of human rights to include , for example , domestic violence , which is properly a matter to be handled under other legal instruments .
We are opposed to the introduction of sweeping new categories of eligibility for asylum , which would be open to abuse .
Many of us do not support the abolition of capital punishment in principle .
And we are suspicious about proposals to impose further codes of conduct on business .
While we value the role of the EU in supporting human rights , we believe that human rights regulation and legislation , as in so many areas dealing with the relationship between the citizen and the state , is a matter for national governments , and we do not welcome an extension of EU intervention in this area .
It is for these reasons that British Conservatives have voted against the Malmström resolution .
Haarder report ( A5-0050 / 2000 )
Mr President , I would have liked to have voted for the Haarder report , in spite of certain passages in it , and certain statements , including some to the House , to the effect that there are no rights for the family and that to grant special rights to the family would be a discriminatory , not to say racist , measure .
The supporters of that theory should get their act together .
If there are no specific family rights as such - as the Committee on Women ' s Rights decided , very much against my wishes - then such rights do not exist for the other heterosexual or same-sex communities either and the section on " Lifestyles and types of relationship " has no place in this report .
I myself was lucky enough to grow up in an entirely normal family , consisting of a mother and a father who were not divorced , and I still regard this model of a happy and united family as one of the foundations of our society .
It always deserves to be recognised and to enjoy a special status , despite what some people might feel ; but , given the result of the votes on the amendments , in the end I really could not vote for this report , in particular because paragraph 18 was adopted .
Mr President , I should like to follow on from what Mrs Lulling has just said .
I should like to say that Mr Haarder has made an exemplary effort to bring about a consensus .
As a result , his report was far better than all the previous reports .
However , I and a majority in my Group voted against the report because points 52 - 56 contain quite controversial social policy requirements which may well be supported by the left wing of this House but which have nothing to do with human rights .
The German constitution offers marriage and the family special protection and that has nothing to do with the violation of human rights .
On the contrary , it is a guarantee of human rights .
Marriage and the family form the basis for human rights , as does the right to life .
I therefore believe that these points should have been left out of the human rights report .
If they had , the House would have voted unanimously in favour of this human rights report because , apart from that , Mr Haarder has presented an exemplary piece of work .
Mr President , I note with some surprise that I am bringing up the rear , despite having been the first to request the floor in writing .
Secondly , I should also like to note that , broadly speaking , my Group supports the Haarder report and expressly highlights the fact that there was excellent cooperation with the rapporteur .
At last we have before us a report which duly deals with the subject , the stated period and enforceable rights .
Hence our support in principle .
We voted against it , however , because two points were accepted by the majority of the House ; I refer to points 53 and 54 , which tackle the issue of the family and the excessive support or special support for all alternative types of partnership .
We in the European People ' s Party see the family as a value per se , as the cornerstone of society , if you like , as the heart of society , and cannot accept that alternative life styles should be specially fostered and set above the family , which we see as the nucleus of our society .
However , with these points and the majority decision by Parliament , we now have a situation in points 53 and 54 in which alternative lifestyles enjoy special favour and are placed above the family , as a result of which we find it impossible to vote for the report as a whole .
Mr President , I just wanted to add to what Mr Pirker has said by pointing out that I voted in favour of point 42 of the Haarder report despite the fact that it contains an error because Austria is named in connection with freedom of movement .
The executive committee of the Nationalrat ( National Assembly ) has passed a resolution unanimously adopting the motion for the executive committee to reach an agreement under paragraph 2 of the Law of 3 April 1919 on the resolution by the Federal government of 26 March 1996 and to consider the declarations of renunciation by Felix Habsburg-Lothringen and Karl Ludwig Habsburg-Lothringen as adequate , so that nothing now stands in the way of their being issued with passports which will allow them to enter Austria .
I am therefore able to tell the House that both Felix Habsburg-Lothringen and Karl Ludwig Habsburg-Lothringen have valid passports without any form of restriction .
Neither signed the declarations of renunciation required by the constitutional office , because they have distanced themselves from the house of Habsburg ; instead they merely entered the following statement on their passport applications : " In order to avoid misunderstandings , let it be noted in this connection that I , the applicant , have not and do not question the republican form of government of Austria nor have I ever considered making any manner of claim to sovereignty " .
The call on Austria to take action in relation to freedom of movement is therefore devoid of any substance .
- ( FR ) In adopting the Haarder report on human rights in the European Union , the European Parliament has just committed one of those aberrations that are so common they must be part of its nature .
Among others , it is calling for equal rights of all kinds between same-sex couples and the traditional family , together with lowering the age of consent for same-sex relations .
May I just remind you that Article 16 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that " the family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the State " .
That same article defines the family in terms of the marriage between a man and a woman .
The International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights repeats the same idea by declaring , in Article 10 , that " The widest possible protection and assistance should be accorded to the family , which is the natural and fundamental group unit of society " .
The reason why the traditional family is entitled to this state protection is because it provides a service without price : the renewal of the generations , the perpetuation of society , the education of children and the transmission of values .
That service is a very good reason for granting the family special advantages , reserved to it alone .
By ignoring that vital law , the Haarder report shows that in this respect , as in many others , the European instruments go against not only the nations but also against society itself .
- ( DA ) We support the general recommendations in the report to the Member States regarding compliance with the international conventions on human rights .
We also share the concerns referred to in the report about the situation in certain countries as regards the rights , for example , of asylum seekers , women and children and in connection with minority languages .
However , we oppose the annual report on human rights being used to promote further integration within the EU .
We are not in favour of the new institutional arrangements proposed in the report or in favour of the proposal that the EU should establish a common legal framework and a common policy on refugees and asylum seekers .
We believe that human rights problems should be combated locally and by means of the international human rights institutions and forums which already exist and which are designed for this purpose , for example , the UN and the Council of Europe .
Nor do we support the view that the EU should draw up a new , legally binding EU Charter of Fundamental Rights . Rather , we are of the opinion that such a Charter would create conflicts in relation to the European Convention on Human Rights .
An EU Charter of Fundamental Rights would not in itself help improve the human situation , either at European or international level .
We have , however , chosen to vote in favour of the report in spite of what I have just said , for we think it is extremely important to fight for improved human rights in Europe .
- Concerning the statement in Amendment No 32 by Mr Rack , Mrs Schleicher , Mrs Cederschiöld and Mr Méndez de Vigo , on behalf of the EPP-ED Group , to the Duff / Voggenhuber report on an EU Charter for Fundamental Rights , our Group questions whether , under the present circumstances , it is still necessary for the Union to become a party to the ECHR .
This is an issue which requires deeper analysis .
Overlapping and conflicts between the Court of Justice of the European Communities and the European Court of Human Rights should , in any event , be avoided .
- I believe that this is a good report and deserves support .
However , problems arise in the detail of paragraphs 52 , 53 , 54 and 56 .
I voted for these paragraphs because I agree with the objectives of the rapporteur .
I would , however , like to ensure that my voting intentions are not misinterpreted .
In relation to paragraph 52 I support the right of individual conscience .
In stating this principle I would also like to make it absolutely clear that this in no way implies that I personally support abortion .
With regard to paragraphs 53 , 54 and 56 I oppose discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation .
I would , however , add a few caveats .
Firstly , I do not support the right of gay couples to adopt .
Secondly , I do not support the lowering of the age of consent below 18 years of age .
With these clarifications entered for the record I am happy to vote for Mr Haarder 's report .
- On balance , this is an excellent report with the exception of paragraphs 52 to 56 .
This section is poorly drafted and ambiguous .
It deals with issues that are firmly in the competence of each Member State , and should so remain .
- ( FR ) I want to congratulate our rapporteur , Mr Haarder , on the quality of his report on respect for human rights in the European Union .
I support the general philosophy underlying the document , which aims to consolidate European policy with regard to civil and political rights , but also to the economic , social and cultural rights of EU residents .
Yet I would also like to draw my colleagues ' attention to two requests made in the report , which I find problematic . Paragraph 19 of the report , concerning the protection of national minorities , and paragraph 20 , calling for the ratification of the Charter for Regional and Minority Languages , pose real problems .
We certainly understand the spirit of the rapporteur ' s observations on the need to protect national minorities : it sends out a strong message to some of the candidate countries , especially the Eastern European ones , whose nationals do not all enjoy fundamental rights .
Parliament firmly rejects abuses of fundamental freedoms throughout Europe , as the Haarder report emphasises .
But we regret that it alludes to the rights of ' national minorities ' , an expression that is far more restrictive than the universal concept of ' human rights ' .
Furthermore , we support the idea of an indivisible political community , within which ethnic origin is not eclipsed but regarded as being of secondary importance .
The Republic cannot recognise specific ' minorities ' or ' communities ' : in its view there are only autonomous and free citizens with equal rights .
In view of our convictions we must also express strong reservations about paragraph 20 of the report , which refers to the Charter for Regional and Minority Languages .
Everyone is free to use one or several languages of his or her choice in addition to the language of the Republic and everyone has the right to learn them at school .
But the fact remains that this is a choice and not an obligation .
The Charter is too vague in this respect , which entails the risk of encouraging the formation of regional communities ; that would pose a threat to the unity of the Republic but also , in the long run , to the cohesion of the Union .
I will , nevertheless , vote for Mr Haarder ' s report because of its quality and its underlying philosophy .
- Obviously , we have no objection to a report on human rights being presented to the European Parliament but as all Member States of the European Union are signatories to the European Convention on Human Rights and all citizens are therefore ( even if indirectly ) able to pursue cases of breach of these human rights to a Court of final arbitration , what concerns us is the way in which this report seems to go well beyond the important principles enshrined by the United Nations and the European Court of Human Rights .
It is not the primary function of this parliament to produce extensive and controversial additions to current legislation and extra channels of redress on an assumption that these should automatically be acceptable simply because they have been proposed .
All of us want human rights to be uppermost in the minds of national and European legislators .
In most cases they are .
We do not need this report either to remind us of them or to attempt to push the agenda into areas which are likely to be of great controversy and are likely to achieve counterproductive results instead of an enhancement of human rights already determined .
- ( EL ) Once more , the hypocrisy of the European Union is evident both in the state of , and respect for , human rights within the Union and in its international policy on these matters .
We are particularly worried by the proposals for greater consideration to be given to human rights in the Union ' s foreign policy , not because we underestimate their importance or the need to promote and safeguard them but because experience shows that they are being used selectively .
The European Union turns a blind eye to situations in which human rights are being savagely violated in order to protect its imperialistic interests .
Its attitude towards the Turkish regime is a blatant example .
Elsewhere , the particularly sensitive issue of human rights is being used as an excuse for intervention , even military intervention , so as to impose specific policies and particular courses of action .
The recent and continuing invasions in Kosovo , using the rights of minorities as a pretext , and the unbelievable demands being made on Yugoslavia are a typical example of how military intervention is being advanced as a general principle of international law at the expense of the principle of national sovereignty .
The very policy which the EU and its Member States are pursuing from within is leading to human rights being subverted and becoming dead letter .
The effects of this policy are already visible in the rise of extremist , fascist powers and racist perceptions , and not just in Austria .
The report on combating racism does not demonstrate that the necessary conclusions have been reached .
We therefore condemn the EU ' s attempts to use human rights as a pretext in order to reinforce its anti-grass roots and anti-democratic nature and intervene further to the detriment of the people .
We call on the people to be vigilant and to stop their self-proclaimed saviours trampling on their rights . We also urge them to fight for solutions which will guarantee that their rights are promoted and flourish .
For these reasons , the three Members of the European Parliament of the Greek Communist Party will abstain from voting .
- ( FR ) I want to draw a parallel between the reports by Mrs Ludford and Mr Haarder and the report by Messrs Duff and Voggenhuber .

The European Parliament is proposing to take part in drafting a European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
And why not ?
Nonetheless , we cannot see how this additional document can contribute to the fight for human rights , except by injecting a little more legal confusion .
And , above all , what are we to think of our House ' s concept of these rights ?
We can get an initial sketchy idea from reading the Ludford and Haarder reports : this is a project for a libertarian society , based on rights without obligations , on freedom without responsibilities .
Freedom is not something that can be decreed .
But those who are building Europe seem unaware of that fact : they not only want to bring happiness to the people ex nihilo , regardless of their differences and their aspirations , but , on top of that , they want to establish a society without points of reference , without distinction between what can and cannot be done , a society that believes in hedonism or the culture of death .
Man cannot be regarded as an entity independent of those around him and concerned solely with his immediate well-being .
Certainly he has rights , including , first and foremost the , right which , paradoxically , he is often refused , the right to life , which must be defended and promoted ; but you appear to have forgotten that the human being needs the objective limits necessary to all life in society to be established .
The human being not only needs to be given the means to live , but also , and above all , he needs the reasons to live .
An additional charter , European or not , will certainly not provide them .
- ( NL ) We have consented to the Haarder report but would like to make the following observations regarding paragraphs 19 and 20 of the draft report .
Paragraph 19 urges Belgium to sign the Convention for national minorities .
Flanders does not seek to prevent Belgium from ratifying this Convention for national minorities , but it would like to add the proviso that this should be done outside the Belgian constitutional context .
In the Belgian federation , the federal states are equal pursuant to the rules in the constitution .
Not one of them constitutes an actual minority .
Because the Convention does not clearly define the term " national minority " , according to Flanders , it does not apply to the periphery .
For Flanders , " national minority " in such a context can only refer to a minority which has been established within a certain area for centuries , whilst the French-speakers only moved to the periphery some three centuries ago and have since refused to integrate , which is to be expected in the normal course of events ( compare this with the Flemish migration to Wallonia and their perfectly integrated descendants ) .
Moreover , French-speakers living in the periphery , which boasts the language facilities , can count on protection , which is mostly unavailable to real minorities .
So , whoever tries to change the situation in the Brussels periphery using this convention will implicitly put the future of the Belgian constitutional equilibrium at risk and illustrate once again that a European lack of insight into our federal system can lead one to think that we would be better off as the separate Member States of Flanders and Wallonia , rather than as a federal Member State of Belgium .
Without a doubt , French-speaking Belgian MEPs will again use this vote to play political games in Belgium .
We do not wish to participate in this and would emphatically disassociate ourselves from this kind of practice .
Moreover , we regret that in paragraph 5 of the Ludford report , the same text was adopted for racism and xenophobia .
In the same light , Flanders would like to make it clear that the Charter for Regional and Minority Languages , as referred to in paragraph 20 of the Haarder report , does not pertain to French in the periphery but , for example , to the Limburg dialect ( recognised in the application of this Charter in the Netherlands ) or to the Arel German dialect in the Province of Luxembourg .
- ( IT ) Quite apart from the approval or rejection of amendments and the removal or amendment of paragraphs , we were disgusted to find in an annual report of the European Parliament on such a sensitive and urgent matter as human rights , the recommendation " not to imprison child abusers , except as a last resort " , and a call for the Member States to " lower the age-of-consent for homosexual relations " .
We must fight against pornography , against increasingly widespread child abuse , against male and female prostitution and against sex tourism , which inevitably leads to suffering on the part of children .
We must fight against discrimination and psychological and other forms of abuse in the spheres of work , information , politics and the family , which is again at the centre of the debate at a time when children are being transformed into mere objects to satisfy the egotism of those who , having relinquished all other values , are attempting to satisfy their egos and their desire to possess with " technological " motherhood or fatherhood .
We utterly reject a resolution which cancels out its positive points with such abominations , and we are sounding the alarm bells in dismay . If you continue along this path , you will destroy the European Union and go against the wishes of the great majority of its citizens .
- ( FR ) I want to explain the reasons underlying my rejection of the annual report on respect for human rights in the European Union .
Two of the provisions in that text call on a number of countries , including France , to ratify the European Framework Convention for the protection of national minorities and the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages without delay .
First of all , I really must dispel a misunderstanding that is tainting the whole debate about regional languages ; the purpose is certainly not to forbid whomsoever it be from speaking , teaching or promoting a minority or regional language of whatever kind .
Insofar as learning or using these languages remains a personal choice , I , for my part , am in favour of any measure to promote their conservation and transmission , since they form part of the cultural heritage of the nations .
I have voted against the Haarder report because , in calling for the ratification of the European Framework Convention for the protection of national minorities and the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages , it is seeking to promote a concept of European integration that is based on a vision to which I cannot subscribe .
According to that concept , the individual has particular rights based on his membership of a territorial , ethnic or religious entity , while the community constitutes the key means of mediating between the individual and the right he is claiming .
Whilst , at first sight , recognition of the community may seem a factor that protects the integration of minorities , in fact , however , it is a strong factor of social segregation and regression ( you need only think of the situation of young Turkish or Maghreb girls , who are excluded from the emancipating benefits of ethnically mixed schooling , who are held back by archaic rules on the status of women ) .
Similarly , while recognition of a special status for these communities may seem to protect the weakest and most destitute , on the contrary , it in fact produces a social compartmentalisation which the triumphant march of liberalism can turn to its advantage .
Moreover , while it is true that enlargement of the European Union means we must take account of the special situation of certain national minorities , nonetheless the community-based solution offers no future prospects whatsoever for population groups who are under threat or oppressed .
On the contrary , recent history has shown how the exacerbation of the sense of belonging to a particular community can trigger the resurgence of ancient ethnic disputes and lead to fratricidal conflicts .
Rather than this concept , I prefer the universalist vision of a republican Europe in which each individual as such fully and actively exercises his rights and freedoms .
I prefer a Europe which offers a chance of integration to all those who subscribe to its common values , whether they proclaim their religious identity or practise no religion , whether they speak the language of their ancestors or have chosen to transcend their roots .
That Europe affirms the primacy of a principle not found in the Haarder report , the secular principle , which contains and synthesises all the other freedoms : right to respect for private life , freedom of conscience and religion , freedom of expression and association .
The Republic of Europe remains to be built : let us hope that the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which is still at the drafting stage , will constitute the first act and the cornerstone of that Europe .
For the same reasons , I abstained on the report on the fight against racism and xenophobia in the European Union .
. ( SV ) It is incompatible with the subsidiarity principle and proximity principle that the 626 Members of the European Parliament should pronounce upon what vision of the family and what legislation affecting the family the 15 Member States and the twelve candidate states ' national parliaments should arrive at .
In solemn speeches and addresses , such as that given this week in the European Parliament by the Prime Minister of the country currently holding the presidency of the Union , Portugal , the wealth of Europe ' s different cultures , traditions , languages and national identities has been emphasised time after time .
To then state that the family ' s - and , therefore indirectly , children ' s - legal position should be standardised throughout Europe , as proposed in paragraphs 53 and 54 of the present resolution , constitutes a basic offence against the national right to legislate and against the EU ' s own subsidiarity principle , as formulated in the Treaties of Maastricht and Amsterdam .
In our capacity as Swedish Christian Democrats , we shall , of course , be continuing our work in the Swedish Parliament aimed at establishing a basic legal position where the family and marriage between men and women are concerned . This is with a view to making our country ' s legislation more friendly to families and children and out of an active desire to support stable and long-term parental relationships which can meet children ' s needs for security , care and socialisation .
- ( FR ) The annual report on respect for human rights in the European Union is usually taken as an opportunity to display a rather pathetic excess of political correctness .
The champions of the libertarian ideology never miss the chance to list a whole series of demands , each more ludicrous than the next , all wrapped up in proper sentiments .
Perhaps that is what this whole exercise demands .
Alas , the 2000 vintage still goes along with this curious tradition .
Nothing has been left out , from the right of non-EU nationals to vote and stand in municipal and European elections , to guaranteeing ' same-sex couples rights equal to those enjoyed by traditional couples and families ' , to the standardisation of the procedure governing the right of asylum within the European Union , all inspired by the eternal resolve to glean new powers for Brussels .
As a member of the Committee on Women ' s Rights , I shall confine myself to emphasising the equality between men and women on the one hand , and the importance of the family on the other .
While the persistence of discrimination between men and women , with regard to pay for example , is unacceptable , to set men against women , as some feminist organisations do , would be sterile and put social cohesion at risk .
We therefore categorically reject any policy of quotas or positive discrimination , those pet themes of political correctness .
As we put it in Brussels on 1 March , that kind of policy would reflect a profound contempt for women : women should gain access to political or administrative posts not through the mechanical workings of some form of quota but through the recognition of their merits and abilities .
Women have a specific role to play in society : they have a vital family role to play in the procreation of the new generations that are essential to the survival of society , a role to play in educating the young ; they have an economic role , as mother of the family , but also a role within family enterprises ( family holdings , businesses , SMEs ) .
This role has been downgraded for far too long , although it is a key role .
On the one hand , that implies giving the wives of self-employed workers who play a part in the family business a stable status and , on the other hand , recognising the economic and social role of the mother .
It also implies enabling women to reconcile family life with working life , giving all women the chance to make a genuine choice : how many women have been forced by economic constraints only to have two children when they would have liked three ?
How many of them have been forced to devote more time to their professional life than they would have wished ?
That kind of policy would mean giving the family its due place .
But this report is an extremely dangerous all-out attack on the family .
It calls for equal rights for same-sex couples and traditional couples and families , forgetting the vital role the family plays in social cohesion .
Let us make no mistake : everyone leads the private life they want ; there can be no question of secret policing .
However , same-sex couples as such are of no use to society , they are sterile and can only lead to a sterile society ; so society does not have to recognise them and grant them rights : it should ignore them .
The family , on the contrary , is the community on which society is based and that ensures its stability .
Its utility resides in the fact that it provides the most stable framework possible for creating new generations , for their education , and therefore for the continuity of mankind .
Even now , with the strong backing of certain European resolutions and under pressure from action groups , there are some who are preparing to recognise the right of same-sex couples to adopt children .
Just imagine the psychological future of children with two fathers and no mother , or two mothers and no father !
If it is to fulfil its potential , a child needs a father and a mother , a stable family .
In face of the culture of death , it is our duty to stand up for the culture of life .
We believe in an exalted idea of the dignity of man , whoever he may be , without discrimination , from the moment of conception to his natural death .
That means breaking with the materialistic and individualistic view of man and believing that there is something sacred in each individual , which is the foundation of human dignity .
Only then can we effectively and consistently ban human cloning or discrimination on the basis of genetic inheritance , a discrimination suffered far too often by , for instance , Down ' s syndrome babies , in the name of what seem to be the best of intentions .
It is only at that price that we can reject the unacceptable hypocrisy of chatting peacefully about human rights while closing our eyes to an economic and commercial system which , in the name of the dogma of free trade , encourages child exploitation in many third world countries .
And then we will be able to move away from a policy of minorities , the legacy of an individualist thinking that is a threat to a peaceful society , away from an ideology of minorities that is a new expression of the class war , that disregards the profound unity of the human family and seeks to establish superficial divisions based on race , sexual mores , age or ethnicity and demand specific rights for each of them .
Man is neither a social security number nor a pawn on a social and economic chessboard to be manipulated at will and discarded when no longer of use .
He is worth much more than that : every man is a sacred history .
- ( NL ) The SP MEPs Anne Van Lancker and Kathleen Van Brempt have abstained from the vote on paragraphs 19 and 20 of the resolution on respect for human rights in the European Union , in which Belgium is urged to ratify the 1995 European Framework Convention for the protection of national minorities and the 1998 European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages .
" We fully subscribe to the international agreements to protect minorities and minority languages .
However , we cannot tolerate international agreements of this kind being used by certain groups in Belgium to their advantage in order to undermine the language legislation which guarantees the tolerant co-existence of the three language communities " .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was adjourned at 2.11 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Western Sahara
The next item is the debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0246 / 2000 by Mrs González Álvarez and others on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left ;
B5-0253 / 2000 by Mr Sánchez García and others on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ;
B5-0262 / 2000 by Mr Carnero González and others on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ;
B5-0272 / 2000 by Mrs Schröder and others on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance ;
B5-0278 / 2000 by Mr Salafranca Sánchez Neyra and others on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats
on the Western Sahara .
Mr President , this Parliament has long been calling for compliance with the United Nations resolutions and for the European Union , that is the Commission and the Council , to become more deeply involved in solving the Sahrawi problem . Although we are going to vote in favour of this resolution - which I regard as a good consensus resolution , calling for the obvious once again - I would perhaps have worded certain points differently .
I refer to the statement that both parties , Morocco and Western Sahara , must make equal efforts to resolve the conflict .
We believe there should be more emphasis on asking Morocco to concentrate its political will on resolving the conflict , because the Sahrawis have demonstrated time and again that they want it finally resolved .
They have released prisoners and accepted the United Nations rulings on eligible voters . It is the Moroccan Government that has been putting obstacles in the way of resolving the conflict .
The latest obstacle to delay this referendum indefinitely has been the introduction of 76 000 appeals to the United Nations from possible voters in the referendum on Western Sahara .
If obstacles continue to be put in the way , we may be responsible for a more serious conflict .
Some people are shocked that the Sahrawi people are now saying they are left with no alternative but to take up arms again .
I am not shocked .
I can understand it . It is a solution nobody wants , of course , but it is one we are forcing them into .
Mr President , the European Union - and Parliament within it , of course - must strive to avoid a new conflict in an area which is already troubled enough .
We do not want Western Sahara to become another East Timor , Mr President ,
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are circumstances which make Western Sahara a highly topical issue and they are relevant this evening .
The first is the United Nations Security Council ' s urgent resolution of 29 February , which agreed to extend the MINURSO mandate to the end of May .
Secondly , there is the food crisis facing the Sahrawi refugees in the desert camps .
Mention must be made of serious incidents which have recently occurred in the occupied territories of Western Sahara , where pro-referendum demonstrations have been suppressed by the Moroccan authorities .
Mention must also be made of the visit the Maghreb Delegation will be making to Morocco next week and the King of Morocco ' s favourable attitude to the European Parliament visiting the territory of Western Sahara for the first time .
The instability that could become endemic in this part of Africa could affect some of the outermost Community regions , like my region , the Canary Islands . Our citizens want a peaceful solution to the conflict in Western Sahara and they want the Sahrawi people to hold the referendum under conditions of freedom , transparency and equality .
And finally , one of the objectives of the European Union ' s common foreign and security policy is the maintenance of peace and the strengthening of international security .
And here the High Representative for the CFSP , Mr Solana , ought to play a more active role in achieving adequate guarantees for the Sahrawi people through an active presence and direct participation in the stages of the peace process and the referendum .
That is why we support the motion for a resolution .
Mr President , first we must express our concern for the Sahrawi people , many of whom have experienced long years of exile and suffering .
Solving their problem means respecting the deadlines for holding the referendum that has been postponed again and again .
If there were to be another postponement it would seriously aggravate the problem .
Stability , security and peace in the Maghreb region depend on this referendum taking place .
For the referendum to lead to the fulfilment of those objectives , however , the preparatory work must be done with great care , especially the correct compilation of the full electoral roll , which has still not been achieved , and strict fulfilment of the criteria governing its compilation must be insisted on .
The European Union must fully assume its role of mediator in this process , which is important not just for the region itself , but also for the whole of Europe , and especially for certain countries .
It must carry out that role by , amongst other things , supporting the decisions of the United Nations and ensuring that the process reaches a conclusion in total transparency and with maximum guarantees , complete probity and respect for democracy .
Mr President , after the vote in East Timor , the process of self-determination in Western Sahara is the last one outstanding in the world .
But it is a process of self-determination which grows more complicated by the day , as highlighted last week by news of the repression taking place in the occupied territories of Western Sahara .
On the proper conclusion of this process of self-determination depend the stability , peace and indeed the economic integration and development of the whole Maghreb .
I would even say that the transition to full democracy apparently under way in the Kingdom of Morocco also depends on it .
From our point of view , the culmination of the process of self-determination in Western Sahara lies in the application of the peace plan from the United Nations and the Organisation for African Unity .
And the core of that peace plan is precisely the holding of a free and fair referendum on self-determination , in which voters can make their choice without any kind of pressure .
In spite of the efforts of the United Nations , in spite of MINURSO , in spite of the progress that has been made in compiling the electoral roll , the referendum keeps being postponed virtually sine die .
Of course , the delay of the referendum is essentially the responsibility of one of the parties , which is failing to finalise acceptance of the terms under which the said referendum is to take place .
For that to happen , for self-determination to become a reality in Western Sahara in the short term , the available instruments must be used : the Houston Agreements and the efforts of James Baker .
Direct dialogue between the parties is essential .
The Kingdom of Morocco and the Polisario Front must restore the direct dialogue which existed at the end of the 1980 ' s and which led to the Houston Agreements .
The European Union should make it a priority to help keep that process going , to help it succeed .
Regrettably , the Union has not acted in the most appropriate way up to now .
Much has been said , but little has actually been done .
The most important point in the resolution we are going to adopt here today is the European Parliament ' s call to the Council to take common action , as provided for in the Treaty on European Union , on Western Sahara .
And that means statements and instruments , making all the instruments we have at our disposal available to help bring this process of self-determination to a satisfactory conclusion , assist Mr Baker , support the United Nations , call on the parties to respect the terms of the international resolutions and set in motion essential humanitarian cooperation .
That is how we can contribute to achieving a priority objective : peace in the Maghreb .
Self-determination in Western Sahara is essential for that .
Mr President , I should like on behalf of my Group to voice our serious concern at the current situation in the Western Sahara to the European Parliament and , more importantly , the Commission and the Council .
The constant postponement of the referendum on the future of the Western Sahara is unacceptable .
A state of emergency reins in the occupied areas .
At least 56 people have been arrested , including 27 women , for fighting for the right to self-determination .
We call on the government of Morocco to stop repression , lift the state of emergency and permit freedom of expression .
We call on the Council of the EU to vote on joint action which will enable the peace plan to be duly implemented without delay .
The previous involvement of the personal envoy of the UN Secretary General , Mr James Baker , should be used for further mediation work in a bid to implement UN Security Council Resolution No 1292 / 2000 .

We urge the Commission of the EU to ensure immediately that the people in the refugee camps have a secure supply of food .
The supply situation has deteriorated dramatically .
All the stocks of basic foodstuffs have been used up .
According to information from various NGOs , food has been rationed since December and various countries have withdrawn bilateral aid .
The World Food Programme relies on the EU ; as a result , ECHO must now provide 80 % of the food aid originally intended as supplementary aid .
The Council and the Commission must therefore immediately exert pressure on the UN to improve the food situation .
The Commission must set up a financial safety fund for the next three months .
Is it right that , due to staff problems at ECHO and the lack of a new global plan , no food aid is being supplied at present ?
Anything approved today will not be implemented until next August at the earliest , but people cannot be left without aid for such a long period unless they are supposed to starve to death .
We had a similarly dramatic situation a year ago in East Timor .
A referendum was held .
A state of emergency followed .
Only then did international aid react ; no preventative action was taken in order to avoid conflict .
That is why we call on the Commission and the Council to act before it is too late .
Mr President , to begin with , I want to agree with most of what has been said in this regard , especially by my colleague , Mrs González Álvarez .
I also want to take the opportunity to appeal to the Council .
As I understand it , Portugal does not intend , during its presidency , to take any initiatives on this issue .
I would therefore appeal to France do so in the course of its own forthcoming presidency and , last but not least ( and if nothing has happened by then ) , to my own country , Sweden , to take measures during its own presidency with a view to achieving a peaceful resolution of this conflict after all these years .
I am also particularly glad that Commissioner Nielson is present here today .
I hope that we shall be able relatively soon to have a meeting in connection with what was stated here in the European Parliament by German aid organisations the other day , namely that refugees in the camps are in danger of starving and that infant mortality and deaths in childbirth have already increased by an alarming amount in recent months .
ECHO has assumed the major responsibility of constantly providing for the refugees and , whenever this organisation wavers , the voluntary organisations are left powerless .
They have ceased to provide aid and there is no effective coordination .
I really would appeal to Commissioner Nielson to act quickly .
I would also appeal to the chairman and members of the Committee on Budgets to deal with this issue quickly .
I cannot think of anything worse than languishing for 25 years among the sand dunes and being taken in by referenda year upon year , only then to starve to death .
Mr President , the Western Sahara issue is , unfortunately , familiar .
It is one of the few legacies of colonialism still surviving in the year 2000 . Morocco is not complying with the United Nations resolutions .
A referendum should have been held years ago , as it was in other countries such as East Timor , Latvia and other places where the right to self-determination has been exercised .
The position of the European Parliament has always been to support , not the independence of the Sahrawi , but the right of the Sahrawi people to freely express their views .
Even today , this right is still being suppressed , under various different pretexts .
Meanwhile , the situation of the Sahrawi people has become serious : even their physical survival is under threat .
In spite of this , they have kept up good relations with Morocco , continuing to conclude trade agreements in various different fields - from fisheries to citrus fruit - while the violation of human rights and of the right to self-determination is being completely disregarded .
I therefore call for all possible steps to be taken to ensure that the right to self-determination of the Sahrawi people is recognised , if necessary through the cooling of relations with Morocco , which , moreover , has already spent too much money fighting this principle .
Mr President , the peace process in the Western Sahara initiated and led by the Secretary-General of the United Nations looked promising .
The eligible voters were identified thanks to the effective UN mission , MINURSO .
But the Moroccan Government has artificially stepped up the number of appeals concerning voters , a clear sign that it wants to prevent the holding of the referendum on self-determination .
Nor has it confined itself to these delaying tactics .
In recent weeks it has embarked on violent repression of the Sahrawi people , in the form of arrests , disappearances and the introduction of a real state of siege in the occupied territories .
In its motion for a resolution , my Group reaffirms the right of the Sahrawi people to self-determination and calls on Morocco to call an end to all forms of repression and to apply in full the Houston Agreements to which it has subscribed .
The United Nations must do its utmost to ensure that the referendum is held before the end of 2000 .
I call on the Council and the governments of the Member States , in particular France and Spain , to stop being so accommodating vis-à-vis the Moroccan authorities and to involve themselves more actively in the success of the peace plan and the holding of the referendum , for that is the most appropriate democratic means of achieving a peaceful and lasting settlement of the conflict in Western Sahara .
The Commission is closely following developments in the implementation of the UN Security Council ' s plan to settle the Western Sahara conflict .
Like the Member States of the European Union , it wholeheartedly supports the efforts of the UN Secretary-General and his personal envoy , Mr James Baker , to find a just , equitable and lasting solution for the Western Sahara .
The Commission is aware that the organisation of the referendum is currently affected by problems with the finalisation of the list of voters and it hopes that Mr Baker ' s visit to the region will bring the desired breakthrough .
As for humanitarian aid , the Commission channelled more than EUR 61 million through NGO partners to provide Sahrawi refugees in the Tindouf region with food , medical and sanitary aid between 1993 and 1999 , and even though the circumstances for delivering humanitarian aid in this case are quite difficult , this will not stop us from continuing our support .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Nielson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
Mozambique
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0244 / 2000 by Mr Miranda and others on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left ;
B5-0251 / 2000 by Mr Queiró and Mr Ribeiro i Castro on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group ;
B5-0254 / 2000 by Mr van den Bos on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ;
B5-0263 / 2000 by Mrs Carrilho and others on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ;
B5-0276 / 2000 by Mr Rod and others on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance ;
B5-0279 / 2000 by Mrs Maij-Weggen and others on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats
on the floods in Mozambique .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in our mind ' s eye we can still see the tragic pictures from Mozambique , the results of a rare sequence of extremely harsh natural events . We are also very much aware of how slow the response to this massive disaster has been .
We regard the resolution we will be voting on today as the continuation of an emergency debate which took place at the mini-session in Brussels immediately following these events .
We concur with all the points mentioned here : the need to keep on mobilising resources for the rescue and relief of the people who have been displaced , to carry out an inventory of the effects of the crisis as a whole and to coordinate and unite efforts to prevent the foreseeable health consequences , replant farm crops and reconstruct the country .
But we alone should not bear the blame for the delay .
We should also be wondering what other countries in other continents are doing .
What about India and Pakistan , which have substantial resources and large communities resident in Mozambique ?
And what are the nearby African countries doing ?
Angola , for example , has powerful armed forces which could have given valuable assistance , or Zimbabwe , just next door , or Nigeria , which has an operational air force .
These questions must also be asked given the imminence of the approaching European Union / Africa Summit , so that we can communicate better on this issue out of common concern for solidarity .
I must also say that we are sensitive to the issue of external debt forgiveness , but we identify more with the text set out in the joint resolution .
As a Christian Democrat , I am sensitive to the appeals of the Catholic Church in this jubilee year for positive handling of the external debt of the third world as a whole .
But we need to make a distinction between the different situations of many African countries .
There are cases where the fortunes accumulated by the leaders of these countries would be enough to pay off their external debt , so these are sensitive issues which need to be carefully considered .
We know this is not the situation in Mozambique , as poor as the country may be .
However , we think the wording of the joint motion for a resolution is correct , and I must say right away that we agree with the position taken by the Portuguese government , which is to immediately write off half of Mozambique ' s external debt .
Mr President , the media have portrayed a distorted image of the disaster which struck Mozambique .
Whilst the world witnessed scenes of desperate people on rooftops and in trees , aid had already got under way off camera .
At least gripping images have a mobilising effect on public opinion and provide a strong base for aid .
But the other side of the coin is that disasters which do not reach the news , to all intents and purposes , do not exist .
This is why it is essential that international aid is not led by the media but only by the people in need .
According to the organisations involved , despite everything , aid has got under way relatively quickly .
This may be true , but this does not apply to the primary rescue operations .
It was not the Commission which was responsible for this , but the governments .
Aircraft , helicopters , food and medicine must be available on demand and at a moment ' s notice .
And I mean literally at a moment ' s notice .
The waiting period should only be determined by the distance involved , not the red tape .
There is a need for much better cooperation between the aid organisations and the armed forces to this end .
It is commendable that Commissioner Nielson travelled to Mozambique so quickly .
I would be interested to hear about his trip and what he thinks of the criticism of the government ?
And what about the criticism concerning coordination ?
The 25 million aid package is sufficient for now , but will need to be increased at a later date .
Mozambique has now entered an extremely difficult phase .
Diseases must be kept at bay , the landmines littering the area must be cleared and re-housing schemes must be established .
For many Mozambicans , the misery is only just starting , now that the media have packed up and moved on .
It is therefore up to us , Parliament , the Council and the Commission , to closely monitor the victims ourselves .
Mr President , we all know that the consequences of the tragic flood disaster in Mozambique would have been less serious if the more developed countries , and especially the countries of the European Union , which has a special responsibility for the former Portuguese colony , had reacted immediately by sending the necessary resources , especially helicopters , to help the population .
For days there were only seven helicopters trying to bring those people the aid they need , while governments remained silent and the whole world looked on , anguished and appalled .
The European Union must never behave like this again .
To make what amends it can , it must now provide Mozambique with all the aid necessary to combat disease , feed the people and reconstruct the country materially , if necessary , going beyond the restrictive and anti-European limits laid down in the selfish budget agreements of Agenda 2000 .
In particular the Member States must cancel their share of Mozambique ' s external debt .
Mr President , the recent floods in Mozambique , followed by the hurricane , have thrown the country into complete disarray , at a time when it was just about recovering from the political atrocities of the past .
It is sad that this should happen to one of the world ' s poorest countries as well .
Unfortunately , aid got under way relatively late in the day , at least according to the reports .
Those images of people perched on rooftops and in trees , which were transmitted across the world , have naturally caused questions to be directed at the international community and the NGOs regarding the speed of action required to alleviate the worst of the emergency situation .
Moreover , the world also witnessed how quickly South African helicopters were on the scene and how they saved a few thousand people as a result . I think it would be fitting to pay tribute to them for these efforts .
Meanwhile , we have heard from Commissioner Nielson that a great deal more was done than was made known .
We appreciate the fact that he travelled to Mozambique in person to assess the situation and to see what the EU could do in the way of aid .
In my opinion , the programme which has now been drawn up in conjunction with the Mozambique government is a sound one , also because it is phased .
It will first address emergency aid , then housing and infrastructure and after that structural aid in order to get the affected areas back on their feet .
The funding which has been set aside for this project is considerable .
I have heard that the international community has put one hundred million on the table in the meantime , and that the EU has made a disproportionate contribution to this .
Moreover , I heard this morning that debts have most definitely been deferred but that it is to be examined how this will be dealt with in future .
It would be good , of course , if these debts were actually suspended , for then the Mozambique government could use the funds for this purpose .
Mr President , I am left with an uncomfortable feeling . The images which have been broadcast obviously do not reflect reality .
Mr Van den Bos has also pointed this out .
This means that the European Commission should consider whether the international intervention power which Mr Solana is busy setting up should not be supplemented with a kind of European intervention power for humanitarian aid , which acts quickly and which can also inform the media quickly on the work that is being done .
The images were inadequate , the disaster is very sad indeed , but the European Union did not stand idly by , as was suggested .
We most definitely provided support .
I think it is only fair to clarify this here .
Mr President , rarely has the European Parliament devoted its attention to a natural disaster in circumstances so dramatic and so deserving of our support .
It is not just the extent of this disaster , and its expression in terms of the number of dead , communities stranded , children with nothing to eat , the destruction of homes and property , or the belated aid many have spoken of today , that arouse our sympathy .
It is the irony of a people who , after securing their independence and surviving a war , had the ability and intelligence to choose peace and democracy , and began to rebuild their infrastructure and pursue development , only to be met with a natural tragedy of these proportions , forcing it to start all over again in many areas .
The strengthening of humanitarian aid , debt forgiveness for one of the poorest peoples in the world and the holding of the international conference provided for in the resolution , which I hope we will approve , is the least we can do for these people who will never give up their African journey towards peace , democracy and development .
As you are aware , I visited Mozambique on 2 and 3 March , together with the Portuguese State Secretary , Mr Amado .
We were able to visit some of the flood-affected areas , including the Chaquelan settlement where more than 28 000 people were already at that moment being assisted , thus witnessing at first hand the consequences of the flood disaster , and also witnessing the immediate effect of some of our assistance .
From the onset of the crisis the Commission has addressed the consequences of the floods in Mozambique in a comprehensive manner .
We have directed our attention to the following areas of concern : immediate relief , resettlement , rehabilitation , macro-economic stability and long-term development .
On the rescue , search and recovery phase : the situation is that the Commission does not have instruments that are geared to this type of intervention .
Member States have the logistical capacity which is needed for these kinds of activities .
For the relief emergency aid and resettlement phase , the Commission has approved two ECHO decisions for a total of EUR 2.7 m for Mozambique , and we are preparing a third decision for EUR 5.5 m .
These cover food aid , water and sanitation , essential relief items as well as the small-scale rehabilitation of essential health infrastructure and preparation for cholera epidemics .
In addition , EUR 1.4 m from the food security budget line have been made available locally to the delegation and the government of Mozambique .
The Commission is planning to fund the delivery of seeds and tools to the peasants to promote replanting as soon as the flood-waters recede .
In addition to the action already funded in Botswana , the Commission is currently carrying out a humanitarian need assessment in Zimbabwe , Zambia and Madagascar .
Turning to the rehabilitation phase , during my visit I announced an initial amount of EUR 21 m in additional funds from the development budget , of which 5 to 10 m will come from the NGO co-financing budget line and the balance from redistribution of earlier EDF funds .
The Commission is insisting on the need for reinforced coordination with the government around the shared comprehensive reconstruction framework .
A donor core group is meeting every week in Maputo with the government at ministerial level .
The EU presidency and the Commission delegation are members of that group .
The Commission intends to contribute to the preparation of the international donor conference that will be convened probably by the end of April .
The Commission will provide its funding for the rehabilitation requirements in strict coordination with EU Member States and the other donors .
As to macro-economic stability and long-term development : proposals intended to help Mozambique maintain macro-economic stability are currently being appraised by the Commission with the government and the World Bank .
Additional resources , up to EUR 15 m , could be made available .
To maintain the rapid growth achieved by Mozambique in recent years , pre-disaster levels of cooperation will be maintained and stepped up .
This will result in disbursements for this purpose estimated at EUR 150 m this year as compared to EUR 100 m last year .
Within the framework of the Community we will contribute EUR 1 bn for debt relief to ACP countries .
Within this , Mozambique figures among the retroactive cases and will be eligible for debt relief under the enhanced HIPC initiative this year .
Concerning coordination with other donors and aid agencies : the Mozambique government , in conjunction with the UN Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance ( OCHA ) , provides the principal platform for coordination of rescue and relief as expressed in the consolidated appeals they have made .
This local ownership of the coordination process should not be challenged by outside donors , at least not as long as it works reasonably well , and this - the UN organisations in Maputo informed us - is in fact the case .
Constraints have been identified in this terrible disaster case .
The magnitude and sudden onset of the flood disaster in Mozambique has left the Commission , as well as Member States and other donors , with the question of whether relief response could not have been speedier , as has also been pointed out in this debate .
I am at present seeing how we can overcome these constraints to humanitarian assistance in order to provide assistance from the Community even more quickly and efficiently than at present .
But it should not be forgotten that this was actually a catastrophe that had many surprising elements , nor was it particularly easy for Member States to mobilise and deploy very sensitive and difficult hardware such as helicopters with extreme rapidity .
This is not easily done .
Finally , I would like to emphasise the figures concerning the international response .
The overall figure of funding for this disaster now stands at about EUR 109 m globally , of which more than EUR 91 m come from the Commission and the EU Member States .
It has already been said in this debate that the European response has , relatively speaking , shown that Europe actually cares .
In money terms we have contributed quite well .
This is not the whole answer to the problem , and we will continue to find better and quicker ways of responding .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Nielson .
We all hope that our aid really will help the people get over the worst of it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
Human rights
Mr President , the violation of human rights in Peru is another case in the long list of cases occurring in Latin American countries with the connivance of a complacent United States .
The coming elections offer no democratic guarantees , so it is up to the European Union to act as a reference point in ensuring that the citizens of Peru and the democratic parties of that country receive those guarantees .
In view of what is going on in that country , and in Colombia , Mexico , Ecuador and elsewhere , it seems appropriate for the European Union to establish a permanent human rights observatory for Latin America .
It is not just the euro which must compete with the dollar ; our ethical and political human rights principles must replace the old backyard and gunboat policy the United States is pursuing in the area .
Mr President , Peru has had quite a troubled constitutional life with frequent incursions by the military into civilian life .
After democracy was restored , as a result - certainly - of the activities of the Shining Path terrorist organisation , the democratically-elected President of Peru , Mr Fujimori , carried out a government coup by dissolving Parliament and drawing up a constitution made-to-measure for himself as President .
The European Parliament has already had occasion to condemn this type of action by President Fujimori .
President Fujimori has obviously re-established a degree of calm , if one can call it that , in Peru . But he has continued to keep himself in power by authoritarian means .
In fact I would say that , for many , President Fujimori is no more than the civilian representative of military power exercised indirectly .
Yes , there are still elections in Peru , there are political parties , there are means of communication and there are certain guarantees .
But the guarantees are not complete .
The proof is that three judges from the Constitutional Court were removed for opposing his re-election plans .
That means the guarantees are not complete .
There is no independence of the judiciary or of the legislature .
Secondly , Peru recently withdrew from the jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court for Human Rights , and I think that is a very bad sign for a country .
I think we should ask the Government of Peru to review that decision .
And thirdly , there is still military action going on inside Peru at this moment , frequently creating difficulties for democracy .
Remember that , as a member of the Andean Pact , Peru is bound to the European Union by a democracy clause and the European Community , or more specifically the Community institutions , has a certain responsibility by virtue of that democracy clause to call for the electoral process in Peru to be adapted , as far as possible , to certain essential democratic requirements .
Mr President , as a member of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and also as a Member of the European Parliament from the Basque Country , a land which has supplied a fair number of emigrants to Latin American countries , I want to express my solidarity with all those who fight for human rights to be upheld - not only in Peru , but throughout the world .
And I want to denounce the situation that exists in Peru , a situation which is due not just to the complacency and connivance of the United States , as has been mentioned here , but also to that of plenty of other countries , including European ones , and the hypocrisy which reigns over international politics .
It is well-known - and there is the Carter Foundation report - that access to the media must be provided as soon as possible , media bias must be ended , harassment of candidates and observers in local elections must be ended , improper use of public funds for electoral advantage must be exposed , there must be transparency in electoral administration and access for all parties to the elections and the rights of independent electoral observers must be guaranteed .
In this respect , the reference just now to a permanent human rights observatory for Latin America seems to me entirely appropriate .
Mr President , our primary duty in the struggle to protect the civilian population , refugees and prisoners of war in Chechnya is to do everything to finally bring the war in Chechnya to an end .
This should also be uppermost in the mind of the parliamentary delegation due to travel to the war zone over the coming weeks .
Only a political solution to all the issues connected with the conflict and reconstruction of the region will guarantee a change in the awful situation faced by the people in the towns and villages which have been destroyed , in the refugee camps and in the prisoner of war camps .
I should also like to warn against judging just one side and apportioning blame solely to the Russian side .
It is clear , including from the report by the Council of Europe delegation , that human rights have been violated and war crimes committed by all the warring factions .
They must be investigated and the guilty must be called consistently to account .
But we should also give the competent Russian authorities the chance to do this themselves .
Mr President , we had a welcome visit yesterday to this Parliament from a delegation from the CIS Parliamentary Assembly .
This gave us a unique opportunity to discuss Russia ' s war with Chechnya face-to-face with other Parliamentarians .
These visitors appealed to us to understand that , in their words , Russia was fighting against terrorism and was not waging a real war , and that this fight against terrorism had been exacerbated by outside arms flows and training camps sponsored by predatory nations jealous of Russia ' s power .
We responded .
Russia is a member of the Council of Europe , and even her need in terms of security to protect her citizens internally from outside assault could not absolve her from her responsibilities under international conventions .
I put the point that the containment by Russia of arms flows from Russia would be a very welcome step forward in terms of shared efforts to combat terrorism .
There are , however , two sides to this political tale of war and suffering , and I think we must seek more strongly to understand the causes of conflict between Russia and Chechnya , so that we can help to stem the flow of human blood more quickly another time .
I suggest no sanctions , no economic sanctions against Russia should be considered at this time .
We have a duty , now that the war is almost over , to have access to victims and to give aid for rehabilitation .
Mr President , I must contradict Mr Markov quite categorically .
It is not apportioning blame to one side to talk of the genocide committed by Russia against the Chechen people , as Lord Judd does in the report by the Parliamentary Assembly delegation of the Council of Europe .
Of course , both sides are guilty of infringements , but Lord Judd ' s diagnosis is pretty unequivocal : genocide .
That is reason enough not to ask Russia to investigate infringements and war crimes .
It would be highly unusual to ask the murderer to investigate himself and we need international bodies to do this .
What we need is the international criminal court and we must bring those responsible to justice .
Of course , we must call on the Russian authorities here but we too must become more involved than previously , because this is not a simple internal matter of state ; it is a question of human rights violations on a massive scale in an area subject to the Human Rights Convention of the Council of Europe , in an area subject to the system of rights and values of the OSCE .
We seem to keep forgetting that the Chechen government was elected under the supervision of the OSCE and that we also need to intercede for this legitimate Chechen government , except that we cannot find this government today , because its representatives are holed up in the mountains fighting for their very survival .
That is why I warn against a pseudo balanced approach .
Naturally , we must condemn infringements on both sides , but we should not confuse the perpetrator of genocide with his victims and that means that we must take good care not only to provide humanitarian aid - that must be done and it is high time that something was done by the EU here - but also to ensure that a political solution is found to the conflict .
A political solution to the conflict cannot be enforced using the arms of the Russian army , because then the war will just keep breaking out in new forms as guerrilla war or as terrorism or as some other form of underground war .
So we need to ensure that a negotiated solution is reached with the elected representatives of the Chechen people .
Today we discussed the right to self-determination in the Western Sahara ; I should like to point out that the Chechen people also has a right to life and we must safeguard the Chechen people ' s right to life , either jointly with Russia or on our own .
We have not yet reached that point , but we did hear how Russian society is currently becoming more radical from an expert this morning .
We interceded for the release of the Russian journalist Mr Babitsky .
He was due to visit the European Parliament today and give us an eye witness account of the situation in Chechnya , but he was not allowed to leave Russia .
He was not allowed to come to Strasbourg because the Russian authorities are frightened of the free and open report of an independent journalist who looks at both sides critically and wished to throw some light on the truth here and reveal the genocide being committed against the Chechen people .
It is a scandal and we cannot accept it .
Freedom of the press for Russia is also a service to the Russian people .
Mr President , it would seem that a war that was started to end terrorism is turning into a situation where a new terrorism is just starting .
It seems to be becoming a permanent phenomenon in the region .
We have condemned the Russian action over the recent months in five separate resolutions .
There has been a certain amount of one-sided thinking in them here and there , which has not made them any more effective .
For example , the idea to use the TACIS programme as a sanction will only lead to ordinary people suffering and has not deterred the Russian government in their policy .
The extension of the war and terrorism is a major threat to us all .
For that reason , we need a Caucasus peace conference , because these problems are not confined to Chechnya .
Secondly , the human rights situation is intolerable , and we therefore need a proper investigation into violations of human rights by all parties .
In addition , speedy and unhindered access to the area on the part of relief organisations must be guaranteed once and for all .
Thirdly , the war must be stopped and talks begun .
And fourthly , Russia ' s active participation in the work against international terrorism and the illegal arms trade is essential .
Finally , the principal rule with respect to refugees is that they should be helped near to where they live and helped to return to their homes .
We should be reminded , however - so as not to be too sanctimonious in all of this - that when Chechen refugees turned to us for help we did not receive them in our own countries as we did on such a large scale with Kosovo .
In this we recognise the short-sightedness of our own policies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we know that Russia ' s international standing has been seriously damaged by the Chechen war .
A full investigation of human rights violations involving international observers is also in Russia ' s political interests .
Except that the Russian government does not appear to be totally convinced of the fact .
How else are we to interpret the fact that the UN envoy Mary Robinson was not granted access to Grozny and the filtration camps .
The agreement which has now been brokered with Mr Kalamanov by the human rights envoy of the Council of Europe , Gil Robles , is a step in the right direction .
But it will only continue to be credible if the two Council of Europe envoys really can work independently and move freely and independently around the country .
We reject and shall not accept any unilateral interpretation of the agreement by the Russian government .
If it should come to the point that the Russian government fails to keep to this agreement , the Member States of the European Union must bring intergovernmental proceedings against Russia before the European Court of Human Rights and ensure that there is an international investigation of the human rights violations , and I cannot but support Mr Paasilinna .
We too are required to put a halt to the expulsion of refugees in our countries , as the German government has done .
We too are required to grant Chechens political asylum in our countries .
It would make a great deal of sense if the proposals by the German government were adopted by all the Member States .
Mr President , although this does not mean that I approve of the policy of the Chechen nationalist leaders , I wish to say on behalf of my colleagues and myself , that we are disgusted at the vile deeds the Russian army has committed in Chechnya .
This is a despicable war , whose prime victims are the people of Chechnya , but also the young Russian soldiers .
We are also appalled , however , at the attitude of the western powers , in particular the European ones .
The British Prime Minister ' s recent visit to Moscow , the way he toadied to the butcher-in-chief Putin , reflect the general attitude of the western powers .
What public opinion sees is a few declarations condemning certain aspects of the war in Chechnya ; what we are actually seeing is political and financial support for the Kremlin .
Any western loans that have not been hijacked by the Yeltsin clan can thus be spent on pursuing the war against Chechnya .
Many of the parties represented here in Parliament form part of governments that are pursuing this policy of conciliation and support .
Under those circumstances , the vote in Parliament can only serve as a fig-leaf for the hypocrisy of the European big powers and their profound complicity with the crimes the Russian leaders have committed in Chechnya .
Freedom of the press in Serbia :
Mr President , having access to independent media in the context of an open and free debate is one of the most important cornerstones of a free and democratic society .
This is something which the world ' s dictators have always known .
All societies and all States which stifle their own press are after one thing only : to silence debate and to extinguish the vital spark of democracy , which is to say the open and free society .
This is now happening every day in Serbia .
The few independent TV and radio stations in Serbia are being harassed and persecuted in order finally to be closed down entirely .
Dissenting voices are silenced .
A desperate , dictatorial leader is oppressing his own people .
Mr Milosevic is threatening Montenegro , attacking the weak opposition in Serbia and infiltrating Kosovo .
Mr Milosevic and his fellow criminals must be removed .
Democracy must be saved .
I therefore want to ask Commissioner Nielson what he and the EU are doing to ensure that Mr Milosevic is brought to justice before the International War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague .
It is to the world ' s shame that Mr Milosevic has not been tried in court for his war crimes and that he is allowed to continue his attacks upon freedom , peace , democracy and the free press .
The people of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are still living in terrible conditions , battered by their own government ' s policy of homicide and suicide , NATO shelling and the embargoes of the international community .
Any democratic opposition is difficult , not only because of suppression by the Serbian authorities but also because of the deprivation suffered by the whole of the population , for which the international community is partly responsible .
The result is yet more conflict and violence .
Today , we want to express our solidarity with the journalists and democrats whose rights have been violated and declare our commitment to fighting the Milosevic Government ' s suppression of the freedom of the press and the freedom of speech .
The Serbian authorities are suppressing newspapers , independent radio stations and any radio stations which acknowledge opposition groups or parties .
I would just like to mention the example of the Studio B operators who , in addition to being pressurised by heavy fines from the authorities , saw their equipment destroyed by hired masked vandals .
In this regard , an appeal has been made to the Serbian authorities , calling upon them to bring their criminal inquiries to a close in order to punish those guilty of crimes , to put an end to the increasing suppression and to amend the recent law limiting the freedom of the media .
We call for economic support from the European Union for the independent press , but also an economic aid programme for Serbia , to assist the entire afflicted population and to help make it possible for the people of Serbia to at last live in peace and to elect a democratic government .
Mr President , I believe that we are all of one mind today as to how this topic should be handled and the way the media are being treated in Serbia .
The situation in Yugoslavia is deteriorating by the day .
In fact , it seems as if Mr Milosevic and his friends are playing a three-way game by means of which they are trying to deregulate anything which can possibly be deregulated .
Tension surrounding Montenegro is mounting .
At Kosovo ' s border , the situation is very unsettled and the regime in Belgrade is creating a climate in which large-scale accidents are likely .
The last few weeks have been marked by a series of repressive measures against the independent media .
This ranged from high fines to direct intimidation .
In addition , there is talk of a kind of internal isolation .
It is increasingly difficult to enter the country .
I experienced this myself a couple of weeks ago when I tried to attend a few conferences of opposition parties in Serbia .
During that weekend , I was refused an entry visa whilst , two weeks prior to this , many international guests had been able to attend that bizarre conference staged by Milosevic .
It shows that every effort is being made to keep out outside influences .
There is also talk of curtailing communication by telephone , e-mail and keeping tabs on written correspondence .
The government seems keen to remove the opposition from local authorities , where they have been entitled to be since the previous local elections .
The new regime can only win the new local elections , expected in May , if the opposition is , in effect , eliminated .
I find this a dangerous game .
Consequently , we would like to see extensive protests against this media repression , but the EU should also look for ways to provide direct support to Serbia ' s independent media .
The latter is a vital lifeline for the opposition which will be mounting campaigns again this spring and which certainly deserves our support , also where the media is concerned .
Mr President , we have started a new round - the umpteenth - in Milosevic ' s war against the free media . So much is clear .
It seems to be heralding the elections in a perverse kind of way .
The campaign has started and anyone who disagrees with him needs to keep their mouths shut .
It is really unacceptable that elections will soon take place - allegedly formal , democratic elections - in a country where the opposition has first been left without any tool to express itself .
It is a trademark of a totalitarian regime which knows all too well that free , independent media are a nuisance and pose a threat , even to a regime such as that of Milosevic .
The EU ' s support - on which we are probably all agreed - can roughly take two forms .
It would be beneficial to support the media in the neighbouring countries : Croatia and a number of other countries have been mentioned .
I am in favour of this .
But it can never replace support provided to the media in Yugoslavia , in Serbia , media which deserve this support .
The EU makes a difference .
The EU has made a difference in the past with its support . It has an obligation to do this in future and should also be given the means to do this .
This is fine within the framework of the new CARA programme , but it is also particularly important that this should happen in two weeks ' time , in conjunction with the Stability Pact .
At the finance conference on the Stability Pact , the European Union can and must commit itself to a number of programmes .
The programmes are ready , the necessity is there ; let us take swift and unambiguous action .
Mr President , whichever way we view the Balkans , in the light of recent atrocities or future events in terms of the Stability Pact , we always seem to come up against this horrifying character of Milosevic and his cronies , people who have a string of crimes against humanity to answer for and who should urgently be taken to the Court of Justice in The Hague .
This crook , this old communist crook , is able to remain in power on account of his virtual monopoly of radio and TV and his oppression of any critical independent alternative , among other factors .
Various actions have been undertaken on the part of the European Union , such as providing independent stations with equipment .
But now that one station after the other is being closed down , the EU will need to act again in consultation with the affected parties .
We just heard that Mr Wiersma was denied a visa to visit the opposition in Belgrade .
It is most peculiar that the European Union is not really aware that we too have this tool at our disposal and that , for example , we should , in fact , deny entry to the EU to the Serbian football hooligans in return , because they are people who take advantage of the Milosevic regime in the most shocking manner .
Now that the Stability Pact will be coming into its own , the help of the neighbouring states will provide a new and sound alternative , especially now that Croatia has experienced a political U-turn .
Alternative reports can be directly provided via stations in Croatia and also in Montenegro .
The Stability Pact can only succeed if Serbia is a democratic constitutional state , not before , and once the criminals have been brought to justice .
As long as Milosevic and his friends can introduce laws which undermine the traditional human rights and human freedoms , as long as this is the case , the outlook for Serbia remains bleak .
It is unfortunate that the internal opposition is so weak and so divided nationally .
The European Union will need to look for powers in Serbia which are not driven by this blinkered nationalism but by values whose observance has also proved to benefit humanity in the European Union .
Mr President , we will gladly support our compromise resolution , especially once the GUE / NGL has pulled out .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is not the first time that we have debated the media in Serbia ; we have been discussing this matter for years .
We should remember that , in October 1998 , once NATO considered that the first planned attack on Serbia in order to help the Kosovars was over , because Milosevic had allegedly given way and allowed unarmed OSCE observers into the country , that it was precisely at this point that this Information Act was issued and began causing so many problems for the independent media : and now we are looking at the result .
It has become clear over the last two years that the media are being increasingly sidelined .
But we have already said that .
How weak must the Milosevic regime really feel , given how it treats the media ?
Apparently he is terrified that the awful truth of his inhumane treatment of all Serbian citizens over the years , even against the Serbs in Serbia , might finally be revealed to the majority of these citizens , terrified that the people might soon deal with Milosevic and his henchmen the way the Romanians dealt with Ceaucescu .
I think he is terrified of this and we should help the media so that they can spread the truth about Milosevic and his regime .
Mr President , apparently , the Milosevic regime is not tired of fighting battles , not by a long shot .
Recently , it has taken systematic action against local stations , in particular .
It does not flinch from using violence in these activities .
Neither do the government-run media shrink from launching a full-blown witch hunt against the country ' s independent media .
They are then termed rather scornfully ' NATO agents ' and ' traitors of the mother country ' .
It is not by chance that the powerful Serbian police apparatus operates mainly at local level , especially in those towns and cities where the opposition emerged victorious in the 1996 local elections .
With the same elections round the corner and parliamentary elections not too far off either , many in Serbia suspect that the Milosevic regime has already launched its own campaign .
The target , regional radio and television stations , is an obvious one from a Milosevic viewpoint .
Anyone in Serbia ' s small and medium-sized towns who wants to see and hear anything other than what is spouted parrot-fashion by the state media based in Belgrade is heavily reliant on these stations .
By the way : the few independent papers that do exist are hard to come by in the provinces .
This once again underlines the significance of a political counter weight on the Serbian air waves .
As can be expected , Serbia ' s dictator is fighting his battle against the as yet independent media in an underhand manner .
Legalistic arguments over missing licences or outstanding financial state payments mask the true political intentions : to silence his own people as much as possible .
What did receive the official seal of approval for the Serbian population , however , were the politically correct pop music stations of Slobo ' s son Marko and daughter Marija .
Given this sad situation , all those in Serbia who stand up for the freedom of the press deserve our support .
This is not just verbal support , but also tangible support in the form of new transmission equipment being provided to the affected stations , following consultation , as stipulated in paragraph 3 of the present joint resolution .
Milosevic ' s willing servants are then welcome to hold on to the confiscated technical equipment .
Situation in Iraq :
Mr President , the situation before us arises from the Iraqi Government ' s refusal to accept United Nations Resolution 1284 .
As things stand at the moment , the Iraqi government is not prepared to accept this resolution , and there is a real danger that when the United Nations Commission responsible for monitoring the destruction of weapons of mass destruction applies for an entrance visa it will be refused .
The British and American Governments have already given it to be understood that , in this case , hostilities would be resumed .
It is therefore possible that , in a few months ' time , we will have a major military clash on our hands , not just the ticking over of long drawn out hostilities as , sadly , is the case even now - the bombs continue to fall periodically - but large-scale bombings within the space of a few weeks .
I feel that we should focus our attention on the possibility of preventing this from happening .
I am sure that the Iraqi Government is prepared to accept Resolution 1284 - a fact confirmed by contact with the Iraqi leaders - but it needs clarification on certain points which are referred to in the Resolution .
It must be made clear that , at the end of the United Nations mission , the embargo will be lifted - not just suspended , but lifted once and for all .
No one will consider rebuilding Iraq if it is obvious that there will only be four months of stability , and that , after that , the embargo could be reimposed without fresh , credible reasons .
We have attempted to besiege Iraq and to force the Iraqi people to change their government through the embargo and we have not succeeded , even though we have been trying for seven and a half years .
Instead of driving the Iraqis to rebel against the regime in power , the embargo has induced them to hostility towards the West , and in any case , has made them incapable of any kind of action .
I feel that it would be more destabilising for the regime to return to a more comfortable situation in terms of trade , to a situation in which the people have at least some hope of happiness , rather than to continue with the embargoes which , at this stage , are not succeeding in overthrowing the regime , but are simply inflicting enormous suffering on the people and , in particular , on Iraqi children .
Iraqis are not going to die of starvation .
There is no famine , but there is an extremely serious health problem : the water and drainage systems have disintegrated and sewage water and drinking water mix , creating dysentery rates which send the infant mortality rate sky high .
The people need more than medicine : they need us to go out there and rebuild their water supply network , their drainage system and their power stations , restoring an adequate quality of life .
I feel that our resolution should also serve to reassure the State of Israel .
We must not forget that Iraq does not possess any nuclear weapons and is not likely to be able to produce any , but it is also true that if it did , its government , or part of it , would use them .
We must therefore make it clear to Israel that a major concern of our policy is the defence of the State of Israel and the right of the State of Israel to exist .
We must draw up a balanced resolution which is acceptable to all the parties involved if we want to avoid the military clash which is lurking over the horizon : not a demagogic declaration , but a political proposal in which Europe takes control in order to protect world peace , exercising its key role in this area with due responsibility .
Mr President , I must confess that I am extremely unhappy that we are not going to vote on this motion today .
With every passing moment , we are rushing towards the danger of a military clash which must be avoided .
I called for the issue to be debated during the last part-session , and I wonder at the fact that a month passed before our socialist friends managed to reach a consensus with us regarding a motion , even though there should not have been any difficulties as we agree on the basic points .
Nevertheless , I realise that it is also important for us to achieve as great a consensus as possible in order to give our governments a firm basis .
However , I call for no more time to be wasted , for I would not like us , as has happened in the past , to once again have to discuss what we should have done to preserve peace once war has already started .
Mr Buttiglione , if I may summarise , you are confirming the note the Chair has received in the meantime , on behalf of your Group , and in agreement with Mr Naïr , to the effect that this resolution will be withdrawn .
But the debate will continue , regardless of what is going to happen in the next part-session in April and which I hope will accord with the political wishes the two of you have expressed here .
So the debate continues and the resolutions are withdrawn .
Mr President , I too am sorry that the vote will not now be taking place .
I am concerned , as are the other speakers , at the plight of the people in Iraq .
One should never forget that the plight of the people in Iraq is being inflicted upon them by their own government .
We should not forget that in January this year Parliament passed a resolution asking that the Kuwaiti prisoners of war still imprisoned in Iraq should be released or at least that details should be given to their families and that there should be compliance with the United Nations resolutions .
That has not happened and we must be quite unequivocal in sending the message to Iraq , and indeed to the people of Kuwait , that we in Europe are not going to forget and are not going to ignore the plight of those people still being improperly imprisoned in Iraq .
We want to make that message as loud and clear and unequivocal as we possibly can .
Mr President , the UN sanctions have become a weapon of mass destruction , claiming at least 200 children 's lives every day .
Dennis Halliday , who resigned from his position as director of the UN humanitarian mission in Iraq in protest at the sanctions , confirms the UNICEF statistics - five to six thousand children die every month as a direct result of the sanctions .
Mary Robinson , the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights , has been speaking out against the sanctions imposed in violation of international law , which prohibits the starving of civilians as a method of warfare .
She says : ' How can you expect me to condemn human rights abuses in Algeria , China and elsewhere when the United Nations themselves are responsible for the situation in Iraq ? '
The UN economic sanctions have denied Iraqis spare parts to restore infrastructure , making water and airborne infectious disease rampant .
Furthermore , the shortage of medical and food aid has made deaths from these treatable diseases epidemic .
The UN estimates that five to six thousand children die unnecessarily each month due to sanctions , even after the UN food for oil programme .
The sanctions constitute relentless lethal force , and innocent Iraqi people caught between opposing forces are paying the price .
It cannot continue .
John Pilger 's documentary two weeks ago on British television showed quite clearly what the situation is , and nobody with an ounce of humanitarian concern in them can ignore this plight and can persecute the innocent people who have no say over Saddam Hussein .
This is ridiculous : a war is being waged against voiceless children basically because the United States , and indeed the British , are supporting this kind of inhumanity to their fellow man .
Mr President , we are spending a few minutes discussing an issue which , although seemingly a long way from Europe , is really close by because , in today ' s world , trouble spots can reverberate throughout the entire world .
It is in the interests of all of us to prevent a new crisis and a new war in Kashmir , because , in the final analysis , it would come down to a military conflict between two countries which are equipped with atomic weapons , which are striving for atomic weapons and which are prepared to acquire atomic weapons .
Whatever the details , whichever way you look at it , it is a damned dangerous situation which we have to avoid .
Without making a value judgement , I think that both countries , India and Pakistan , must exercise extreme restraint .
The one with regard to increasingly frequent violations of its borders and the other with regard to increasingly frequent proven discrimination against sections of the population , especially Muslim sections of the population in India .
I do not want to make an assessment , I do not want to put it on the scales , but both sides are guilty of fanaticism , in this case religious fanaticism and extremism , which is making this trouble spot more and more dangerous .
The European Union - and we have debated human rights , xenophobia and discrimination at length over the past few days - must fight against this extremism with all the means at its disposal wherever it occurs , at home , in the candidate countries or throughout the entire world .
We have to support all available initiatives .
We are not the ones in the hot seat when it comes to taking initiatives .
The United Nations and , without doubt , the United States of America find themselves in this position .
But it is incumbent upon us to state clearly that this conflict needs to be resolved , not exacerbated .
In this sense , Mr President , I consider it important for Europe to raise its voice and call on both countries , both India and Pakistan , to do whatever they can and to offer them both international aid if they consider that it is needed or makes sense in order to resolve this conflict .
What we must not do is keep quiet .
Mr President , I am pleased that we are debating this resolution today even though I would have preferred the ELDR resolution to have been the one we are debating .
India and Pakistan have carried on this conflict for over fifty years now .
There were UN resolutions that called for a plebiscite for the people of Kashmir all that time ago , and still nothing has happened .
It is even more important now that we find a solution , especially as both India and Pakistan are nuclear powers .
If there is another war across that border , I believe it could turn into a nuclear war , and that will be a problem not only for India and Pakistan and the people of Kashmir but for all of us .
That is why I hope India and Pakistan will come to the negotiating table , together with the people of Kashmir .
I would like to see either the European Union or the USA acting as an honest broker , as a mediator , to try to find an end to this dispute .
But whatever happens , the human rights abuses must stop .
We have daily reports of rapes , murder , torture , and a lot of people say , " Oh , this is an exaggeration " .
But when I was in Azad Kashmir and I went to one of the refugee camps a few years ago I was very moved by the first-hand accounts I heard .
I was even more moved when I went into a tent where the women and children were .
I went up to one woman and although we could not speak each other ' s languages we stood there and hugged each other .
That woman was sobbing her heart out .
I could almost touch the pain , really feel the pain of that woman .
She was not acting it , she was not pretending it - nobody goes to a refugee camp for fun .
They were there because they had been tortured , they had been mistreated and they were escaping .
That was not an isolated incident , and it is still happening today .
We must find a solution .
They must come to the negotiating table .
Mr President , I am as delighted as others are that we are having this debate today for the first time in our elected parliament in this session .
It is long overdue , for the reasons which our previous speakers have already underlined .
Relations between India and Pakistan are indeed deteriorating , with Kashmir being a particular bone of contention .
Tensions are also being aggravated by the fact that these two countries are nuclear powers .
Indeed , in the Herald Tribune of Tuesday , March 14 , 2000 , the headline reads : " Nuclear war between India and Pakistan is a real possibility " .
For this reason alone , supported also by the well-known UN resolutions and the reference which has already been made to the constant violation of human rights , Kashmir is no longer a problem that can be swept under the carpet and not debated in this Parliament , as has happened for many years .
It is increasingly an international problem and one where mediation will , in my view , become essential .
So what can we do to bring long-term stability to this volatile region ?
We discussed this issue when we met with members of the US Congress in our normal framework of delegations earlier this year .
The US is in favour of arbitration , but it strikes me that , when President Clinton visits these two countries next week , India should be asked to come to the negotiating table so that , together with Pakistan , it can find a long-term settlement to this Kashmir question .
Equally , the European Union should , when formulating policy towards South-East Asia , raise the profile of this issue in order that we in the Foreign Affairs Committee can have a more substantive reason to have a debate in our Chamber in a few months ' time .
As these two approaches are made , this two-pronged approach by the European Union and the United States is , in my view , the best way to start the process for long-term peace and stability in this region .
Mr President , I am delighted that we can discuss this almost forgotten conflict . It has not been completely forgotten in the sense that political refugees who live in our own towns and neighbourhoods come and talk to us about this problem .
I am then often ashamed at how little influence we can exert as a huge economic power in the political field .
This is why I welcome the debate on this conflict today .
However , we should not just treat it as a conflict between Pakistan and India regarding the respective spheres of influence that the two countries want to see established .
Very often , the people who actually live there are not taken into account . Although the UN resolutions of 1948 and 1949 stipulated that the fate of Kashmir and Jammu should be decided by a referendum under international supervision , this never actually happened .
India and Pakistan were supposed to attempt this on their own , but this only led to a whole raft of small conflicts which - and the previous speakers were right to underline this - have taken on more threatening proportions since both countries have become nuclear powers .
This appears to have awakened world opinion again .
I am convinced that international mediation is desirable and necessary .
I am therefore happy to concur with what Kofi Annan said concerning this matter , but I do hope that this will not prejudice the right to self-determination on the part of the peoples involved .
Mr President . Over a year ago , in February 1999 , there was hope for new relations between India and Pakistan .
In the Lahore declaration , both presidents confirmed their determination to comply with the 1972 Simla agreement .
Unfortunately , the Lahore process came to a standstill during the clash over Kargil between May and July 1999 .
The latest development in Kashmir is worrying .
We condemn the continuing human rights violations , the religious fanaticism , the sabotage and the terrorism .
The cause lies in activities by rebels who are operating across the border , across the line of control from the Pakistani side and systematically attacking unarmed civilians .
India has repeatedly accused the government and Islamabad of backing the guerrillas with technical and military know-how .
Border crossings have to be prevented along a 700 km stretch of country which is hard to monitor .
The political and military situation needs to be further stabilised in order to create a climate for bilateral talks .
The Indian government has already declared that it is prepared to resume negotiations , provided that the demarcation line is strictly adhered to and fundamentalist tendencies are checked .
When US President Clinton visits South-East Asia at the end of March - James Elles referred to this - and if we are to visit India in April as the SAARC delegation of the European Parliament , then the subject of Kashmir will need to go to the top of the agenda .
We must work on achieving a rapprochement between the two neighbouring states , the Islamic state of Pakistan and the multinational state of India .
It is up to Commissioner Patten and the high representative of the Council , Mr Solana , to ensure that the European Union has a chance to distinguish itself as a successful international mediator in conflict situations .
First , on the presidential elections in Peru , the Peruvian authorities invited both the EU presidency and the Commission to send observers to the elections .
A consultation took place between the Commission and the Member States , concluding that the situation does not justify the organisation and deployment of a full EU observation mission .
Some Member States announced , however , that they would be sending observers on a bilateral basis including , in some cases , representatives of their national parliaments .
They are also supporting the mission of observers of the Organisation of American States , led by the former Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala , Mr Eduardo Stein .
On the human rights situation in Chechnya I have the following comments .
The Commission is also deeply concerned about increasing evidence of human rights abuses in Chechnya .
We want Russia to comply with its OSCE / Council of Europe commitments and seek a political settlement , allow independent investigations on reported human rights abuses , improve the climate for an independent press to operate , and address the legitimate requests of humanitarian operators .
These issues are also mentioned in your resolution .
It was exactly these issues I discussed very directly with the Russian Government during my visit to the region at the beginning of February .
The Commission also reiterated this message through Foreign Minister Ivanov during the ministerial troika on 2 March , where we submitted to him a number of concrete proposals including ECHO assessment missions to Chechnya , NGO access and basic requests , visits of EU diplomats to the region before presidential elections to report on civil conditions , the humanitarian situation , alleged human rights abuses and investigations .
We are still waiting for an answer from the Russian authorities on these concrete proposals .
On the media situation in Serbia , the mounting series of actions taken against Studio B by the authorities last week are wholly unacceptable and we deplore them .
The increasing pressure put on the independent media shows just how important those media are .
The European Commission has made great efforts to support the independent media in Serbia .
In December 1999 we approved a EUR 3.3 million programme of support .
We have put aside an emergency envelope of funding which will be able to provide equipment and survival funds for these media , including such television stations as Studio B. The Commission is allocating new personnel for the implementation of media projects , and our contracts with beneficiaries have been streamlined to try and speed up the process of the delivery of grants .
Satellite equipment is being distributed across the region to Croatia , Bosnia-Herzegovina and Macedonia .
The European Commission 's Europe-by-satellite service is continuing its support by making available time on its service for independent TV stations in Serbia to broadcast information which will reach the rest of the region and encourage exchange of programmes .
On Iraq , I have the following comments : the Commission is concerned about the unilateral Iraqi decision to oppose the acceptance of UN Security Council resolution 1284 and its subsequent delaying of the operation of the new monitoring instrument UNMOVIC and the easing of the sanction regime .
This will only prolong the crisis in Iraq . Oil for food remains the best short-term option to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi population .
In the longer term , the economic and social situation in Iraq can only be improved by increased economic activities stimulated by lifting sanctions .
Ways should be pursued to engage the Iraqi government in a dialogue on the implementation of UN Security Council resolutions which might lead to a gradual easing of sanctions .
But let us be clear - the key to the lifting of sanctions lies with the Iraqis .
The Commission has , since the Gulf War in 1991 , been the major donor of humanitarian aid to Iraq , to the tune of over EUR 242 million .
Another EUR 8.6 million is allocated from the 2000 ECHO budget .
The Commission is , however , concerned about the restrictions imposed by the Iraqi Government on NGO operations , which may jeopardise the implementation of ECHO financed humanitarian aid programmes in Iraq .
Finally , Mr President , on the situation in Jammu and Kashmir , the Commission welcomes the European Parliament 's deep concern regarding the Kashmir conflict reflected in the different draft resolutions .
The international community 's concern for the region is a legitimate one , particularly as both sides possess nuclear weapons and as dialogue between them has , at this stage , effectively broken down .
Precisely because of this impasse and the high risks involved , third parties must adopt a balanced approach .
Third parties may urge both sides to de-escalate military confrontation in a structured way and resume comprehensive dialogue with a view to relaunching the Lahore peace process .
Pakistan should be asked to put a stop to infiltration of paramilitary personnel crossing over from their side of the line of control .
India should be encouraged to look for and explore the full potential towards internal political solutions to meet the expectations of the Jammu and Kashmir populations in line with the possibility for enhanced autonomy as enshrined in its constitution .
The Commission believes that a stand on the issue should take the present extreme sensitivity of the situation into account , especially with a view to the upcoming EU summit with India , where Kashmir will certainly be discussed .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Nielson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m. , except on the situation in Iraq , as agreed .
Combatting organised crime
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0248 / 2000 by Mr Di Lello Finuoli , Mr Manisco and Mr Papayannakis , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on crime linked to illegal trafficking in Apulia ( Italy ) ;
B5-0259 / 2000 by Mr Procacci , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the fight against organised crime in South-East Europe ;
B5-0267 / 2000 by Mr Lavarra and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the fight against organised crime ;
B5-0274 / 2000 by Mrs Frassoni and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the urgent situation created by crime linked to illegal trafficking in Apulia ( Italy ) ;
B5-0277 / 2000 by Mr Le Pen and others , on behalf of the Technical Group of Independent Members , on organised crime ;
B5-0284 / 2000 by Mr Fitto and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on organised crime .
Mr President , I support the motion for a joint resolution tabled by a large number of my fellow Members and supported by the most representative groups of this Parliament , for we must call urgently upon the governments of the Member States to intensify the fight against organised crime and make it more effective where , in addition to cigarette smuggling , this involves drug and arms trafficking and , even more importantly , the trafficking of human beings .
Italians are familiar with the difficulties of dealing with organised crime .
We are familiar with the way in which organised crime uses activities such as cigarette smuggling , which do not always seem , and I stress that this is only an illusion , to be very serious , in order to sabotage any possible opposition .
Europe has a major duty to promote the development of these new areas , many of which look set to join the Community , but there is every likelihood that all our investments will be in vain should we not succeed in defeating these organisations of gangsters which will otherwise reap all the benefit of our investments .
The means and resources donated by the European Community would not be used for healthy growth , but would serve to further strengthen the canker of underground organisations .
For this reason , I would draw attention to an extremely positive point of the resolution which calls upon the Community to monitor the economic and social development of the populations of the areas in question , because that is where we will achieve most .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is not the first time that we have dealt with the problem of organised crime in the European Union and there is a specific reason why we are doing so today in an urgent debate : the murder in Brindisi on 24 February of two officials of the Guardia di Finanza has again suddenly brought to light the danger faced by our colleagues in the security bodies of the Member States whose job is to protect the external borders of the European Union or work in regions which , because they are adjacent to the external borders of the European Union , are breeding grounds for organised crime .
Our colleagues in the public police departments do not only deserve our full solidarity and respect ; above all , we owe it to them to acknowledge once and for all that , wherever we live in the European Union , officials of the Guardia di Finanza in Apulia , for example , and I say this as a German member of parliament , are protecting the territory and the citizens of my country .
I think that we in this European Parliament owe it to the relatives of the victims to acknowledge that respect for the dead is not an Italian but a European matter .
That is the first point which I wished to make here .
The second is a political challenge which , in my view , we are not taking seriously enough .
We talk of the need to combat organised crime efficiently and yet we too frequently overlook the fact that the European internal market which we ourselves have created , with freedom of movement of services , capital , goods and persons , has created a huge free zone of economic activity in which , wherever legal transactions can be freely conducted , illegal transactions can also be freely conducted .
In creating this huge legal economic area , we have also created a huge illegal economic area and it is now possible to operate on a large scale throughout the whole of Europe for the purposes of smuggling , trafficking in human beings , credit card fraud , drug trafficking , prostitution and every other possible form of serious crime .
However , the police counter-strategies needed still mainly come within the jurisdiction of the nation states .
The instruments to fight organised crime are organised at intergovernmental level .
Where I live , in the district of Aachen , there is a town called Herzogenrath .
The Netherlands are on one side of the street and Germany is on the other and if you rob a bank on the German side and escape to the Dutch side in time , then you are lucky because no German police is allowed to follow you .
This is a practical example of the difficulties inherent in the fight against organised crime and clearly illustrates the need for a cross-border , or rather a pan-European approach .
The point I wish to make is that , when it comes to serious crime which can only be combated at a pan-European level , the European Union needs independent operational powers for the European police agencies under the control of the European Parliament .
I think that , as politicians in the Council , the Commission and Parliament , we owe it to those who fall victim to increasing organised crime to create the instruments needed to fight organised crime efficiently .
Mr President , for a long time , cigarette smuggling has had a rather romantic appeal in Italy , which it acquired particularly after the war thanks to the influence of neorealist films .
However , the events taking place in Puglia and the South of Italy are not at all romantic . Quite the opposite .
The tragic death of two customs and excise officers is a European issue as well as a question of Italian public safety , and it is not just a question of European safety , but also , and above all , an issue which has a bearing on our relations with our neighbours across the Adriatic .
The European Union is making a substantial contribution to the reconstruction of the former Yugoslavia .
The actions of the local authorities and our initiatives to assist them are absolutely vital elements in the fight against organised crime , and are therefore also crucial for the safety of Europeans .
We regret that the joint resolution did not take up our suggestion to make the new reconstruction programmes conditional upon an undertaking by the governments of the former Yugoslavia to cooperate actively in the fight against organised crime .
However , we hope that the Council and the Commission will be able to mobilise these governments through their endeavours and that an effective action of this kind will be instigated at the Conference scheduled for 19 and 20 May , in which both institutions are to take part .
Mr President , the Tampere Summit last year took note of the extremely difficult situation of some of the regions of Europe , and set the date for the forthcoming Conference of 19 and 20 May next which is on the very subject of the security and development of this area .
Europe is attempting to enlarge its borders and create an area of freedom , security and justice .
The Adriatic is a border and so is the Ionian Sea .
If we want to give weight to the processes of European enlargement , we must reassure our citizens , our fellow citizens who live in those areas , that our words are not just hot air but authentic projects which will genuinely affect their situation , and that , when we talk of law and security , we will provide them with the necessary means , conditions and systems .
We have already paid too high a price in deaths - too many civilians gave their lives in the raids in Puglia - and we have lost too many men from the forces of law and order .
In consideration also of the existence of the Stability Pact , we need to take practical steps to show that the enlargement of Europe will also mean greater security for our people .
Mr President , when it comes to this issue , I am in two minds .
On the one hand , it is only natural - and I was the rapporteur for enlargement to the east and internal security - that we need to worry about higher security standards , not only in the candidate countries , as we do in the EU itself , but of course in all other European countries .
We need a pan-European system of internal security , and here the Balkans are naturally a special cause for concern because we have assumed responsibility in Kosovo and the neighbouring regions .
On the other hand , however , we must take care not to classify certain peoples in a particular manner .
We are therefore against point 4 of the joint resolution which names Montenegro .
Of course , Montenegro also has internal security problems , as we do in the EU for that matter .
But Montenegro presently faces a huge threat ; as you will have heard , and as officially confirmed by NATO yesterday , Milosevic has again started military operations against Montenegro .
We must be careful not to give him an excuse .
Therefore , solidarity in the fight against organised crime , yes , but please , no specific passage on Montenegro ; just support for Montenegro in its struggle for greater freedom .
Mr President , I consider the consensus reached in this Chamber on the need for a new initiative to fight organised crime very important , in particular because of the realisation which spread from the Group on behalf of which I am speaking , that the dramatic events in Brindisi are not just an issue which is confined to the Region of Puglia , but that they draw on values , principles and objectives which are an integral part of the new European policy and on the question of justice and security for the citizens of the Union .
Parliament and the institutions of the Union must take due account of this perspective and provide a rational response to the fear and insecurity experienced by the citizens in the face of crime , and it must fight all aspects of crime , including those who resort to brutal violence with no qualms about killing the forces of law and order and defenceless citizens , and the supranational financial and economic criminal organisations .
The links between criminal groups in different countries and the increasingly wide geographical spread of crime call for a supranational response .
After all , security is one of Europe ' s objectives in the Treaty of Amsterdam and was on the agenda of the European Council held in Tampere in the autumn of 1999 .
We hope that substantial decisions similar to those proposed in Tampere will be taken regarding the creation of common investigation groups , a European police academy and a genuine European judiciary such as EUROJUS .
This is the path we must take , taking due account of the fight against crime taking place in the Balkan States in our relations with these countries .
Finally , may I also express my sympathy for the families of the victims and recognise before this Chamber the extreme sense of duty shown by those two officers in that tragic event which took place on 24 February .
The Commission has examined with great interest the resolution concerning the threat posed by the development of illicit activities of criminal groups operating in several countries of south-eastern Europe .
We share the preoccupation expressed in the resolution as to the risk of seeing the reconstruction and development efforts in the context of the Stability Pact being jeopardised by international criminal networks that engage mainly in trafficking in human beings , trafficking in drugs and arms as well as in smuggling of goods .
Clearly a lot of these criminal activities have serious negative consequences for the Community and its Member States .
As you are aware , the European Council has shown its strong determination to fight against organised crime and has demonstrated the need for a coherent and coordinated approach by adopting in June 1997 an Action Plan to Combat Organised Crime .
Although many actions envisaged aim to encourage cooperation between the fifteen Member States , the plan does not neglect the need also to develop wider forms of international cooperation .
The tangible result has been the conclusion by the Council in 1998 of the Pre-accession Pact on cooperation against crime with the candidate countries .
As regards the specific question raised by the resolution and related to the situation in the Balkans , the Commission agrees that there is a real danger of massive development of organised crime activities if no coherent and coordinated action is set up in this region associating the various donors as well as the international and regional actors .
The Commission considers that the Member States have a crucial role to play in providing their expertise and human resources in supporting specialised projects in the fight against various criminal activities in the Balkan region , including the fight against corruption .
The Commission considers that it can prove and provide a useful input to the Stability Pact by combining the Member States ' expertise and the Community funds in order to set up well-targeted anti-crime projects and activities .
In this respect , the Commission is also ready to act as a coordinator and in close consultation with the special coordinator of the Stability Pact .
Furthermore , I have to underline that the Commission is preparing a proposal for a new specific financial instrument which will provide a global legal basis for the Community assistance to the whole region .
An official proposal will be presented to the Council by the end of this month and we hope that a new regulation will come into force as soon as possible , hopefully just after the summer break .
The Commission remains convinced of the crucial importance of making all the necessary efforts to support effective measures for the fight organised crime and is determined to develop , within this new framework , regional projects covering the field of justice and home affairs .
In addition , the Commission is already in a position to announce that , under its programming of the assistance envelope of regional programmes for 2000 , around EUR 2 m have been earmarked for projects within the field of justice and home affairs .
Furthermore , as regards trafficking in certain goods such as the smuggling of cigarettes , and insofar as this traffic also affects the Community 's territory and its financial interests , OLAF has set up multi-disciplinary and multinational task groups .
These groups work to combat organised crime whose transnational dimension has been demonstrated on several occasions .
They have been established to provide support and operational assistance that focuses its investigations on the sectors and products which are most vulnerable to fraud , which is the case for cigarettes .
The results of the activities of these task groups recorded over the last few years are particularly significant .
In 1996 , for instance , cigarette smuggling , mainly in the transit regime , totalled ECU 800 m .
The overall financial impact of fraud detected in this area in 1997 was an estimated ECU 1.6 bn covering Community own resources and national revenue .
The number of inquiries against cigarette smuggling even increased in 1998 , although the financial impact was lower than in the previous years .
This can be explained by the continuation of large international inquiries and the success in the fight against cigarette smuggling from Andorra and against the black market in Spain .
All in all we take these threats to the Community very seriously and will continue working hard to fight them .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Nielson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
CITES
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0243 / 2000 by Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Bowis , on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) ;
B5-0249 / 2000 by Mr Sjöstedt and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) ;
B5-0260 / 2000 by Mr Davies and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) ;
B5-0269 / 2000 by Mrs Roth-Behrendt , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) ;
B5-0275 / 2000 by Mr de Roo and Mrs Isler Béguin , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to apologise on behalf of Mrs Maij-Weggen , who submitted this resolution .
She has had to leave earlier on account of a death and funeral in the family .
It is not the first time in this House that the CITES Convention is being mentioned .
Over the years , this Convention , with its 148 signatories , has saved many plants and animals threatened with extinction .
This often followed robust campaigning on the part of the environmental and animal-protection lobby , campaigns which were adopted many times over by the European Parliament , the national parliaments and also , for example , by the American Congress .
Once again , it seems unlikely that the correct decisions will be taken at the CITES meeting in Nairobi and once again , we will be stepping in to prevent the wrong decisions from being taken .
In this intervention , I would like to focus on three risks .
The first risk concerns the fact that a number of southern African countries have proposed moving the African elephant from appendix I to appendix II , which means that the controlled hunt will be allowed . Together , these countries would like to harvest more than 50 tonnes of ivory .
We urge the Commission and Member States not to go along with this .
The list of illegally traced ivory is already so extensive that a legal hunt would only exacerbate the problem .
In the light of the fact that over a twenty-year period , the entire population of the African elephant has plummeted from 1.3 million to 625 000 , we have now reached a critical level , as is widely known .
A second risk which I would like to point out is Norway ' s and Japan ' s proposal to re-legalise the hunt for the minke whale in the North Atlantic and the Southern Pacific .
Again we are opposed to this , if only because these lovely animals are already being hunted down by both countries .
Re-legalisation would only further reward bad behaviour .
In addition , this minke whale is an endangered species and it would be preferable to keep to the arrangement to protect all whales .
Finally , I would like to give a third example .
Cuba has requested to move the hawksbill turtle back to appendix II .
This is the result of a typically isolated view of an animal generally threatened with extinction .
As this species mainly lays its eggs in Cuba , people think that there are plenty of them and would like to kill 500 of these tortoises per annum , only to serve them up at exclusive restaurants , with the shells being sold off to Japan .
This would be a tremendous incentive to continuing the illegal hunt .
Cuba should be ashamed of itself , making this proposal , and what is more , their own proposal does not even meet the ideology adopted by Cuba itself , to which , incidentally , I do not subscribe either .
In a nutshell , these are three examples from a series of proposals in Nairobi which cause us great concern .
We urge the Commission and Member States not to support this type of proposal but to keep CITES as it is .
Let us not start this century on a bad note but on a good note and work together to ensure that no more plants and animals are threatened with extinction .
Mr President , as the previous speaker said , this resolution is addressed to the parties to the CITES Convention meeting in Nairobi in April .
We are addressing them to try to preserve species under renewed threat , species like the Asian pangolin , the gorillas of the Congo , the elephants - through the sale of ivory - and the other species mentioned in the resolution .
I want to refer briefly to three essential measures which ought to be taken in Nairobi in the days ahead .
The first is providing information and raising awareness amongst the public , the buyers and sellers .
The second is sanction mechanisms against those who have not yet adopted legal measures to stop poachers , in particular , benefiting from impunity .
And the third is cooperation with developing countries , because sometimes trafficking and trading in threatened species is the only way to survive in their rural areas .
Mr President , protecting animal and plant species which are threatened with extinction is about more than just preserving the natural riches .
It is about a battle between civilisation and barbarism .
Maintaining bio-diversity is also about more than preventing the extinction of certain animal species , however important these may be , such as elephants and whales .
Since the individual species are unable to stand up for themselves , we need to do this for them , at home or elsewhere .
This means , for example , that the international transport of tropical animals must be regulated .
Even today , there are scandalous cases of abuse , both in legal and illegal transportation .
Over-exploitation and misuse cannot be explained by poverty alone .
They often involve ruthless traders who only have their own self-interests at heart .
Although we may not be aware of it , huge numbers of animals are also the victims of natural disasters and especially wars in Africa .
Animals are , by definition , not just there for our amusement .
It is only right that a civilised society should give their beastly fate more attention .
Mr President , at the previous CITES conference , the European Parliament almost unanimously adopted a resolution to accord the African elephant the highest status of protection .
The African elephant is still a threatened animal species , according to the IUCN .
Fourteen EU Ministers faint-heartedly abstained from the vote and , as a result , legalised the shooting of elephants in Africa .
The Dutch Minister was the only one to vote for the conservation of the elephant .
Between 10 and 20 April next , the fate of this elephant will once again feature on the agenda of the world community .
Kenya , the hosting nation , and India have tabled the proposal to grant the African elephant full protection once again .
Shooting elephants in order to sell their tusks to Japan and then giving the proceeds away - at least on paper - to protect wild animals is a perverse kind of logic .
Besides which , it does not work .
South Africa , Botswana , Namibia and Zambia want to shoot even more elephants now .
This blood money also ends up in the wrong hands .
I would call on the 15 Environment Ministers , including the 6 Green Ministers , to show courage and to grant the African elephant full protection once again on 30 March during the Environmental Council .
Full protection is also needed for the hawksbill turtle which is only to be found in Cuba .
In the space of three generations , more than 80 % of the population has disappeared .
Regarding the African elephant and the hawksbill turtle , the European Commission gives priority to the blood trade with Japan .
This is scandalous .
Mr President , the European Community is not a party to CITES .
The present text of the Convention permits only individual countries to join .
The Gaborone amendment to the CITES text from 1983 would allow us to become a party to the Convention .
However , this amendment has not yet entered into force due to the insufficient number of CITES parties who have ratified it .
The Commission continues its diplomatic efforts to ensure that a sufficient number of ratifications are made in order to allow the Community to play a more proactive role in this important Convention .
Notwithstanding the fact that we are not yet a party , the Community possesses legislation to implement CITES .
This legislation is amongst the most thorough and comprehensive of its kind in the world .
The Commission 's policy is based on both conservation and sustainable use , principles recognising that peoples and states are the best protectors of their own wild fauna and flora .
Concerning the specific matters in Parliament 's resolutions , we agree on the need to step up enforcement measures in the field of wildlife trade in India .
We will approach the Indian authorities along the lines suggested , and continue to do all we can to support and further the objectives of CITES .
Concerning the proposals for the forthcoming Conference of the CITES parties , the Commission has yet to adopt a formal proposal .
However , our general orientation on the major issues is as follows :
On whales , the Community 's position should be unambiguous .
No return to commercial whaling until the International Whaling Commission deems that the appropriate management controls are in place .
We should therefore oppose the Japanese and Norwegian proposals to restart the trade .
On African elephants , we favour the maintenance of the status quo until a clear picture emerges of the impact of the international trade that was permitted in 1997 .
We should not support any of the proposals that have been made .
Concerning the Cuban sea-turtle proposals , the Community should oppose the resumption of the regular annual trade in shells .
We need , however , to hold a more open position on the disposal of the Cuban shell stockpiles until we know the position of the neighbouring countries to Cuba .
Finally , on sharks , there is cause for concern , and the proposal on basking sharks should , in particular , be supported .
Here , however , CITES will need to work closely with regional fisheries bodies and the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Nielson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
Mr President , I see from my order paper that the vote on the situation in Iraq has been withdrawn .
Can I be told at whose request , and what reasons were given for withdrawing that ?
It was not the vote which was withdrawn ; on the contrary , the movers of the motions themselves withdrew both their motions .
If there is no motion to vote on , then obviously no vote can then be held .
I am not aware of the reasons which prompted the movers of the motions to do this - you must ask them yourself - but clearly , if they have been withdrawn , then we cannot vote on them .
Perhaps Mr Swoboda can briefly explain what is behind this .
Mr President , you are quite right , we have withdrawn the motions for resolutions .
If I may briefly explain , we withdrew them because we shall be holding a longer , more detailed debate on this subject during the next Strasbourg session .
I think that it makes more sense , given the worsening situation in Iraq , to hold a debate once the Council and Commission have made statements detailing their position rather than under the urgency procedure .
That was our reason for withdrawing them .
Mr President , may I confirm that what Mr Swoboda just said applies equally to the EPP-ED Group .
We have withdrawn our motion for a resolution for the same reasons , i.e. the debate scheduled for April .
Thank you , Mrs Grossetête , I think the reasons are now clear .
Mr Buttiglione wishes to raise a point of order .
Mr President , I withdrew my motion in spite of my conviction that we are mistaken not to take the opportunity to intervene , now that it is time to do so and we have the possibility of achieving a general consensus on the matter .
I would stress that this is the second time that the adoption of this motion has been deferred and I hope that events do not reach crisis level before we are able to attempt to influence the situation to bring about peace .
Thank you , Mr Buttiglione .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Vote ( continuation )
Mr President , although it would have been better if we had voted at lunchtime , I am happy to go ahead now .
Mr President , I support the proposal by my friend , the very honourable member , Baroness Ludford , with pleasure .
Let us proceed with the vote .
Mr President , I should just like to ask why the sudden change of mind by the members .
Mr Posselt , I suggest that you ask them yourselves later .
I do not want a public debate in plenary on the matter .
Before the vote on Amendment 53
Mr President , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , I wish to withdraw Amendments 53 and 55 relating to paragraph 17 of the report .
It does indeed seem that the wording of these two amendments could give rise to conflicting interpretations , especially in certain language versions .
I am against ethnic classifications , because that would stigmatise immigrants .
Amendments 53 and 55 called for the term " ethnic " to be deleted .
The use of the word " data " could be taken as referring to statistics on the incidence of racism and discrimination , which could be useful ; but it could also be taken as referring to the introduction of files , with all the problems that implies and which we also discussed in relation to Eurodac .
Those are the reasons why I decided to withdraw these two amendments .
Thank you .
We have noted your remarks .
Mr President , I am grateful to Mr Sylla for withdrawing these two amendments .
But I wanted to ask him whether he does not think the same problem could arise with the part of the first sentence of Amendment 54 that has not been changed and which , in the English version I have before me , reads : " stresses that the EU must collect reliable ethnic data as a basis for review " . I am concerned specifically with the terms " reliable ethnic data " and wonder whether Mr Sylla could perhaps table an oral amendment relating to this notion of " ethnic data " ?
The mover of the motion had the foresight to withdraw the motion before the vote .
We are not therefore voting on it .
( Parliament approved the motion for a resolution )
Mr President , I do not want to delay the proceedings , I just want to ask the Bureau to consider refusing to accept any more motions for deletion in the future which delete entire paragraphs so that we can avoid the problem which has arisen today .
I would ask for this to be considered .
Mr Swoboda , this is to do with the fact that , in our wisdom , we changed the agenda and , if I remember correctly , because I sit behind you , you too voted in favour at the time .
If you have now changed your mind , you must submit a motion to amend the agenda again and then I shall gladly proceed otherwise .
Mr President , I freely admit that I have room for improvement .
Mr Swoboda , that applies to both of us !
Mr President , on a point of order , I am very pleased that this report has gone through .
We spent a very long time voting on this .
Most of these amendments were put down either by members of the technical group of racists or by the EPP on positions that they lost in committee .
We should not be spending so long voting on amendments put down when they lost their position earlier on .
We could have done it much more quickly because the position has been quite clear .
You have touched on a fundamental problem which has to do with the way in which this has been entered on the agenda .
If , according to the agenda , these proposed amendments have been submitted in time , then the President will call them and deal with them as usual .
Mr Speroni wishes to raise a point of order .
Mr President , I do not know whether there has been an interpreting error , but Mr Evans called us the " technical group of racists " , whereas we are the Technical Group of Independent Members .
I am certain it was a problem of translation .
I am convinced of it .
Report ( A5-0055 / 2000 ) by Mr Belder , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission communication [ COM ( 1999 ) 256 - C5-0094 / 1999 - 1999 / 2099 ( COS ) ] on countering racism , xenophobia and antisemitism in the candidate countries
( Parliament approved the motion for a resolution )
Report ( A5-0067 / 2000 ) by Mrs Read , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on Europe - An Information Society For All : Commission initiative [ COM ( 1999 ) 687 - C5-0063 / 2000 - 2000 / 2034 ( COS ) ] for the Special European Council in Lisbon on 23 / 24 March 2000
( Parliament approved the motion for a resolution )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is the first explanation of vote which I have given in many years and my first explanation of vote as chairman of the EPP-ED Group .
Unfortunately , our Group was unable , for a number of fundamental reasons , to vote in favour of the Ludford report on countering racism and xenophobia in the European Union .
We take the view that a good cause , namely the fight against racism and xenophobia , is being abused for extraneous objectives and that the report deals with topics which have nothing to do with racism and the fight against racism and xenophobia .
Most of our group therefore abstained or voted against .
Our reasons were as follows .
Firstly : the Ludford report flouts and violates the underlying principle of subsidiarity by calling in points 4 , 6 , 27 second indent , 11 and 20 for measures such as the recruitment of third country nationals to public office or formal requirements to change curricula and teacher training programmes .
Secondly : the report deals with matters which have absolutely nothing to do with the subject of the report by calling in points 19 , 22 and 30 for measures such as rights for third country nationals to vote in local and European elections .
Thirdly : the Ludford report addresses matters which lie outside the time framework of the report and have nothing whatsoever to do with the report .
And I want - and I would prefer if more people listened , especially those who are about to leave - I want to highlight the absurdity of this report and I regret having to say this about this report in particular .
Its absurdity lies in the fact that not only fewer than one-third of the members voted , but a statement was made about a Member State of the European Union , namely Austria , a statement to the effect that Parliament subscribes to the sanctions of the fourteen Member States .
Parliament decided by a large majority , following a passionate debate in February in Brussels , not to subscribe to these sanctions and today , with such a small minority , with so few present , we are subscribing to these sanctions .
There are two reasons for this : first , because it is an issue which is extraneous to the subject of the report and , secondly , because we are dealing with an issue which was decided a long time ago by a large majority .
I consider that unacceptable .
My Group has therefore been compelled either to abstain or to vote against the report .
( Applause )
Mr President , I voted against this report because I judge a good bottle of wine by its contents , not its label .
This report may well have an anti-racism label , but it contains an indigestible brew of ideologically confused nonsense and does not merit the title of an anti-racism report .
This report is beyond improvement and I warn the House not to continue making a fool of itself with such absurd reports , because the issue of anti-racism is too important to be used as the basis for some sort of ideological show battle .
Although we do not agree with many of the recitals in the report on countering racism and xenophobia , we voted for that report because it takes a stance against discrimination and in favour of the rights of minorities .
Yet we certainly do not go along with the way Parliament is congratulating itself .
First of all , because most of the proposals to promote the rights of minorities and immigrants remain vague and are not binding .
Secondly , because of the hypocrisy involved in pretending to stand up for immigrants and minorities while conducting an anti-immigrant domestic policy , if only in the form of hunting down immigrants who do not have proper papers .
Finally , the report says nothing whatsoever about the deep-rooted economic and social reasons , in particular the rate of unemployment and the worsening poverty among a growing section of the population , that encourage demagogues of the racist and xenophobic extreme right to stir up unrest .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the Spanish delegation to the Group of the European People ' s Party to explain why we abstained in the vote . Abstention does not normally mean taking a clear position but in this case it does .
We abstained because , on the one hand , we support the symbolism and principles of the fight against racism and xenophobia , and some of the points in this report contain important statements , for example , paragraph 8 , on the functions of the European Racism and Xenophobia Information Network and paragraph 24 , which invites the Member States to prioritise some very specific issues in this fight , to mention only two .
But , on the other hand , by contrast with the Haarder report which we voted for this morning , this report is long on radical demagoguery and short on legal rigour .
Now this Parliament , as co-legislator , should know that any statement it makes has either legal value or , as in this case , quasi-legal value , and that is why greater care must be taken .
Let me give you just one example of this : paragraph 22 , which seeks to give substance to European citizenship , by granting rights to vote in European and local elections to third country nationals resident in the Community .
That obviously violates the Treaty right away .
It is badly drafted .
And I could give further examples of this kind of thing to justify our abstention .
Mr President , I should like to give a very brief explanation on behalf of the Austrian delegation of Socialists .
We voted in favour of this report because we believe that , a few statements notwithstanding , it is a good report , and I find the way in which parts of this report have been described during the explanations of vote totally unjustified .
We abstained on point 10 .
We would have preferred a statement in keeping with the European Parliament ' s resolution on Austria .
But as this point was accepted nonetheless , we voted in favour of the report on account of its fundamentally positive thrust .
Mr President , I am a firm supporter of the fight against any form of racism and xenophobia , but I abstained from the vote on Mrs Ludford ' s resolution because I see it as one of those hotchpotch resolutions that tries to cover all manner of things and sometimes contradicts itself .
I do not think this kind of resolution does any credit to our Parliament .
- My Group and I are pleased to have voted for and supported the Ludford report which is concerning the important subject of the fight against racism and xenophobia .
Those who have voted to oppose family unity ; to oppose encouragement for ethnic minorities to participate in elections ; against a policy force that reflects Europe 's diversity and against multi-ethnic parliaments are to be deplored and condemned .
The British Labour members and the PSE Group voted in favour of Amendment 2 to delete paragraph 17 , not because we opposed the sentiments and intentions , but as it was open to possible misinterpretation or charges of ambiguity .
The fight against the racists and xenophobes in our society , those who seek to divide Europe , is one that must and will be won .
. ( SV ) We conservatives support most of the measures against racism and xenophobia in the Ludford report .
We are , nonetheless , abstaining from voting in the final vote because we believe that labour market legislation is an area to which the subsidiarity principle ought to be applied , as mentioned in paragraph 17 .
- ( FR ) The Ludford report on countering racism and xenophobia , like the Haarder report on human rights in the European Union that is also before us , seem inspired by some malevolent spirit that is prompting them to go beyond the legitimate protection of the rights linked to human dignity and to methodically destroy , one by one , all the bastions of citizenship , regardless indeed of whether it is national or even European .
Both reports give the impression of aiming to defend the rights of an indiscriminate individual , who could be living anywhere at all on this planet , rather than the rights of individuals situated in time and space , who have inherited certain traditions , who uphold their own values , i.e. precisely the citizens of our respective countries , who have sent us here to protect them , and for no other purpose .
I think the approach taken in these reports is a kind of violation of our terms of reference .
For instance , the Ludford report proclaims equality between European citizens and third country nationals and goes so far as to propose that non-nationals can be employed as European officials in the same way as Member State nationals , or that they enjoy the same rights of unchecked freedom of movement and family reunification as EU nationals .
The differences are being ironed out at every level , for the Haarder report also supports equal rights for same-sex couples and the traditional family .
The two reports also join forces in calling for the right of immigrants to vote and stand for election in local and European elections .
I think that second category is highly significant .
For even if supposedly practical reasons could sometimes be trumped up for calling for their participation in local elections , the significance of their participation in European elections is purely ideological . Its aim is to show that the future Europe must not be a super-nation ( even if there is a super-state ) but , on the contrary , an open field , a crossing point where the rights taken away from the nations would be redistributed all over the world .
Another revealing point common to both reports is that they call for the proposed new ' rights ' to be enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of EU citizens , now being drafted , on which I gave my views the day before yesterday during the debate on the Duff ­ Voggenhuber report .
And , of course , they insist that , in future , this document must be legally binding on the Member States .
That is another aspect that shows that this Charter , if it really was adopted in the form called for by the European Parliament - but which we will oppose absolutely - would have the effect of a mechanism for reducing the powers of the nations .
Here as ever we see that the European level is the point of least resistance in face of pressure groups , of extraneous minorities , even of foreign interests .
And once again we draw the same lesson : the citizens must keep a close guard on their powers and only delegate them where necessary to transparent institutions , devoted to their defence and over which they have full control .
- ( DA ) We are in favour of the humanitarian angle from which the report has been drawn up .
We are in favour of the report focusing upon the breeding grounds for racism and xenophobia in Europe .
We think it is important to combat racism and xenophobia by guaranteeing citizens the rights to education , access to the labour market etc .
It is also positive that the report should recommend that citizens of third countries should have better opportunities for integration .
For the aforesaid reasons , we have chosen to vote in favour of the report , since we basically think it is extremely important to combat racism and xenophobia .
We would emphasise , however , that we cannot support the means of combating racism and xenophobia that the report recommends .
We believe that measures such as drawing up a common asylum policy and establishing EURODAC - which would cause asylum seekers to be viewed with suspicion - would not further the fight against racism and xenophobia .
- ( FR ) I congratulate the rapporteur on the quality of her work on the European Commission ' s report on the implementation of the European Year Against Racism ( 1997 ) .
Recent events in Austria demonstrate that it is , alas , still necessary today to combat racism , antisemitism and xenophobia .
As the report points out , we really must express " horror at the entry into Government in Austria of Jörg Haider ' s Freedom Party " .
Let me take this opportunity to repeat that we must keep up the pressure on the Austrian Government and continue to encourage public debate .
For there is indeed a strong risk that people will simply become used to the situation .
I repeat : the great risk is that it will become part of everyday life .
This open breach of the founding principle of our European Union , namely unconditional respect for fundamental rights , must not create a precedent .
Throughout Europe , extreme right-wing parties are hoping to exploit the entry into power of this coalition with its fascist connotations .
So it is our duty as European democrats to remain vigilant , to tempt this government into a foolish mistake that will lead to its fall .
I personally am prepared to take this fight to the bitter end .
Like the rapporteur , I believe that the ethnic , religious , cultural and linguistic diversity of Europe is a source of vitality and that it is essential for Europe ' s future economic prosperity and social success .
That is why the public authorities of the Member States and the EU institutions must actively promote racial equality and take concrete action to achieve greater ethnic diversity among their staff .
I also agree that leading the fight against racism and xenophobia and the promotion of equal opportunities should be an explicit responsibility allocated to one European Commissioner .
One other proposal deserves our full attention .
The report urges the Member State authorities to include , as formal requirements of school curricula and teacher training programmes , the teaching of Europe and its role in the world , including slavery and colonialism , and the history and culture of minority communities , the dangers of racism , xenophobia and intolerance , including the Holocaust and antisemitism , and the imperative of racial tolerance and the value of diversity .
Coming back to Austria , one reason why it has come to this extreme situation is perhaps that this country does not have a sufficiently objective memory of the past .
Let me conclude by asking for consideration to be given , in the framework of the IGC , to possibly amending the Treaty of Amsterdam , specifically its Article 7 which concerns action against any Member State guilty of a " serious and persistent breach " of fundamental freedoms and rights .
in writing .
( PT ) We cannot fight racism and xenophobia only by legislating against them . What we really need are measures aimed at effecting a sea change in the underlying causes of the conditions which allow these phenomena to spread .
The report we are debating deals with a series of points we fully agree with , aiming principally at guaranteeing the fundamental rights of the citizens of third countries who choose one of the Member States of the European Union as a place of work and residence .
It is especially worth highlighting the need to give the citizens of third countries resident in the European Union political rights , by granting them the right to vote in local and European elections .
For those reasons , our vote is in favour of the report .
- As a former Minister in the UK for race relations I am very much aware of the need to look constantly for ways of improving relations between all groups and interests in the population .
This requires a careful mixture , firstly of education , and only when absolutely necessary , of legislation .
This report totally fails to provide a balanced approach .
It is gesture politics at their worst with the clear ideology of the author taking precedence over good sense .
It is damaging through its stridency .
It gives no credit for the great achievements in race relations in EU states .
It offers only a defeatist agenda , not one of a positive nature .
It insults those who are trying to improve a situation and therefore it is offensive to many .
In short , it is an abuse of the opportunities offered by our Parliament to debate and determine issues like this which are vital and important and deserve better than this approach .
Those of us who really care know the great difficulties of this subject .
We simply cannot support such an appalling set of proposals , particularly as Baroness Ludford 's approach could have the unfortunate result of turning the majority against the minority rather than harmonising relations .
This report would undermine rather than improve race relations .
That cannot be a desirable outcome .
- ( FR ) Sarah Ludford ' s report is a masterpiece of morbid and destructive rage against the identities of the peoples and nations of Europe , their rights to be different , their rights to make their own choices , to be their own masters , to refuse social , cultural and institutional disintegration .
This pathological , fanatical and obsessive ' anti-racist ' mania is being used merely as a psychological lever in the process of colonising Europe and forcing its people into submission .
The sole purpose of this frenzied attempt to heap guilt on the Europeans , who are in fact generous , welcoming , open to other cultures , anything but racist or intolerant , is to make them accept the unacceptable , to persuade them to submit in silence to a mass , general colonisation , to a new society in which they will become no more than a subjugated minority .
The moral inquisition , propaganda and constant psychological conditioning to which we are being subjected are worthy of the most despicable methods applied in the communist regimes ' ' re-education ' camps .
But this report will at least have the merit , thanks to the Baroness and her cronies , of letting us find out who the new collaborators are .
Stand up and be counted !
- ( FR ) Europe is facing real difficulties today .
Like it or not , it is not the path of glory it aspired to be for the citizens of the Member States .
It reflects what it is , namely a remote and restrictive machine whose sole purpose seems to be to enact finicky legislative rules obviously aimed at centralisation and standardisation .
It is against that background that this year , as ever , we are once again debating human rights in the world and in the Union , accompanied this time by a debate on countering racism in the European Union and the candidate states .
That could have allowed us to inject a little ' soul ' into a system sadly in need of it .
But that was not to be .
The rapporteur , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs and the plenary have served us up documents that smell of death .
These pseudo-defenders of the rights of man have quite simply forgotten that man is not a concept , a point in a political programme .
The human being has a dignity , a mission that are far superior , if not contrary , to what is being put before us today .
Respect for the human being means recognising that his legitimate rights correspond to legitimate obligations , that he must exercise his freedom responsibly , that his natural dignity presupposes moral points of reference .
It is not a question of restricting that freedom but , on the contrary , of becoming aware that man lives within a family and national community , that his humanity imposes rules on him , failing which civilisation becomes synonymous with barbarism .
I would not so much say that the European Parliament has missed an opportunity as that it has once again been true to itself , libertarian and , in the final analysis , liberticidal .
- ( FR ) I could not vote for the report by Baroness Ludford and I want my abstention to be perceived as an expression of strong contempt , because of the incongruities and exaggerations contained in certain passages of this report .
Various exaggerated statements and demands , especially those concerning third country nationals residing in the Member States of the European Union , are of a provocative nature and lead to reactions that the report terms racist . Yet the majority of the citizens of our Member States often cannot understand why it should be absolutely essential for third country nationals residing in the EU to enjoy the same rights as them , including the right to vote , when there are no reciprocal rights at all for EU nationals residing in those third countries .
I know that in making these points I risk being demonised by the media and falling into the trap some sections of the report are setting for those among us who still dare express their opinion in the face of the exaggerations on which Baroness Ludford ' s report bases what it sees as a rise in racism and xenophobia .
- ( FR ) Today , the European Parliament is presenting us with the new man in a new world .
The Ludford report is not an account of the good or bad situation as regards racism in the European Union ; it is the political programme of an extreme left-wing libertarianism that , in the end , shows little concern for the natural rights of man .
In fact , reading this document would suggest that the countries of Europe , especially the Member States , are hellish places where the most elementary rights are trampled under foot daily , where the governments and their authorities , including , and I quote , " the police , justice and immigration services " , pursue totalitarian and inhumane policies .
Oh how wonderful it must be to live in China , in Cuba or in North Korea !
Faced with these tyrants , the European Union is keeping vigil : since it is close to the people , and so concerned with their happiness , that it manages their daily lives , it will know how to promote new and hitherto unknown rights ; since its foundations and the way it works are so democratic , it will know how to create this new Europe freed of all sin ; it will know how to be the undisputed guide that can lead all its followers towards ' a brighter future ' .

This is not serious .
Communities , whether national or European , need points of reference that are not exclusive but that guarantee enduring relations .
Our nations are often pluri-secular , they have always attracted populations and ethnic groups different from their own , who have added their value to that of their hosts .
This happened without problem , because our nations presented these newcomers with identified systems within which they could easily find their bearings and their place .
Mrs Ludford is proposing a society with no model , where the law of the strongest would be bound to prevail .
Freedom means a just and identical law for all ; for each individual or each group to have its own law spells anarchy and barbarism .
The European edifice will not be built simply by the addition of those who make it up ; it will be the result of a concordance of views about its destiny and the ways to achieve it , or it will not be built at all .
Today , the Ludford report puts us at a remove from that Europe .
Report ( A5-0055 / 2000 ) by Mr Belder
Mr President , the only reason we voted for this report is to reaffirm that we are opposed on principle to any form of racism , xenophobia and oppression of minorities , within or outside the European Union .
However , that vote does not mean we agree with all the recitals and all the proposals in it .
At the same time , we do not think the states that already belong to the European Union are in a position to teach lessons to countries that are only at the stage of applying for accession , given the extent to which the ignominy of racism and xenophobia is being propagated in most of the Member States of the European Union itself , by demagogues from the extreme right , even and including some within this Parliament .
- ( FR ) The European Commission presented this communication on countering racism in the candidate countries in response to the request by the Vienna European Council of 11 and 12 December 1998 .
I welcome the communication , which reflects the European Union ' s resolve to help the candidate countries to combat racism , xenophobia and antisemitism with determination , and to satisfy the Copenhagen criteria relating to human rights , the sine qua non for accession to the European Union .
The profound process of transformation that has been under way in Central and Eastern Europe since 1989 has had its impact on the rise of racism , xenophobia and antisemitism .
The high unemployment rate ( formerly an unknown social phenomenon , but now officially recognised ) , which resulted from the economic reforms , is making people feel more insecure .
All this creates fertile ground for the rise in forms of racism .
There is a risk that the changes resulting from the implementation of the Community acquis will further accentuate the social tensions in the candidate countries .
So it is vital to take vigorous action without delay to help these countries to tackle these problems .
This could be done through programmes such as PHARE ( and more specifically " PHARE-Democracy " , now incorporated in the " European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights " ) and the MEDA programme for Turkey , which can provide back-up during these changes .
The European Observatory of racism and xenophobia which will open its doors in Vienna on 10 April this year must also make a relevant contribution to continuing the fight against racism , xenophobia and antisemitism in the candidate countries .
The report highlights one very acute problem in the candidate countries , the problem of respect for the rights of minorities .
I am thinking particularly of the Roma , who face intolerable discrimination in several Central and Eastern European countries .
I am also thinking , obviously , of the problem of the institutionalised discrimination against the Kurdish people . Let me take this opportunity to remind you that Mrs Leyla Zana , a Turkish parliamentarian of Kurdish origin , is still being held in Turkish jails after a parody of a trial .
So far , all the pressure exerted by the European Parliament has had no effect on the Turkish authorities ' position .
Sadly , Mrs Zana ' s case is no exception !
Turkey needs to make considerable progress in relation to respect for the Kurdish population .
That is the condition for its accession to the European Union and there can be no compromise on that !
ECB foreign reserve assets
The next item is the report ( A5-0042 / 2000 ) by Mr Goebbels , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the European Central Bank recommendation for a Council Regulation ( EC ) concerning further calls of foreign reserve assets by the European Central Bank ( BCE 0001 / 1999 - C5-0202 / 1999 - 1999 / 0817 ( CNS )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union has equipped itself with a politically independent Central Bank , responsible for safeguarding price stability .
The ECB must , at the very least , be financially independent .
Pursuant to the Treaty , the Bank ' s initial capital is fixed at EUR 5 billion while foreign exchange reserves are fixed at EUR 50 billion .
As the European System of Central Banks is currently composed of only 11 national central banks , the capital released is only EUR 3.9 billion , while currently transferred reserves come to only EUR 39.46 billion .
Of that , 15 % are in gold , while the remaining 85 % consist of US dollars and yen .
It should be noted that interest on its own capital is the European Central Bank ' s only reliable source of income .
In the short term , this income varies with interest rates .
The ECB ' s other source of income is the interest on its official reserves .
However , from that income the ECB has to deduct the interest it pays on its liabilities in euros vis-à-vis the national central banks .
The foreign exchange reserves that appear on the ECB ' s balance sheet are given in national currencies , while the liabilities vis-à-vis the national central banks are given in euros .
At present , given the interest rate differentials between the euro on the one hand , and the US dollar and the yen on the other , the net income from interest is positive .
However , in the event that interest rates vary , and to the extent that the source of income is highly sensitive to interest rate differentials , the share of income accruing from interest could fall very quickly and even produce a loss .
Since the ECB holds currencies to offset liabilities in euros , it would also run a foreign exchange risk if the euro appreciated substantially against the reserve currencies it is holding .
An internal ECB calculation indicates that the foreign exchange value at risk could exceed the ECB ' s current capital .
A 10 % depreciation of the US dollar and the yen against the euro , accompanied by a 10 % fall in the price of gold , would wipe out all the ECB ' s existing capital .
The Treaty provides for a mechanism whereby the ECB can forearm itself against any erosion of its capital .
The European Central Bank can partially or totally retain the monetary income from the Eurosystem .
Nevertheless , a central bank that depended on being bailed out repeatedly would not be very credible .
In fact , the European Central Bank will probably close its 1999 financial year with a deficit of more than EUR 200 million .
So it is imperative to resolve this structural problem as quickly as possible .
On 14 April 1999 , the European Parliament endorsed an ECB recommendation on doubling its capital in the long term .
The recommendation under consideration today seeks to authorise the Governing Council to effect further calls of foreign reserves , raising the ceiling to EUR 100 billion .
So it is simply a question of authorisation in principle to increase reserves as needed , without being pressurised by exceptional events .
The ECB might , for example , make use of this procedure to augment them on a case-by-case basis , particularly during a period of large-scale intervention , but also , possibly , because of potential portfolio losses , the portfolio being revalued every quarter according to market rates .
In this context it must be noted that the total reserves of the Eurosystem come to more than EUR 350 billion .
As President Duisenberg maintained at his last hearing before the European Parliament , the ECB does not intend to intervene on the foreign exchange markets to try to influence the external value of the euro .
In the event of another international financial crisis , which remains possible given the irrational exuberance of the markets , there could be a need for concerted intervention by the main central banks .
To enable the ECB to be a party to agreements such as those known as the Plaza or Louvre agreements , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs felt it was clearly necessary to advise Parliament to vote for the recommendation .
I have not proposed what might be called a political resolution to my colleagues .
Personally , as I said a while ago , I feel that Parliament votes on too many resolutions and that this inflated number of resolutions reduces the value of other , politically essential resolutions .
In this case it is a question of saying yes or no .
A massive yes vote also sends out a political message .
We want the ECB to be able to pursue its main objective of safeguarding price stability in total independence - including material independence .
At the same time , and here Mr Duisenberg is being too evasive for my liking , we also want the European System of Central Banks to give its unequivocal support to the European Union ' s general economic policies .
We want the Central Bank to play its full part on the international scene and to make an active contribution to defining new rules that will enable the international financial system to operate without crises .
We are confident that the Governing Council will make optimum use of the foreign exchange reserves in the Eurosystem in the event of tension on the markets .
No one claims that the deterrent effect of the foreign exchange intervention instrument is proportional to the amount of reserves . However , credibility is enhanced by the option of being able to mobilise additional assets at any time without delay .
It would be warranted , however , for such internal ECB transfers , which will not be included in detail in the Eurosystem ' s weekly consolidated financial statements , to be disclosed a posteriori .
The European Parliament also assumes that the ECB President will explain the decisions taken by his Council when he appears before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and , indeed , during plenary debates .
The Central Bank has everything to gain from this improved transparency with regard to consolidating its credibility .
Mr President , I will close my statement by emphasising , speaking for myself and addressing myself to the ECB , that the ECB is there to serve the women and men of Europe , to serve the economy as a whole .
So its role is not just to satisfy the expectations of the financial markets .
Mr President , I should like to carry on from the point at which the rapporteur stopped in his report , for which I thank him , and point out once again that , compared with the plethora of resolutions which do not equate with the priorities of this House , increasing foreign reserve assets is an important resolution .
What is the legal basis for today ' s debate ?
According to Article 3 of the Statute of the European System of Central Banks , owning and managing official foreign reserve assets is one of the tasks of the ECB .
This task is carried out in parallel by the ECB and the national central banks , whereby the national central banks transfer part of their reserves up to the equivalent of 50 billion euros to the European Central Bank , in accordance with Article 30.1 of the Statute .

It was decided at the time , in Article 30.4 - which is why today ' s discussion comes as no surprise - that the ECB could call up further foreign reserve assets beyond the limit set in Article 30.1 .
This call must be issued in the form of a regulation by the EU Council .
The ECB is currently calling for a further increase of 50 billion euros .
We , the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the entire Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , as the rapporteur has already said , welcome this proposal .
The reasons are set out in detail and time is already marching on , but allow me to say that we consider that this increase is needed .
First , because it will help to increase the financial independence of the ECB , and the independence of the European Central Bank is instrumental to the stability and unassailability of the currency .
The return on the capital paid up so far and the official reserves currently represents the ECB ' s only source of income for financing its operations .
We know that it sustained a loss in 1999 .
We must therefore admit that a lack of funds robs the ECB of the ability to formulate an independent and transparent policy .
Its financing requirements must be covered so that its independence cannot be called into question .
Secondly , we are in favour of this increase because it will help to foster the credibility of the ECB on the markets .
If the ECB is financially independent and self-sufficient , this will increase its credibility on the international markets and , by extension , strengthen the euro en route to the third stage on 1.1.2002 .
Thirdly : this increase will enhance the ability of the ECB to react and adapt .
In the event of a serious imbalance on the markets , possibly doubling its reserves gives the European Central Bank the potential to carry out its task in the form of a stability policy more effectively .
It gives it the possibility to react more flexibly because it has the necessary funds at its disposal .
Our report also introduces an additional model for strengthening the transparency of this procedure and I would therefore ask that you vote in favour of increasing the reserves .
Mr President , in this draft legislative resolution , Parliament approves the ECB ' s recommendation for a Council regulation concerning the continued calling in of foreign reserve assets .
The following reasons are given : first , the Treaty makes provision for this .
If it is not applied in the form of a regulation , this could be construed as a difference of opinion between the ECB and the Council .
Secondly , the ECB should gain in financial independence .
Thirdly , the foreign exchange intervention instrument will be made more credible and the capacity of the ECB to adjust to various scenarios will be fostered .
Of course , there can be no objection to any structural improvement of the ECB ' s financial situation .
The only question is whether or not pouring more money into it will solve the problem once and for all .
Before an answer can be given , the following questions at least must be considered :
Firstly : does it make political and economic sense to apply the sort of restrictive monetary policy which the ECB applies and which is more restrictive than the FED ?
Secondly , does the increase in interest rates for top refinancing facilities and deposit facilities applied on 9.2.2000 not run counter to economic growth ?
Thirdly , are more decisive measures to reduce unemployment permanently not the most tried and tested means of guaranteeing price stability ?
Fourthly : in addition to a supply-orientated economic policy , should greater emphasis not be placed on a demand-orientated economic policy , i.e. strengthening the European internal market through reduced import tax rates in the Member States ?
Fifthly , is it so wrong to assume that the exchange rate set when the euro was introduced had more to do with political wishful thinking than economic reality ?
Sixthly : what specific grounds are there for assuming that the ECB will probably sustain a loss in 1999 ?
Having answered these questions , our Group felt unable to vote for the proposal for a resolution .
Not because the ECB has too few foreign reserve assets , but because it is wrongly organised structurally and will therefore complain endlessly of these liquidity problems .
Mr President , the European Central Bank is recommending to the Council that it double its foreign reserve assets .
To that end , it puts forward two very different kinds of argument .
The first dwell on its own concerns about financial administration , given that the increase in its staff appears proportional to the fall in income from its assets , income one might in fact have hoped would be sufficient to make it self-supporting .
In a flash of lucidity , the ECB has declared that a central bank with a structural deficit would quite simply not be credible .
That is true , and it gives some cause for anxiety about the administrative ability of those who so quickly need to raise the ceiling level .
The second argument is that the ECB needs to enhance its capacity to intervene on the markets in a general context of the depreciation of the euro - contrary to the soothing forecasts we were originally favoured with - and of repeated attacks by the financial centre of one EU Member State which , it has to be said , was wise enough not to join the single currency .
So it did not take long before the supposed instrument of EU independence and economic power so cruelly demonstrated its inadequacies .
It is rather shattering to read in the report that , should the political authorities - Parliament and the Council - refuse to help to bring about a structural improvement in the financial position of the ECB , the latter would no longer be regarded as independent by the markets .
It is clear to see where the ECB ' s priority lies ; it has acquired the habit of facing the policy makers with a fait accompli and its main aim is to gain the respect of the financial centres , to which it evidently attaches more value than to the confidence of the people .
No , really , we care little whether the ECB does or does not double its nuisance value .
We would have preferred some genuine self-criticism on the part of those who are genuinely responsible , namely the governments of the Fifteen , and a policy reversal , which would enable the people of the Member States to free themselves from the fate of standardisation that is being prepared for them by an ill-assorted group made up of technocrats who believe in the divine right of federalism and of globalised speculators .
Mr Goebbels points out that rejection by Parliament could be construed as indicating profound disagreement with the soundness of the policy pursued by the European Central Bank .
That is reason enough for us to vote against this text .
Mr President , we have good reason to be puzzled by the European Central Bank ' s request to double the ceiling of its calls of foreign reserve assets from the national central banks .
At first sight it may seem acceptable to raise the current ceiling from EUR 50 billion - in fact it is 39.5 billion because certain countries have not joined the single currency - to EU 100 billion , when we remember that the national central banks will still have EUR 300 billion of own official reserves available .
However , the fact that this operation is to take place so soon after the date when the single currency was launched clearly shows that the value of the reserves was seriously underestimated at the time .
Why ?
Aside from a few technical explanations relating to details , such as the exact number of ECB staff , there is only one valid reason that can be cited : the euro-optimism surrounding the launch of the euro , as it was called at the time , led people to believe that the single currency would naturally be strong and that the question of reserves was , therefore , secondary .
They all seem to be becoming rather more realistic again now .
But the whole business is not yet closed , for the explanatory memorandum in the draft regulation , like the explanatory statement in the European Parliament ' s report , are rather disturbing , pointing out as they do , in passing , that the aim of raising the ceiling is , and I quote , to enhance the Bank ' s " ability to adapt to different possible scenarios " .
Since this does not refer to a scenario where the value of the euro is rising - if that were so , there would obviously be no need for additional reserves - it must mean a scenario where its value is falling .
The European Parliament ' s report seems even more alarmist when it refers in so many words to the potential instability of the euro which , according to the rapporteur , does not need to be demonstrated .
This slip of the pen will no doubt displease Mr Duisenberg who , for his part , keeps reiterating day after day that the euro is fundamentally stable .
Yet it is a revealing slip of the pen .
For it is , in effect , not realistic to believe that an artificial currency can inspire the same confidence as a currency solidly established among the people .
Mr President , on behalf of my colleague , Mr Solbes , I would like to make the following comments .
The Commission has been consulted by the Council - as it has been by Parliament - about the recommendation of the European Central Bank concerning further calls of foreign reserve assets to the ECB .
The Commission has adopted its opinion on this recommendation on 8 March , which reads as follows : " Noting the rights of initiative of both the Commission and the ECB , the Commission has agreed with the initiative taken by the European Central Bank .
The Commission supports the doubling of the limit for calls of foreign reserve assets by the ECB to the extent that these further calls serve to replenish holdings of reserve assets up to the initial limit of EUR 50 billion fixed in the ESCB Statute " .
The Commission has therefore adopted a favourable opinion on the ECB ' s recommendation .
Should Parliament adopt the report of Mr Goebbels in its present form , this would mean that Parliament ' s and the Commission ' s views converge , which I would welcome .
Thank you , Commissioner Nielson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.35 p.m. )
Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , last night , we were faced with the unwelcome news on EDF ( German TV channel ) that Mr Hombach , the EU Balkans Envoy , has been placed under investigation again by the Public Prosecutor .
We have already had serious problems of this kind to contend with , as has the previous Commission , but in this particular case the accusation has been levelled that DM 300 000 were allegedly paid to an agency with nothing being received in return .
I call upon you to inform the Council of this and to urge it to relieve Mr Hombach of all his duties until such time as this investigation has been resolved in a conclusive and legally valid manner .
We cannot afford for the European Union to make a bad impression again .
We take note of your comments , Mr Zimmerling .
Yesterday evening after the votes in the Chamber , a comment was made which I would like to distance myself from and not to be associated with .
There was no mistake in the interpretation and Members of this House did refer to the Technical Group as the Technical Group of Racists .
This was an unfair comment .
No one could , by the wildest stretch of the imagination , consider someone like Emma Bonino a racist .
People need to be extremely careful how they treat other people in this Chamber .
Some people may not like the fact that the Technical Group has been set up , but it has been .
These Members were elected just like me and every other Member in this House and we have to accept that fact .
People have rights and I do not think that the comment that was made yesterday was acceptable .
We take note of your comments , Mrs McKenna .
Mr President , when , in the sitting on Monday , I thanked the French State , the city of Strasbourg and the European Parliament for the fact that we could only get sound on the Finnish television channel and that the taps runs cold water but not hot , I did not mean that this is how it should be , but that these things should be put right .
I hope that the French State , the city of Strasbourg and the European Parliament will be able to take steps to put such small matters right in so expensive a building .
Very well , Mr Seppänen , we also take note of your comments .
Mr President , on seeing the Minutes , I am horrified to note that I have once again failed to sign the register of attendance , although I participated in a quite considerable number of roll-call votes .
I would ask that my attendance be recorded in yesterday ' s Minutes .
That will not be a problem .
Mr President , I do not have any comment to make on the Minutes , but I do want to say something about the European Parliament ' s information services .
I do not know whether I have picked the right moment to say this .
It does not concern the Minutes , but relates to something else .
Can I go ahead ?
Right then , a fellow MEP has just given me the session news about the debate we had yesterday on the Ludford report , and I am disappointed to note that it makes no mention of the statement I made on behalf of our Group .
I would ask the parliamentary services to look into why it was left out .
I can assure you that the services will look into this very closely , Mr Poettering .
Mr President , further to yesterday ' s minutes , I would like to express my great disappointment at the fact that even fewer than 200 Members attended the votes yesterday .
I conclude this from the minutes .
Very well , Mr Manders , we take note of all of that .
( The Minutes were approved )
Vote
Whether national or European , any central bank exclusively serves the interests of big investors .
We refuse to make a choice between the different ways in which capitalist groups and wealthy investors manage their banking , since whatever they do is against the interests of the working classes and the majority of the population .
Our abstention expresses our opposition to both the national and the European organisation of the banking system .
- ( FR ) The European Central Bank ' s proposal induces us to reflect and to act prudently on two counts :
Firstly , with regard to the method , it is clear that the procedure remains the same : the Community institutions present truncated reports , which minimise the consequences in terms of further loss of sovereignty for the Member States , and then proceed by means of successive small-scale tinkering .
In this way , when introducing the euro , the Commission maintained that the sovereignty of the Member States was in no way threatened by the ECB , or the ESCB , which was set up to hold and manage Member States ' official foreign reserves .
However , they forget that , on the one hand , the national central banks manage these funds on behalf of the ECB , which has sole control of monetary policy . On the other hand , while Article 30 ( 1 ) of the statutes of the ECB sets the maximum amount for reserve assets at EUR 50 billion , an amount considered sufficient to safeguard the independence of the ECB , two years later , the dogma of independence is looking to Article 30 ( 4 ) to grant further assets , because it needs to increase its independence and credibility further ...
It seems legitimate to ask ourselves whether we are throwing funds down a bottomless pit !
Secondly , with regard to the content , the ' dressing up ' of this new exorbitant demand should not fool us .
It is not simply a question of giving more financial resources to an independent institution so that it can apply an effective monetary policy which benefits the Member States , but also of , indirectly , creating additional resources for a technocratic structure so that it may finance its ever greater operational needs .
The issue therefore remains skilfully blurred ; while the euro was intended to be ' strong and stable ' and the reserve assets were originally intended to provide protection during the transitional period ( should this prove necessary ) , it now appears that neither of these expectations has been fulfilled and Frankfurt is totally deadlocked !
Consequently , another question arises regarding the effective use of financial resources .
Why should the Member States give up their resources in favour of a Community institution which , as a result of its need to be independent , cannot be controlled ?
In conclusion , let us remember that a State is not defined in terms of the sovereignty it enjoys as a result of its autonomy of action .
In fact , experience shows that its authority and credibility in the international arena depend very largely on its available resources : we must therefore take care , because to progressively deprive it of both would eventually cause it to cease to exist !
CAP : information measures
The next item is the report ( A5-0046 / 2000 ) by Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation on information measures relating to the common agricultural policy ( COM ( 1999 ) 536 - C5-0249 / 1999 - 1999 / 0209 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , I am presenting a report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the proposal for a Council regulation with regard to information measures relating to the common agricultural policy .
This report sets a precedent , as it is the first time that the Council has consulted Parliament on these measures .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has studied this legislative motion for a resolution extremely promptly and with great interest , and has approved it unanimously .
I would like to highlight the following aspects of the amendments proposed by Parliament : First , in Amendment No 2 , rural information and activity centres are included as possible agents for these measures .
Secondly , the amendment refers specifically to the important role to be played by young farmers in the aforementioned measures .
Thirdly , we indicate to the Commission the value of simplification and cutting through red tape , both in the examination of the programmes submitted and in subsequent monitoring .
Fourthly , we single out countrymen and women , farmers and other parties active in rural areas as the ideal beneficiaries of these measures .
On examination of our amendments , it is clear that they have a human aspect and allow a far more dynamic , open discussion .
They avoid dealing with the CAP in a passive , purely bureaucratic and technological fashion .
That is why we believe that Parliament 's amendments improve the text .
Fifthly , with regard to the cofinancing percentage , Parliament would like the Commission to be able to increase this percentage , increasing financing for organisations or associations with few financial means .
Sixthly , we already know that , according to the proposal , commitment appropriations provide EUR 4.5 million annually through the EAGGF , which implies EUR 27 million for the current period , 2000-2006 .
However , the proposal made by Parliament indicates that the European Commission should adapt the budgetary allocation to the large number of organisations entitled to participate under this regulation .
Finally , Mr President , I would like to highlight the contribution of Amendment No 10 , which proposes a new Article 5a , defining the following criteria to be met by programmes or measures eligible for funding : that these programmes should foster sustainable , multifunctional farming ; they should serve to maintain or create jobs ; they should promote social and regional cohesion ; they should give a more prominent role to women and young people ; they should protect the environment and safeguard the water supply , air quality and soil quality ; they should treat agricultural waste and control energy expenditure , in the countryside and in transport .
In our opinion , these are proposals that should promote rural development and improve food safety and product quality .
The European Parliament would like the Commission to make these priorities , which are priority objectives for agriculture in 2000 , easier to visualise in these next information measures .
Mr President , that is all I have to say .
I would like to thank all the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for the support and collaboration they have given me at all the meetings we have held .
I would also like the European Commission , in one way or another , to take account of Parliament 's criteria .
Mr President , as high a priority as possible ought to be given to transparency and to keeping EU citizens informed of the work being done in the EU .
Providing factual and objective information about cooperation in Europe has become very important in recent years as we face considerable challenges with the extension of the EU into Central and Eastern Europe .
It is especially important to explain what the common agricultural policy is about and to provide information about objectives , resources and potential for development .
There are many target groups - farmers , first and foremost , but also people generally , as well as everyone directly or indirectly affected .
If this work is to succeed , it is important that cooperation should be established with the farming organisations and also with consumers .
The common agricultural policy was the first , and is also the most extensive , of the Community ' s integrated policies and it accounts for a very large proportion of the EU ' s budget .
It is , therefore , also important to make it clear that the subsidy arrangements ensure that consumers obtain food at prices which , as a result of the subsidy , are lower than they would be without the subsidy .
This means that the EU ' s agricultural arrangements are of benefit to all EU citizens .
The common agricultural policy is always undergoing change and development .
It demands a great deal in terms of the supply of information and , especially , in terms of the coordination which is needed if cooperation is to succeed , both within the Member States and independently of the Member States .
Circumstances are very different from one country to another , and it ought , therefore , to be farming organisations which are among the main players , because these organisations focus primarily upon farmers .
Mr President , the purpose of information on the common agricultural policy should be to establish a strategy for communication , directed mainly at those working in farming and rural areas .
In our opinion , the main criticism of this proposal for a Commission regulation relates to the opening up of a budget line to non-agricultural organisations and also the reduction in budget appropriations to EUR 4 500 000 .
This situation has been made even worse by the reserve of appropriations that the Commission is building up for itself , which , when taken in conjunction with specific actions , in fact leaves the organisations with only EUR 3 million , which is obviously a very limited amount .
I therefore welcome the rapporteur ' s proposal that the Commission should match the budgetary appropriations to the numerous organisations that have a right to funding under this regulation .
However , another negative aspect of the Commission ' s proposal relates to limiting cofinancing to a rate of 75 % , when actions implemented directly by the Commission are financed at a rate of 100 % .
Furthermore , we know that the draft guide to the rules makes access to the budgetary line I have just mentioned even more difficult for organisations , especially those in a weaker financial position , in other words , exactly the ones that need the most support .
Hence the importance of our amendment designed to supplement the concept set out in the report .
With our amendment , we hope to see Community cofinancing rise above 75 % for organisations representing small farmers and family-run farms in financial difficulty .
We hope that this amendment will be adopted .
With regard to the amendment designed to reduce funds intended for the Commission by EUR 1 million and instead increase specific actions , we feel that this is potentially a way of improving the Commission ' s proposal for a regulation .
Lastly , it is important to emphasise the need for the Commission to simplify its administrative procedures both in order to study the programmes presented by the organisations and for their future monitoring .
Mr President , I welcome this measure .
From an administrative point of view the formalisation is a good thing .
But when we come to think about it the amount of money is quite small - EUR 27 million over a period of six years .
Considering the size of the agricultural budget and the fact that it extends to every corner of the Union , it is a relatively small amount of money .
That is why I welcome that fact that most of it will be spent at the rate of 50 % rather than 75 % .
The more of it that is spent at the rate of up to 50 % , the further the money goes and the greater the impact .
The common agricultural policy gets a lot of criticism .
One of the things that was not widely understood was the importance of this policy from a social point of view : the fact is , that in all the depressed regions of the Union , the common agricultural policy has maintained the population and supported communities , in a social sense , that would not otherwise have survived .
This is particularly true of the peripheral countries such as Ireland , Greece , Spain and Portugal , where communities that would have disappeared have been supported and maintained , if not for ever , certainly until a change in economic environment , until the new technologies arrived .
The long-term effect of the common agricultural policy in that sense will be greater than people have often imagined .
I have no fault to find with the way the Commission interacted with the agriculture industry over the years .
From my experience the European Commission was more open to representations and information exchange with the agriculture industry than most departments of agriculture in most Member States .
The Commission taught Member States over the years how to be open with very limited resources .
But there are new pressures , arising out of consumer concerns about new processes and systems of producing food .
These have to be explained , not only to farmers , but to consumers as well .
There is a lot of mythology about what is safe and what is not safe .
We have an important job to do to explain the workings of the whole productive system to the consumers of Europe and those outside the Union who will buy our food .
It is important that we apply as many resources as possible to this .
The last point I want to make is that , arising from these pressures , we will have a reaction from agriculture .
As we inevitably wind down some of the supports in the process of enlargement and , at the same time , maintain the pressures to protect the environment and the consumers , then there will be friction between the producers and the European administration .
To devote as many resources as possible to good relations is a wise policy .
Mr President , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur , Maria Izquierdo Rojo , and the members of the Committee , for their report .
The proposed regulation intends to provide the Commission with a tool to help it to present an operational model for European agriculture , and give wider publicity to the common agricultural policy .
In this way , the implementation of agricultural policy is facilitated .
Now I would like to speak about Parliament ' s proposed amendments .
They are not generally aimed at changing the subject matter but rather at amending the proposals .
Amendments Nos 2 and 6 concern organisations falling within the scope of aid .
It is the opinion of the Commission that it is not necessary to mention the groups and organisations by name .
All agricultural organisations and rural players fall within the scope of aid according to Article 2 .
This being the case , the proposed addenda are unnecessary .
Amendments Nos 5 , 8 and 10 concern measures that are eligible for aid .
Amendment No 5 contains amendments regarding information services and fora for discussions for men and women in rural areas .
They are unnecessary , as they are already contained in the Commission ' s proposal .
One of them , which reads " supporting them in their choices " is not in harmony with the Commission ' s proposal .
The purpose of this regulation is not to offer farmers any special services .
Local bodies are better qualified to do that .
The resources available would not be sufficient for that either .
I would , moreover , like to make the comment , with regard to the amendments tabled for Article 3 , that information visits are not being ruled out .
The list of activities that are eligible for aid is not exhaustive , which is indicated in the word " particularly " .
The Commission is prepared , however , to adopt this amendment .
The funding of long-term exchange programmes cannot , however , be accepted , as such action is not a part of the information policy .
Amendment No 10 concerns Article 5 .
The Commission supports the objectives mentioned here , proof of which is to be seen in the fact that they are implicitly contained in Article 1 , which concerns the operational model for European agriculture .
That is why it makes no sense to repeat the contents of the model in further detail .
Amendments Nos 7 and 13 concern contributions .
The Commission thinks that it is not desirable to pay more than 75 % of eligible aid costs .
The funds available are modest .
The lower the contribution stays the more measures there will be that can be financed and the greater the multiple effect .
Amendments Nos 9 and 12 concern the allocation and approval of appropriations .
As we know , Parliament is a budgetary authority together with the Council .
For this reason , the Commission thinks Amendment No 9 is not necessary .
Regarding Amendment No 12 , which proposes including the allocation of appropriations in the regulation , I would say that if the allocation is settled on beforehand , the administration of the budgetary heading will lose its vital degree of flexibility , which might be damaging from the point of view of proposed applications for financing .
Amendment No 11 concerns evaluation .
The Commission agrees with Parliament on the usefulness of regular evaluation .
It can best be taken account of in the implementing regulation .
Amendment No 4 concerns administration .
This extra recital is unnecessary in the regulation , in the opinion of the Commission .
Provision for administrative details , evaluation and later assessment will be laid down by the Commission in the Implementing Regulation .
In this connection , it has to be said that the effective monitoring of public funds has to be assured in the process regardless of how open and simple the process is .
Amendments Nos 1 and 3 concern linguistic nuances .
These the Commission does not consider significant , as Recitals 4 and 7 in the Commission ' s proposal are not as restrictive .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Grain legumes
The next item is the report ( A5 ­ 0045 / 2000 ) by Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1577 / 96 introducing a specific measure in respect of certain grain legumes [ COM ( 1999 ) 428 - C5 ­ 0187 / 1999 - 1999 / 0182 ( CNS ) ]
Mr President , I am presenting a report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1577 / 96 introducing a specific measure in respect of certain grain legumes .
The European Parliament has been analysing this proposal since October 1999 and approved this draft legislative resolution unanimously on 23 February 2000 .
I would like to highlight the following aspects of the amendments proposed by the European Parliament .
First , Amendment No 1 on the inclusion of a Recital 2a .
This amendment supplements the Council approach , which is purely commercial , and opts for a proposal with wider economic , human and food quality aims .
Whereas the Council only talks about the market , the European Parliament highlights the economic interest for the Community of the production of these grain legumes .
Given the deficit of protein crops in the European Union , Parliament considers that this system should be improved without cutting the level of aid .
Secondly , Parliament ' s Amendment No 2 proposes that seed vetches should also be included in the aid system .
Aid for seeds already exists for rice , chickpeas and lentils .
We propose this aid because , as we all know , the production of seeds is subject to supplementary technical and quality control requirements , so that if the cultivation of seeds were not supported by some form of aid , this could have extremely negative consequences for the quality of production of seed vetches .
Thirdly , Amendment No 3 indicates that , in our opinion , the Commission should , without further delay , make proposals for the 2000-2003 period .
Before I finish , Mr President , I would like to point out that in 1993 - which is some time ago now - the Council indicated that it intended to gradually strengthen the current aid system for grain legumes .
However , this has still not been done .
Secondly , successive periods show that we are faced with a chronic imbalance in this system .
The maximum guaranteed area is being systematically reduced , thus penalising time and again the farmers who are suffering reductions in aid of up to 20 % .
Therefore , Mr President , what the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development of the European Parliament would really like to see is an improvement in the system .
However , we appreciate what the Commission is telling us , that this is a time of serious budgetary restrictions that we could not implement without reducing aid .
That is why we are presenting this proposal , which is really a maintenance proposal , and what we are saying to the Commission is that , without further delay , proposals must be drawn up at the latest for the 2000-2003 period to achieve an improvement in this system without decreasing aid .
I thank all the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their collaboration and support , as well as the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . Thanks also to the Commission for its willingness to hold a dialogue and I hope it will be open to our proposals .
Mr President , Commissioner , the report that is being proposed for approval today in plenary refers to a minimal reform of Regulation 1577 / 96 on aid for the grain legume sector .
So slight is the reform that it does not amend the total maximum guaranteed quantity , although it does split it into two , nor the amount of aid per hectare .
The only new element is the substitution of the management committee by the cereal management committee .
As the Spanish saying goes , which is very much in agreement with this regulation , ' Esto son lentejas ; si quieres las tomas y si no las dejas ' [ ' here are some lentils , take them or leave them ' ] .
Consequently , my Group will support the rapporteur 's report and , above all , will particularly support Amendment No 2 , which proposes the inclusion of areas dedicated to the production of seed vetches in the aid system , as this will lead to high-quality crops .
Nevertheless , I would like to make it clear that we have missed the opportunity to support a substantial , very arid area of southern Europe , which has no other crop alternative for its soil .
Furthermore , the demand for vetches for feeding livestock is increasing all the time , as shown , at least in Spain , by the fact that the area sown in the last three years has exceeded the proposed maximum guaranteed area by 100 000 hectares per year on average .
On the other hand , the food problems we have had in the European Union have been caused by feeding herbivores with animal-based feedingstuffs , and if we do not encourage the feeding of livestock with plant proteins , such as legumes , and lower their price , farmers will continue to resort to animal meal due to the enormous pressure of competition .
Finally , it just remains for me to lament , once again , the fact that the Commission 's agricultural policy is more concerned with reducing spending - or , at best , not increasing it , as on this occasion - than with maintaining a genuine European agricultural sector that is so essential for the equilibrium of the region .
Mr President , I am participating in this discussion in order to support the report by my colleague , María Izquierdo , whose proposals , like those of the Commission , seem to me to be beneficial and of interest .
Grain legumes are a traditional crop in certain areas of southern Europe , including Spain and , more specifically , Castilla-La Mancha , the region I come from , which contains one third of the total area dedicated to these crops in Spain .
Our concern is therefore to avoid damaging the aid system for this sector of agriculture and , more specifically , for the production of chickpeas , lentils and vetches .
Chickpeas and lentils are two essential products in Spanish gastronomic culture and in our diet , the Mediterranean diet , which is now so highly thought of by scientists , which includes dried pulses in our traditional recipes .
The purchase of dried pulses in Spain has been increasing by up to 5 % annually .
In my country , the consumption of these is 6.5 kg per head annually and anyone who knows how these products are cooked can vouch for the fact that this is a very substantial amount .
Religious customs , for example , mean that we do not eat meat during Lent and due to the wiliness and common sense of our compatriots , meat has been replaced by other dishes - delicious dishes , of course - such as our lentil and spinach stew .
We are talking about uses that have been consolidated throughout history and are now consumed throughout the year , including by non-believers and those who do not practise a religion , and that have left an almost infinitely varied series of main courses based on dried pulses , which undoubtedly increase the consumption figures .
Another sector which requires this type of product is livestock farming .
At times like this , when we are seeing fraudulently-fattened livestock and the use of unauthorised products , it becomes essential for the market to provide reasonably-priced , good quality natural feedingstuffs , such as some of those that this regulation concerns , and specifically vetches .
Finally , we are talking about Community protection for a crop which last year , in my region , provided an honest living for around 17 000 families .
Moreover , this is a sector in which , fortunately , there has not been a proliferation of bounty-hunters who move into agriculture in order to receive grants from the Union .
Here we are dealing with traditional crops farmed by people who devote themselves to these crops from generation to generation , and who have contributed to the formation of a large part of the countryside and cuisine of substantial regions of Europe , which still interest us and which we should maintain .
I am therefore asking for the support of Parliament for the Commission 's proposals and the improvements which , by way of amendment , are contained in María Izquierdo 's report .
Mr President , we are able to support an extension to the proposal but , at the same time , I would draw attention to the fact that Agenda 2000 , which was decided upon last year in Berlin , is based , of course , upon our looking towards free trade and endeavouring to reduce the present level of aid and to reach a number of agreements under the aegis of the WTO whereby , by virtue of market mechanisms , we can obtain greater access to the many markets out in the world .
I would also draw your attention to the fact that , in recent years , conventional farming has been put under pressure . Prices have fallen for just about every product .
This is what some people call stability . Farmers experience it somewhat differently because costs are , of course , rising and price freezes will therefore automatically be experienced as a setback .
I would also recall the fact that the Commission has recently tightened up on the conditions for intervening in the area of grain .
Wheat growers , in particular , will be affected very badly , which they already are because of a 15 % fall in prices , but then there is also a tightening up on quality and with regard to the issue of protein crops . This means , moreover , that , especially in the northern part of the EU , there will be further price falls in the offing .
On behalf of my Group , I shall , as I said , support an extension to the arrangements , but I would strongly urge the Commission , before 2002-2003 , to make a concerted effort to investigate possible changes to the way in which we employ resources so that we can , in the future too , safeguard that group of farmers which , until now , has been supported by means of the aid arrangements in question .
- ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , we must support the production of grain legume crops by improving the system without reducing the level of aid , given the current shortfall in grain legumes both for human consumption and animal consumption .
The fact is that the system of aid established in 1989 has been modified several times , but no report has been presented on the application of the present system .
Now , by advocating a maximum guaranteed area of 400 000 hectares , the Commission wants to reduce the average production area over the last three years by around 100 000 hectares , which will mean considerable reductions in aid .
On the other hand , although we do not disagree with splitting the maximum guaranteed area into two , we feel it is necessary to adjust the historical reference period in order to calculate each of the maximum guaranteed areas excluding the last three years , in order to reduce the damaging impact for Portugal on products designed for human consumption .
Finally , it is important to point out that it is vital for Portugal that dry bean should be considered in this system , even without the change to the maximum guaranteed surface .
We therefore firmly believe that the Commission should bear in mind these amendments to the new system which it hopes to establish for grain legumes .
Mr President , I would again like to thank the rapporteur , Maria Izquierdo Rojo , for an excellent and constructive report .
There are two Commission documents that serve as a basis for the issue of grain legumes .
The first is a report on the aid scheme in place for grain legumes , and the second a proposal for improved administration of the system .
What vegetables are we actually talking about ?
I know that the Spanish members know the subject well , but I should mention that by grain legumes are meant three annual vegetables with a high protein content and which are gathered in the form of dry seeds .
Lentils and chickpeas serve as food for humans , while the seeds of vetches , which to us are more unusual vegetables , are used as animal feed .
Grain legumes are grown as field crops , particularly in the southern part of the Union , as they thrive well in dry climates .
In fact Spain accounts for 90 % of all EU grain legume production .
Grain legumes are not covered by the aid scheme that was remodelled with the Agenda 2000 programme , although they can be used in crop rotation schemes involving other crops such as corn .
Grain legumes are covered by their own scheme where the amount of fixed aid per hectare is EUR 181 and the maximum guaranteed area is 400 000 hectares .
The scheme was established in 1989 when the growing area of grain legumes was reduced at the expense of corn , which was already suffering from overproduction .
The special scheme aimed to preserve traditional legume grain growing areas by means of the aid per hectare arrangement .
What are the conclusions of the Commission ' s report ?
An examination of how the scheme has been applied reveals that the MGA of 400 000 hectares has been systematically exceeded .
There are two conclusions to be drawn from this .
First , the aim of the scheme has been successfully achieved and , second , the growing areas have to be brought under better control .
The MGA overruns in the last few years have shown themselves to be mainly with regard to vetches .
Although the scheme is being applied satisfactorily as a whole , MGA management is problematic , as those responsible for the overruns are not being treated any differently from other producers .
So how could the system be improved ?
We should aim to find solutions regarding improvements within the framework of the present scheme and the appropriations set aside for it .
We are in a situation in which the Agenda 2000 reform has been adopted and international trade negotiations are drawing closer .
I would like to point out that the rapporteur ' s proposed amendment whereby the current aid scheme for vetch farmers could be combined with another market arrangement , i.e. , that for seed vetches , would not achieve the improvement desired .
This is a reference to Amendment No 2 .
It cannot be adopted for two reasons : firstly , the schemes are mutually exclusive , as in one scheme the seeds , in principle , have to be harvested as animal feed , while , in the other , they are designated for sowing .
The other reason is that it might involve extra expense .
The Commission ' s report recommends that the MGA should be divided into two parts based on the earlier land area division in the proportion 40 / 60 .
It would divide up thus : 1 600 000 hectares would be used for the production of lentils and chickpeas , and 240 000 hectares would be used for the production of vetches .
In addition , it is proposed that the Management Committee for Dried Fodder be replaced by the Management Committee for Cereals .
The purpose of this change is only to legally endorse what has become common practice on the committees .
Finally , I would like to say that the Commission will adopt the rapporteur ' s amendments that reinforce its position , proposing that the Commission submit a new report , as in Amendment No 3 , and seek ways of improving the system , as in Amendment No 1 .
Members of the European Parliament , in the light of my comments , the proposal will probably not be difficult to adopt so that it can be applied from the marketing year 2000 - 2001 onwards .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Additionality
The next item is the debate on the following oral questions to the Commission :
B5-0207 / 2000 , by Mrs Evans and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on additionality
B5-0209 / 2000 , by Mr Davies and Mrs Attwooll , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the additionality principle in Structural Fund appropriations .
Mr President , Commissioner , the purpose of the Structural Funds is to target the poorest and most run-down areas of the European Union , those in greatest need of development , with extra money to help them begin to rebuild the economy , create jobs and regenerate poorer communities .
Additionality is meant to ensure that happens and to prevent governments from using EU funding to replace their own aid as this would defeat the object .
But in many regions and nations that is what happens at the moment and I can illustrate the problem using the example of Wales .
The granting of EU Objective 1 status to West Wales and the Valleys last year was an acknowledgement of the poverty in two-thirds of the country .
EUR 1.2 billion of European funding used effectively could provide exactly the additional help that is intended .
But if we look at the government budget to Wales , in practice there will be no more government spending next year with Objective 1 than there is this year before Objective 1 .
The National Assembly budget which comes from the Treasury remains the same so that in the first fifteen months , at least , of the new programme period there are no additional resources at all .
The money will be taken from other budgets in the National Assembly , such as health and education .
Therefore central government expenditure is reduced .
Under the Structural Funds , areas of greatest need are identified and selected on regional criteria .
Yet when the Commission looks at additionality it is dealt with on a Member State level .
This is a clear contradiction .
The rules as they stand allow this to happen .
Member States are not legally required to demonstrate additionality at the regional or programme level .
I agree with the statement made by Commissioner Barnier in a written reply to me when he said that the spirit of additionality rather than the letter of the law on the matter is an important consideration .
We need the revision of the system and a central part of that is looking at additionality internally in the Member States at the programme level as well as at the Member State level .
Mechanisms need to be in place to ensure that Member States respect the principle and the spirit of additionality so that funds are targeted and spent effectively .
So we are asking in this question , Commissioner , for confirmation that this will be done and I look forward to the vote on this debate in April .
Mr President , the principle of additionality exists in order to ensure that transfers to the Member States under the Structural Funds add to , rather than replace , national expenditures on structural development measures .
In this way , European Union structural policies will have a greater impact on reducing regional and social disparities .
The ex-ante verification of additionality is at present being undertaken in application of Article 11 of Regulation 1260 / 99 .
This is an integral part of the negotiation of the Structural Funds programmes with the Member States .
This exercise is a demonstration of the Member States ' intention to implement the principle of additionality over the programming period that lies ahead .
Where necessary , the Commission may request clarification from the Member States on the details of their forecasts for eligible expenditure for the period 2000-2006 .
As a further measure , the Commission has prepared detailed implementing provisions for inclusion in the programming documents covering both the situation ex ante and also the mid-term and final verification of additionality .
The second issue covered by the questions is the possibility of the verification of additionality at regional level .
I would like to develop a number of elements of previous answers .
Firstly , although additionality is implemented at the level of the overall eligible spending by the Member States rather than at regional level , it must be borne in mind that the overall additionality required to be demonstrated is , by definition , the sum of the eligible expenditures at the lower level .
In practice , reduced national eligible expenditure in some regions would have to be balanced with an increase in other regions in order for additionality to be respected overall .
On this point the Commission can give a clear assurance that , where evidence exists of reduced national expenditure in a given region or regions , it will be particularly attentive with regard to the credibility of the overall figures .
A second point of clarification concerns the scope of additionality and the suggestion that , when implemented at national level , it may be incompatible with the regional vocation of the Structural Funds .
It must be borne in mind that the development-related expenditure of a Member State which is taken into account for the assessment of additionality is generally a mixture of resources allocated and managed at national level and those managed at regional level .
While there might be some categories of expenditure for which stability could be expected at regional level between the programming periods , it could hardly be suggested that the level of spending on , for example , major infrastructure should be maintained at the same level in each region regardless of current needs .
This is why the Commission takes the view that the strict application of additionality at regional level would lead to excessive rigidity in the management by the Member States of their own development expenditure .
Finally , regarding budgetary provisions within the Member States between the central government and the regions , the Commission can only repeat that these are matters exclusively for national consideration and are not related to additionality as defined in the regulations .
Mr President , can I begin by thanking my colleague from Wales - though from another party , Jillian Evans , for raising this issue .
I do not think that there is a more important issue in Wales at the moment than the application of Objective 1 funds and it is important to look at the background to the issues that we are currently considering .
There are two major news stories breaking in the United Kingdom today .
One is the shock news of BMW 's decision to break up the Rover-Land Rover Group with the threat of massive redundancies right the way across the UK and the other breaking news this morning is the Conservative Party 's stunning victory in the Ayr by-election driving the defending Labour Party into a miserable third place with a swing of almost 10 % .
Now these stories are not just topical background to this debate .
In my view , they underpin the very issues which we are considering in the context of Structural Fund spending under Objectives 1 and 2 in those parts of the European Union which are facing major economic problems .
As we have already heard from Jillian Evans , a major part of Wales , in constituencies which I also represent , has been granted Objective 1 status , but sadly ever since that announcement was made by the Commission , our problems in Wales have actually got even worse .
As a direct result of what I would describe as UK government policy , our agricultural economy has all but collapsed .
Farm incomes are at their lowest level for a generation and this decline is also hitting the manufacturing sector .
I do not apologise for saying that the massive overvaluation of sterling which gives the UK Labour Chancellor an electoral war-chest of unprecedented proportions has handicapped every Welsh and UK manufacturer trying to export into the European market .
It is little wonder that BMW blames the Rover decision directly on UK government economic policy , but that I fear is little comfort to the thousands of workers in Rover who have strained to improve the efficiency of the company only to find that their efforts have been undermined in Downing Street .
I turn then to the central hand of Labour government at work in terms of the European Structural Funds package .
The unacceptable behaviour of the UK Government over this has already brought about the timely end of the political career of the first Secretary of the Welsh Assembly .
Sadly , the Structural Funds spending issues have been marked by delay by disputes in relation to matched funding and also in relation to the issue of additionality .
Lest it be raised later in this debate let me make it clear : this is not a new issue and I share the view that it is an issue that needs to be examined very carefully by the Commission itself .
I have the honour to be appointed as the rapporteur on the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee for the Structural Funds guidelines 2000-2006 and the committee agreed on that occasion , based on our recommendations to the Regional Policy Committee , that the Commission should pay attention to this issue of additionality .
We reiterated the importance of ensuring that Structural Funds do not just merely , as it were , replace public spending otherwise earmarked for those areas that are lagging behind .
I am rather sorry that the Regional Policy Committee did not incorporate that in the report themselves , but there it is .
There are a number of questions that I would ask Commissioner Liikanen to take back to Commissioner Barnier .
I appreciate that he is the Commissioner in office today but he may not be in a position to respond to these points himself .
However , these are points that I seek to put in the context of certainly the area that I represent and I daresay they are points that would be supported by Jillian Evans on behalf of her party .
What progress is being made in relation to the approval of the programming documents within the Commission ?
Will the Commissioner take the step in terms of transparency of publishing at an appropriate time the correspondence that has taken place between the Commission and the National Assembly ?
We were assured , I am bound to say by a rather complacent Economic Secretary , who has now become the First Secretary , that all matters were proceeding in an orderly fashion .
Yet we hear from remarks that are made from time to time by the Commission that there are real problems and we find it difficult to do our job within this Parliament without that degree of transparency .
So , will the Commission undertake to make that information available to all Members of the European Parliament ?
Will they undertake to keep us informed in relation to these matters ?
Will they undertake to challenge Member State Governments in relation to the maps that have been drawn up in relation to Objective 2 where also there has been quite clear evidence of jerrymandering also .
The additionality issue is an important one , but I must say it is not the only one which gives much concern to many Members of this European Parliament .
Mr President , I should just like to touch on a couple of points that Mr Evans raised .
First of all , I acknowledge that there is difficulty in the Midlands with the Rover Group .
I would not like to make political capital out of it .
There are too many jobs at stake .
Secondly , he also mentioned their by-election .
I congratulate his party in securing a victory in this by-election .
But , unlike him , I have been in Ayr for the last three weeks , on the doorstep .
I can tell you that additionality was never raised once .
I turn to the question at hand .
I thank the Nationalists for having raised this .
It is right that we have a proper discussion on the whole question of the Structural Funds .
But I suspect there is a deeper plot here .
What are they actually trying to achieve ?
I listened to Ms Evans .
Basically , what I took from her contribution is that she wants to redefine the Structural Funds regulations .
I would remind people in this Parliament that it was not so long ago that this Parliament passed , by the assent procedure , the rules and regulations governing the Structural Funds , including Article 11 , which defines additionality .
Is it therefore Parliament 's role now to change that ?
We should not change that .
The role of this Parliament is to ensure that the rules are complied with .
That is what we should concentrate on .
I know that Ms Evans , along with one of her colleagues , Dafydd Wigley and a member of the Scottish Nationalist Party , Mr Wilson , went to meet Commissioner Barnier .

I should like to read out the statement made by Commissioner Barnier after that meeting :
" I know that there has been a great deal of debate in Scotland and Wales recently about European regional funding .
But I have the impression that this has sometimes confused two separate issues - additionality and cofinancing .
I am not surprised that there is a certain amount of confusion among the Nationalists on this .
Additionality , whether or not EU funds are providing additional impact , compared to what would otherwise have happened , can be used as one of the selection criteria by the local programme planners before they decide to approve aid to individual projects .
The Commission , on the other hand , is obliged by the rules to make a global assessment of additionality for the UK as a whole , with the specific aim of ensuring that the European financial aid is additional to , and not a substitute for , national finance .
We have always been satisfied in the past that the national requirements have been met " .
Mr President , it is clear from what the Commissioner has said that the Commission is conscientious in measuring the additionality of structural funding at Member State level , and it was good also to hear his assurances about the various different levels of evaluation that take place .
As the Commission will be aware , however , a number of Member States within the European Union have devolved systems of regional government .
Such regional systems of government are normally financed in whole or in part from central government funds .
It appears to me that , under the present rules , central government can build the EU contribution to structural funding into its calculations for determining regional government budgets .
There appears to be no mechanism , despite what the Commissioner said , for ensuring either of two things : first , that the additionality rule is applied to this calculation , and second , that the amount of EU funding which ultimately reaches individual regions corresponds directly to the amount earmarked for those regions at the planning stage .
At the very least , this engenders a lack of transparency .
It may also mean that the additionality principle is not being properly implemented on a region-by-region basis .
I accept , like Mrs Evans , that this does not , strictly speaking , contradict the letter of European Union law on this matter .
But , unlike her , it seems to me to be quite clearly contrary to the spirit of additionality rules and undermines the very purposes for which structural funding was established in the first place .
Although I come from Scotland , I know these issues are of concern not just to my Liberal Democrat colleagues from other parts of the United Kingdom but also to ELDR members representing regions across the whole of the European Union .
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate my Welsh colleague for her excellent speech and I am also glad that there is basic agreement from all sections of the political spectrum .
Some of us newcomers to this Parliament are already beginning to tire of good intentions , fantastic programmes and of hearing about the spirit of the Community regulations .
Instead of spirit , we are going to end up with ghosts and sleepless nights because , in reality , commitments are not being fulfilled .
It is therefore appropriate for the European institutions themselves to start by making good their commitments with regard to additionality .
The Court of Auditors has already drawn up an assessment of the implementation of the additionality principle in June 1999 which shows that it is a total disaster and a mistake .
Secondly , we must take into account - and this is a political declaration - the real Europe , the citizens ' Europe , the Europe of nations and nations within the States , because until these are taken into account , we will keep coming back to the same old problem .
Scotland , Wales , the Basque country , Catalonia , Galicia , even a region as large as Andalusia , cannot depend on the decisions of a central State , however much of a State it is .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to reiterate the words of Mr Miller , who spoke earlier - and who is regrettably no longer in the Chamber - when he criticised the authors of this question by saying that our main task is to ensure that the rules are complied with .
The first rules that need to be complied with are those in the Treaty , in this case , Article 158 , which takes the objective of economic and social cohesion to its highest level .
Our task is to ensure that following on from this , the Commission ' s regulations and behaviour attain and serve to attain these objectives . Our task is also to be alert enough here to criticise and to raise the issue whenever we see that this is not being done .
We support the good timing and the reasoning of the issues raised by the authors of the oral question and we agree with the comments that have already been made here .
We call on the Commission to exert more pressure to ensure that these instruments are used effectively in favour of the regions with the greatest needs , instead of , as it seems to us , letting the objective of economic and social cohesion go cold .
This subject is obviously a delicate one , and its development has been discussed at great length over the years , with many rules being regularly revised , but what we cannot accept is that the revision of these rules and the development of the bureaucracy always hit the most needy .
We cannot , for example , accept the fact that problems have been raised about allocating funds to regions which are eligible under various programmes , because if these regions are eligible for various funds it is precisely because their needs are the greatest , and anything that hinders the operation of these funds holds back their development and threatens the objective of economic and social cohesion .
Similarly , we do not accept that the Commission should in any way associate itself with the degree of inertia shown by some national governments who are not prepared to support the regions with the greatest needs .
We therefore call on the Commission to ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I have been watching this whole business of Structural Funds and additionality for many years , and there are a number of things that we can learn from the past .
The first is that the money in absolute terms in most regions of the Community is relatively small , and its impact is political rather economic - though that is important too .
I have often said it is important that we as a European Union should not just make regulations telling people what they may or may not do , but that we should extend what appears to the European public and to the regions of the Union to be tangible benefits .
Even in rich regions they will appreciate the fact that the European Union tries to help close the gap between rich and poor .
The other thing in the macro-economic sense that we can say is that , if a certain amount of Structural Funds is allocated to Portugal or Greece or Ireland , as it has been in the past , then that money goes into these states in any case and that is the first impact that it has .
The money is actually transferred and , regardless of whether the letter of the law is observed or not , the countries become the better off .
Another point that I would like to make is that we can learn from the past .
First of all , we have now tidied up the regulations to some extent , but originally they were written in an effort to please every sector and every political interest , so that it became impossible , with the staff that the European Commission had at its disposal , to police the spending of the money , and that is still the case to a large degree .
We are now into to the third or fourth programme .
What we must do is learn from the mistakes of the past and try and apply the lessons to the future .
If you want to be absolutely effective with the way this money is spent , what you need to do is to look at what a country has been spending previously , and to ask them to submit their plans to the European Commission .
The European Commission identifies the weaknesses in this plan and says : This is the way we would like our money to be spent in addition to what you have already allocated for all this work you intend to do .
In my personal experience in Ireland , I never heard the European Commission take Ireland to task for failure in the area of additionality .
But one should remember that , between 1982 and 1992 , the Structural Funds to Ireland peaked ; they are getting less now , and there was a generous amount of money .
But , from 1982 to 1992 , the public capital programme actually reduced , including Structural Funds .
It reduced in real terms by 30 % .
So where did the Structural Funds go ?
The Structural Funds actually went into public sector pay and social welfare , and it is very questionable as to whether they did a good or a bad turn to the Irish economy in those years , because they contributed to inflation and increased wage demands .
So there are lessons to be learned : set against the staff the Commission had at its disposal to deal with the Irish problem - three or four people - Ireland had 30 000 civil servants , and the Irish Civil Service won every time !
Mr President , I am going to refer to a subject that none of the previous speakers has discussed .
I am referring to the report by the Court of Auditors on the principle of additionality .
This is a report that was published in the Official Journal of the European Communities on 9 March .
This report contains a very interesting section - section 62 - that discusses privatisation .
Over the past few years , various European Union governments have enthusiastically embarked on a policy of privatisation placing the heritage which previously belonged to the community in very few hands .
In Spain , for example , over the last four years , public companies have been privatised to the tune of 4 billion , with a B for Barcelona or Brussels . These public companies have passed into the hands of private individuals .
Mr Liikanen is an expert in accounting , and knows that privatisation is a form of public disinvestment and , specifically , that it can be a form of regional disinvestment .
If , for example , an airline providing regional services was privatised , regional disinvestment could occur , and we would thus be infringing the principle of additionality .
The Court of Auditors has referred to this , saying that Member States are aware that spending decreases as a result of privatisation and it is in their interests to reduce it .
Taking into account the importance of the categories of spending affected , telecommunications , energy , etc . , this simple operation can substantially modify the final result .
And we also have the response by the Commission , which must be very recent , and which Commissioner Liikanen , as a member of the College , must remember perfectly .
The Commission replies here with a system that we call the Olendorf method , a method of language-learning that consists of the teacher asking the student " Have you got my uncle 's underpants ? " and the student replying " No , but I have my grandmother 's glasses " .
And the response given to us by the Commission in section 62 is very short .
It says : " Although the private sector sometimes invests in sectors that are traditionally considered public , it would be incredibly difficult to increase the verification of additionality in private investments , as this would imply the collection and examination of the accounts of a number of private companies which would not be obliged to provide the corresponding information to the national authorities or to the Commission " .
That is , the Commission is replying using the Olendorf method .
We have here Commissioner Liikanen who knows the subject very well , and perhaps he could give us a more specific response , as I believe that this considerably affects the core of additionality .
The second issue is that the Berlin financial forecasts anticipated a substantial reduction in the Structural Funds .
This year we have EUR 29 430 million . In the year 2006 we will have a nominal figure of EUR 26 600 million , that is to say , a reduction of 14 % over seven years .
Taking into account inflation , I can calculate that there is a reduction of 20 % .
That is , from now until 2006 , the Structural Funds will lose over 20 % compared with the current figure , which means that it will be very difficult to meet the needs we are meeting today and , as we have heard , there are still many problems in many Community regions .
There is a further problem , which should also not be hidden from the Commission or the members of this House : we are talking about the impending enlargement of the European Union with thirteen new Member States , most of which have a far lower average income than that of the poorest regions of the Community and there are no plans to fulfil cohesion policies with regard to these candidate Member States .
I know that the Commission will not be able to give me a reply on this question , but I am drawing the attention of the House and the Commissioner to the problem that this will cause with regard to Community cohesion policies .
Mr President , while I endorse everything that Mr Medina Ortega has said , I would like to say that , although we are a tiny Group with very little time to speak , I did refer to the report of the Court of Auditors that he mentioned , which is indeed from 9 March this year .
Mr President , Commissioner , as has been said here , EU funds cannot replace Member States ' public expenditure and the structural aid that runs parallel with it .
This principle of additionality is important to reduce regional disparities , which is the aim of the Union ' s regional and structural policies .
The Commission must oblige the Member States to work in such a way that the principle of additionality is implemented both nationally and regionally .
I suspect that this principle is being seriously violated in the Member States .
The effect of the Union ' s regional policy is dramatically weakened by governments drastically reducing national , public and structural aid and subsidies , even in excess of what is coming into a region via Union funds .
In some cases this violation is covered up by including as national regional funds development funds , which are mainly , however , targeted at the fastest growing areas .
The regional failure to observe the principle of additionality aggravates the situation with regard to internal regional disparities within Member States , which runs counter to the aims of the Union ' s regional policy .
President , it is a great pity indeed that Commissioner Barnier has been unable to be present here this morning , because this is a matter within his brief which is causing great concern not only in Scotland and Wales but in other parts of the Union .
It is a matter of real concern because it is made to appear as though a scheme which is supposed to provide specific help really ends up just been a conjuring trick between the Commission and the national governments in which extra money is supposed to be coming in , but we are told afterwards it makes no difference whether extra money went into the particular region as long as it went into the country as a whole .
That is simply unacceptable .
We are further told , however , that all is well , because the additionality rules in the regulation are being carried through properly .
Yet the Court of Auditors , in the very report that we have been talking about , says the following things : the difficulties encountered are caused by the limited development of the principle in terms of concepts and methodology and the joint failure to find appropriate and effective procedures for verifying it .
And then two paragraphs later , the identification of the structural assistance interventions in the eligible regions is unreliable , and this leads to the inclusion of a large number of estimates and hypotheses which are difficult to verify .
' Difficult ' indeed , Sir .
No wonder that this causes disquiet throughout the Community and let us ask the Commission to giv