Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament , adjourned on Friday , 25 October 1996 .
Membership of Parliament
The Austrian and Finnish authorities have notified me of the list of Members elected to Parliament from their countries , following the elections in Austria on 13 October and in Finland on 20 October .
The full list of names will be annexed to the Minutes of today 's sitting .
I welcome these new Members to the European Parliament , as well as the former Members who have been reelected .
We look forward to working together with you .
To enable you to begin that work without delay , I would point out that , pursuant to Rule 7 of the Rules of Procedure , until such time as a Member 's credentials have been verified or a ruling has been given on any dispute , the Member shall take his seat in Parliament and on its bodies and shall enjoy all the rights attaching thereto .
Once again , I should like to thank the Austrian and Finnish Members who are standing down for the work which they have done and for their cooperation , and to give them our best wishes for the future in their countries .
( Applause )
Welcome
I now have the pleasure of welcoming the Conference of Federal and Länder CDU and CSU political group leaders from the Federal Republic of Germany , led by Mr Alois Glück , who have taken their seats in the official gallery .
I welcome you here to Parliament !
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are disasters which , by their very nature or significance , affect all of us , all the citizens of the European Union .
This is the case of the fire which last Thursday broke out in the building of Lisbon 's City Hall , in my country 's capital .
In just a few hours , the flames devastated a significant part of this valuable testimony to neo-classical architecture , a democratic and heritage symbol of the city of Lisbon and a national historical and cultural reference point .
Without calling into question the motion for a resolution which we have already tabled and which we would like to see discussed and passed next Thursday , I hope that I am speaking for everyone in this Chamber by asking you , Mr President , on behalf of the European Parliament , to take the initiative of sending a message of support to the city authorities , in particular the Mayor of Lisbon who until recently was our colleague , to all of the City Elders and to the people of Lisbon .
I am sure that you will do so .
Thank you very much !
The House will be very sad to hear your news of the fire at Lisbon City Hall , Mr Novo , and I shall send a message of sympathy to the Mayor of Lisbon this week to make it clear how much the House regrets this loss .
There are matters of great urgency which will not allow for any delay .
Urgent human , political and moral action needs to be taken .
1 200 000 refugees are on the move in Zaire .
Every minute counts , Mr President , in spite of the praiseworthy efforts made by the Commission , the Council and the whole of Europe .
I appeal to you to make sure that we lose no time as we tend to do in the context of other bodies .
Every hour , every day that goes by increases the death toll by tens of thousands .
Without wishing to upset the agenda of this week 's session , which is quite full as it is , I urge you , Mr President , to raise the matter as soon as possible and intervene personally with the UN Secretary-General so that a debate is held at the earliest opportunity .
There should not be any delay in dealing with this obvious international emergency .
We need to send a delegation of this Parliament - which as it happens has not been represented - to this area and the delegation shall by way of exception be led by you , Mr President , in order to underline the gravity of this tragedy .
I am sure that your concern is shared by the great majority in the House , Mr Kouchner , and I shall write accordingly to the Secretary-General of the United Nations .
Furthermore , I would point out that this matter is on our agenda for Wednesday .
My letter to the Secretary-General is not dependent on the debate ; I simply wished to make the point that on Wednesday , the House will be discussing both the situation itself and the measures we are expecting from the European Union .
Mr President , I have a point of order under Rule 109 ( 3 ) .
The Secretary-General , Mr Vinci , will certainly remember the part he played in Parliament 's reaction when acts of violence were committed here in the House .
I was the rapporteur for the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities when the House approved my proposal to add the following final sentence to this Rule : ' The Secretary-General shall see to it that this disciplinary measure is carried out immediately , with the assistance of the staff of Parliament 's Security Service . ' On the Thursday of the last part-session - without going into details and naming no names - a fight took place outside the Chamber which brought the House into disrepute and completely overshadowed all our positive achievements in the Dutch press .
As the rapporteur who drafted the Rule in question , I should like to propose that it should also apply outside the Chamber .
This is something I should very much like to discuss with you .
It is open to you to propose an amendment to the Rules , Mr Janssen van Raay , which would be referred to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
We cannot change the Rules of Procedure here in the sitting .
Rule 109 ( 3 ) is quite clear : it refers only to the Chamber .
Mr President , I regret having to rise on what might seem a trivial point of order but I feel it fair to let Members of the House know that about 20 minutes ago Mrs Hardstaff and I found two photographers , armed with long-range lenses , taking photographs of somebody 's office from the extension of the building .
We challenged them and asked them to leave ; we got the security people to ask them to leave .
It seems that there is no rule by which we can ask people who are invading the privacy of Members of this House to leave Parliament .
I would like you to instigate an immediate investigation into why these people are allowed to continue photographing our offices and also to tell me precisely what are the rules on photographers in this building - they seem to have a free rein and it is not good enough .
I appreciate your concern , Mr Hallam .
Please let me have the details in a brief note , so that I can investigate the matter properly .
Mr President , I rise in connection with what is essentially a moral , humanitarian and political matter .
Everyone is aware of the existence of the green line in Cyprus , of the green line which encircles Nicosia .
On that line there has been a crossing point through which , by long-standing agreement , people living in the occupied enclave have been able to pass in order to visit relatives in the free part of Cyprus or to obtain medical treatment , given that treatment facilities in the occupied part of the island are hopelessly inadequate even where they exist .
A few weeks ago the Turkish authorities closed this route . As a consequence of that a father and mother who had crossed to the free area for social and other purposes before the closure are unable to return to their young children in the occupied area , which means that those children are now without protection .
Mr President , I request you to use your good offices to try to get that arbitrary action reversed .
That was not a point of order , Mr Ephremidis , and I am not taking any further points of order here .
I still have a number of announcements to make , which I think we have to deal with first .
Mr President , I simply wished to let you know that there was another photographer outside the Chamber just now , attempting to photograph us as we were signing the attendance register .
I would ask you to finally put a stop to this deplorable state of affairs .
There were no security staff on hand , so I told the photographer that what he was doing was not allowed .
Could you please either have the attendance register moved into the Chamber - there is plenty of space available behind you - or take steps to see that we put a stop once and for all to this quite irregular snooping in Parliament .
There are clear rules governing photographers in Parliament , Mrs Lulling .
For example , filming or taking photographs is not permitted in the restaurants .
In principle , however , they have hitherto been allowed to take pictures in the lobby and elsewhere on Parliament 's premises .
For that to be changed , the Rules would have to be amended . The matter would thus have to be considered by the Bureau .
I cannot simply change the Rules of my own accord , before there has been a discussion in the Bureau .
Mr President , like you , I have absolutely no objection to cameramen or whoever photographing me openly signing in .
I am here doing my job .
Let them please report the fact that we are doing our jobs rather than anything else .
Ladies and gentlemen , should we not now think about beginning our debates ?
Amendment of Rule 49
The next item is the report ( A4-0348 / 96 ) by Mr Manzella , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on amendment of Rule 49 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure ( annual legislative programme ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in all democratic parliaments , the organization of the legislative programme is without doubt the most sensitive issue in the relationship between the institutions of government and the representative bodies .
That relationship may be said to be the reflection and the measure of the involvement of a parliament , as a legislative body , in the political direction of a constitutional system .
The concept of the institution of government may be monistic , that is to say the government is simply the executive arm of the parliamentary majority ; then again , the concept may be dualistic with the institution of government being independent of the representative assembly : at any event , those two concepts are shaped by the way in which parliament 's programme of work is determined .
This House , as we know , is not able to initiate legislation - save in the case of the very limited procedure under Article 138b of the Treaty - except , obviously , indirectly , by tabling amendments .
That is why our relationship with the other institutions of the Union , on the legislative programme , is very unusual .
What I mean by that is that Parliament must play a more prominent role in the procedure determining the organization of legislation , without disrupting the current system of institutional responsibilities .
This procedural position will thus allow it to take part in determining the political direction of the Union in a way that would appear to be ruled out as the distribution of responsibilities is currently established .
Hence the proposal to amend Rule 49 , which I have the honour to put to the House .
This replaces the provisions of the tripartite declaration - CouncilCommission-Parliament - with the notion of dynamic participation by this House , on an equal footing with the other Institutions , in the actual drawing-up of the programme .
The crucial element in this participation is that we should establish the political priorities of the legislative programme via a resolution .
As a result of this position in the process , which will enable it to decide - and this is always a crucial decision in politics - on the time-scale for legislative processes , the European Parliament will participate fully in determining the Union 's political guidelines , although , strictly speaking , without the power to initiate legislation .
It follows - though this is not spelled out in our text - that , in accordance with the general principle governing parliamentary decision-taking , our resolution will have to be preceded by a process of analysis and selection carried out by the standing committees .
That will then enable the House to establish the final political priorities based on the proposals put forward by the Commission , on the basis of a text tabled by the Conference of Presidents .
That process of analysis , forecasting and selection will take place within a specific time-frame , between the October and December part-sessions , with the annual programme having to be approved at the December partsession .
The work of the House on this will be facilitated by a requirement that the Commission accredit the proposals with both the definitive legal basis and all of the data , currently available , on the financial consequences , compliance with the principle of subsidiarity and urgency .
According to two of the amendments tabled , the annual programme , defined thus and , above all , thus determined as a result of the establishment by this House of the political priorities , ought to be subject to six-monthly review , at the beginning of each new presidency .
The concept of a programme that runs smoothly through the change of presidency seems to your rapporteur to be perfectly logical and reasonable , and I therefore support the amendments concerned .
I therefore consider that as a result of this amendment to our Rules of Procedure which already has the support of the Commission - a mark of genuine interinstitutional cooperation - the European Parliament will acquire a more visible role in the process of governing the Union .

Mr President , we are dealing today with Mr Manzella 's report on the revision of Rule 49 and I would like to congratulate him on all the hard thinking and work he has put into preparing this report .
Mr President , let me summarize how things stand at the moment : the Commission submitted its programme in October as usual .
Parliament drew up a resolution on this programme and the Conference of Presidents spent long weeks and long months in negotiations with the Commission , in which officials and one of the Commissioners appointed by the Commission were also involved .
As usual , lengthy discussions were held before the document was finally published in the Official Journal .
I have already raised a few points during the debate on the work programme for this year .
Let me remind you here that the work programme for 1995 appeared in the Official Journal in August and the work programme for 1996 appeared in the Official Journal in May .
If work programmes are drawn up in this way , we are not going to be able to have any meaningful influence on the Commission 's activity or on our Parliament 's political activity .
The President of Parliament has therefore called on the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities to radically simplify Rule 49 .
Our group , Mr President , is in agreement with this simplification which needs to be applied as widely as possible .
In our view , the Commission will from now on begin by submitting its work programme in October .
Parliament and its committees will then tackle the various issues of concern to them so that by December we should be able to present a resolution outlining Parliament 's priorities in the year ahead .
In addition to this work programme , I think that Parliament in any case has other opportunities for intervening in legislation .
Article 138b of the Treaty , for instance confers on Parliament some right of initiative .
It is my view that Parliament should avail itself of this right more often than it has done in the past .
Our group then , Mr President , is in complete agreement with the details of Mr Manzella 's report , which seeks to achieve the widest possible simplification .
We would like to make sure that , when voting on the amendments , this simplification is not modified in a way that would make the article too complex for what is required by the Commission 's work programme .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Manzella on an excellent report which , Mr President , has very faithfully carried out the request that you and the other group chairmen made earlier this year to have a more compact , efficient and transparent system for Parliament to express its views on the Commission 's legislative programme .
I thank Mr Manzella for that and we in the EPP Group will support his report .
I wish to say one or two words about the amendments tabled .
There are a number of amendments from the PSE Group that were rejected in committee - narrowly , it is true - and which have now been tabled again .
I hope that it will be possible , together with those who are responsible for these things in the PSE Group , to come to an agreement whereby we ensure that the requisite majority is garnered during the votes tomorrow .
It would be a pity if the best appeared to be the enemy of the good and everybody just voted for his own amendment and , at the end of the day , we did not manage to get the right amendment .
I , personally , very much favour the retention of Amendment No 3 by Mr Manzella .

It seems to me , in contrast to the alternative amendment from the PSE Group - Amendment No 8 - to be more compact , shorter and to be very much along the lines of what you , Mr President , have asked .
I hope it will be possible to maintain this original proposal from Mr Manzella .
Equally , I have tabled in my own name and that of my group , Amendment No 13 , which envisages a six-monthly review , carried out by Parliament , of progress that has been made on the legislative programme .
When I worked for Lord Cockfield I remember that progress-chasing in regard to the implementation of the 1992 programme was something that he laid much emphasis on .
It is a useful self-discipline and I hope we will be able to institute it during our consideration of the legislative programme .
Finally , I see that among the Manzella amendments you have accepted , quite rightly , an amendment to delete text .
Now , strictly , that is contrary to Rule 125 of the Rules of Procedure .
But I am sure that you are quite right to have accepted the amendment and , now that I have seen this anomaly , I shall table an amendment to Rule 125 , to make it clear that when we talk about modifications to the Rules of Procedure themselves , then amendments to delete particular articles or particular elements are wholly acceptable .
That is not clear in our present Rules , but it should be .
With that final caveat , I wish to congratulate Mr Manzella once again and say that I shall be voting with my group for his report tomorrow .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our group feels that the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament should guarantee that approval of the Commission 's legislative programme by our Assembly should take place on the basis of the principles of simplicity , transparency and efficiency .
We therefore feel that the joint declarations by the European Parliament and Commission should be replaced by a much closer and stronger interinstitutional dialogue , involving a periodical examination of the legislative programme by the Conference of Presidents .
In our view , the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities has not included these principles in the text and has instead opted for eliminating from the draft report the sub-paragraph in which participation by the Conference of Presidents and the Conference of Committee Chairmen is established .
This does result in a simple and transparent text , it is true , but it might not be effective in giving this Assembly true powers of control over the legislative programme , control which obviously is one of the bases of our political activity as a Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as far as this report - which Mr Manzella has certainly approached with a great sense of responsibility is concerned , we are opposed in particular to a decision that appears to have been taken .
I want to take advantage of the time that remains to try to explain to the rapporteur and honourable Members just how dangerous the path to be followed seems to me to be , unless a number of amendments designed to effect a slight change in course are adopted .
For a number of years we have had with the Commission - and hope to do the same with the Council also , though it seems to me that we have been successful only once in five or six years - a unique procedure in which the Commission and Parliament reach agreement - and I realize this - with great difficulty .
I also realize that we have encountered determined resistance on the part of the Commission when it comes to putting into practice what it actually agreed : in other words , it very often endorses the legislative programme and then , sometimes deliberately , takes no account of it .
We have been so disappointed with this procedure that we intended this report to change it , making it more effective by means of a vote in plenary : an appropriate and very fair measure responding to the Commission 's work programme and then legislative programme with a debate in the House - and we too consider this definitely to be an important and politically significant act .
But what my group believes to be of little benefit and in fact dangerous to the House is to take the backward step of restricting ourselves to this but not retaining the system that assigns to you , Mr President , in the final analysis , responsibility for negotiating this legislative programme with the Commission , in - as is our constant hope - the presence of the Council , so that what we have is a legislative programme agreed with the other Institutions .
That element in a sense disappears in the amended Rule 49 , although in at least two other rules of the current Rules of Procedure , which have not been amended , that requirement remains , that desire for an agreed legislative programme .
That is why my group has tabled amendments , but I have noticed that in some languages , Italian for instance , they have not been properly translated .
The point of the amendment , Mr Manzella , is clearly to retain the concept of agreement between the Institutions in establishing the legislative programme . But it is our view that a mere resolution of the House is not enough and will not guarantee Parliament or you , Mr President , the opportunity of negotiating with the Commission .
And that is why , along with other minor amendments also , we think it important to retain that concept and include it in a different , amended version , adopting the fundamentals of the Manzella proposal but including this important specification .
Mr President , in ordinary circumstances the Commission plays no part in deliberations about Parliament 's internal rules , but this particular matter concerns us directly .
In fact , positive cooperation by the Commission will be a prerequisite for implementation of the arrangements that Mr Manzella is proposing to the House .
In commencing , I would like to assure the House that that cooperation will be forthcoming and that we are also committed to following through the agreements that have been arrived at already .
Please permit me now , Mr President , to make some observations about the report itself .
First of all , I would like , on behalf of President Santer and Mr Oreja , to commend the extremely constructive cooperation that has been achieved on this matter between the Commission , the President of Parliament - you yourself , that is to say , Mr President- , the chairman of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , Mr Fayot , the rapporteur , Mr Manzella , and to emphasize , of course , the important part played by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure at its meeting with Mr Oreja at which he was able to set out the Commission 's position .
After the completion of the procedure for the legislative programme for 1996 there was general agreement between the Commission and Parliament that the existing arrangements were seriously in need of reform .
Both parties were of the view that the procedure needed to be made simpler and to be vested with a greater political emphasis .
The report before the House today constitutes a formulation of that common aspiration , and I can therefore say , on behalf of the Commission , that it has our full support .
That being the case we do not have many observations to make .
We think that the proposal to include in Rule 49 the general reference that the three institutions - including the Council - will share in determining the legislative programme is right .
I believe that an amendment was tabled to the effect that each institution should proceed in the determination within the constraints of its own powers .
It was tabled but , regrettably , the Committee on the Rules of Procedure rejected it as self-evident .
I would like this interpretation to be emphasized in the new Rule 49 .
The Commission can accept the request that we present the programme in October , as we did this year - although I must tell you in all honesty that it imposes a very strict internal timetable on us .
I consider the reference in the proposed new text of Rule 49 restricting the legislative programme to proposals of legislative character and international agreements to be an improvement and a good simplification .
We take cognizance of the request for the provision of a statement of the proposed legal basis for every act included in the legislative programme .
This is an old problem and we continue to have certain reservations .
We also note the request for the provision of information concerning respect for the principle of subsidiarity and the financial consequences .
As you know , we have certain reservations about that , too .
We shall find it difficult to be precise until the detailed proposal has been processed .
I believe that the introduction of a provision that this information should be provided wherever possible would ease the Commission 's reservation , which I merely wanted to clarify for you .
Let me say finally that I believe that we have a text that we can work with and , what is more , work with very successfully .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Aid to uprooted people
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0344 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0374 / 96-95 / 0162 ( SYN ) ) with a view to the adoption of a Council Regulation on operations to aid uprooted people in Asian and Latin American developing countries ( rapporteur : Mr Howitt ) .
Mr President , last Friday I received a report about a severely ill woman refugee and her baby , members of the Rohingya indigenous community , who had fled Burma for a refugee camp in Bangladesh .
An aid worker who knew the mother told me that her child had been diagnosed at the end of July as being severely malnourished and was under close medical supervision .
Mother and baby were interviewed for repatriation - repatriation to a country known as one of the world 's worst human rights abusers ; a country notorious for its killings , mass imprisonment and forced labour ; where returnees who have been forced to set up settlements just inside the border are subject to intimidation from the Burmese military and have lost all hope of reconciliation .
I was told that this Burmese refugee child was so sick that it was visible to the naked eye that she would be unable to survive repatriation , but the return went ahead and four days later the child was reported dead .
Today 's debate , this legislation and the European aid it supports must signal our determination to avoid such tragic stories .
Emergency humanitarian aid must swiftly be given to those who flee persecution and who are left with nothing .
But European aid must also help refugees to rebuild their health and livelihoods and to resettle back in their communities or into a new life ; a life with a genuine hope of a secure future .
As the world watches over the fate of refugees in eastern Zaire , embroiled in ethnic conflict not of their own choosing , the first priority must be freedom from the fear of violence .
That is why we retable our amendments that European refugee aid must never collaborate against the principle of non-refoulement .
Return must be voluntary or Europe will not help .
We are still watching those responsible for the 15 , 000 former Vietnamese boat people who reside in Hong Kong .
It is why respect for human rights and for reconciliation must underlie the programmes - respect for land rights too in countries like Guatemala where 70 % of the cultivable land is held by just 2 % of the population .
We welcome the fact that our first reading amendments on conflict prevention , on environmental considerations , on combating sexual violence and on help to host communities have been incorporated into the legislation .
But on laying down principles for these programmes for the very first time , important omissions still remain .
Why is there no reference to participation by refugees themselves , and to targeted aid to women 's , disabled and other social groups , which is an essential precondition for the success of these programmes ?
Why limit assistance to basic health needs when long-term counselling is also needed to heal the psychological wounds of conflict ?
If awareness building about land mines can be included in the regulation for humanitarian aid , why not in this ?
When Haitian parents stayed behind pushing their children onto boats so that they would get asylum , why is there a refusal to commit the aid so that children can be reunited with their parents ?
Europe is funding such projets and has been doing so for ten years .
In the northern Bokeo province of Laos , for example , we are currently supporting 1 , 200 returnees in two villages , helping them to build their own homes and a school and with irrigation projects and mine clearance .
Tonight is not an administrative exercise in Europe .
We should look at what we are trying to do on the ground , listen to the experiences of refugees themselves and of aid organizations and agree new regulations based on what we are really trying to do in practice .
In particular , the Council of Ministers should end its stubborn insistence on prior approval of these programmes by a bureaucratic III ( a ) comitology committee .
The new Committee on Food Aid alone is already costing ECU 153 , 000 per year , money which could be feeding hungry people .
In relation to the refugee programmes , my parliamentary question shows that one in four of all refugee aid projects will have to be agreed under this new cumbersome procedure .
This will cause a minimum delay of three months in decisions and the two people responsible for administering the programmes will have to generate 70 , 000 extra pages of paperwork a year - 70 , 000 - this is madness !
Let us stop playing the politics of Europe with the lives of refugees worldwide : 53 million refugees and uprooted people worldwide , equivalent to the total population of my own country , Great Britain , one in every 115 people on this earth forced into flight .
This is surely the biggest challenge facing humanity today .
In our deliberations let us demonstrate that we understand the scale of this challenge .
In our decisions let us show that we are worthy in our response .
Mr President , in recent years measures to help refugees have assumed crucial importance in terms of the more general policies of development and establishing peace .
As already correctly pointed out in Mr Howitt 's report , which we fully support , this involves a combination of measures designed to secure compliance with the provisions of international law and the protection of human rights , as well as positive measures designed to manage the political and humanitarian aspects of crisis situations that actually arise .
On that first aspect , it is important to reiterate that the Geneva Convention and the Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees guarantee the right of asylum and the right ' not to be repulsed ' to all those who legitimately fear for their safety in their country of origin .
Direct action to help displaced people has therefore to be informed by the more serious criteria of the effectiveness of the aid and its compatibility with the objectives of arriving at a peaceful solution to humanitarian crises and the creation of conditions for their lasting development and , possibly , the voluntary repatriation or reintegration of the refugees .
Refugees and displaced people are not an amorphus mass to be helped but individuals needing to be assisted and motivated so that they are able to cope with current and future needs .
Making the most of human resources and protecting the most vulnerable refugees and displaced persons are crucial measures if we are to prevent a situation in which their living conditions becoming unsustainable in the long term and the outstanding problems that prompted their flight become simply insoluble .
If the regulation we are discussing includes the amendments on which we are about to vote , it could make it possible better to define action by the European Union to help the uprooted peoples of Asia and Latin America , even though , it cannot , of course , take the place of more effective political action by the European Union .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Howitt , on behalf of my group as well as myself .
The subject of his report is the fate of refugees in Asia and Latin America .
All of these refugees have to endure harsh conditions .
I had the opportunity , a little over a year ago , of seeing the situation for myself on a private visit to Central America . Among the places I visited were refugee aid projects run by the European Union and by NGOs which are supported by the Commission .
It is shocking to be confronted with such images : to see how people have been driven out , how they have lost all their possessions and must now begin the slow process of rebuilding their lives and somehow recovering .
The Commission and the NGOs that are funded from this budget heading are supporting people in such situations , and their help is needed .
Instead of putting obstacles in the way of those who are actively helping on the ground , we should do our utmost to facilitate their task and support them .
That is why I should like to mention once again a particular problem which came to my attention both on the private visit that I referred to , and on a visit by a European Parliament delegation to Nicaragua .
Projects which are funded from this particular budget line meet enormous problems when it comes to procuring equipment .
We were made aware of the specific problems faced both by NGOs and the Commission in procuring vehicles , because priority has to be given to European products when these are purchased for use in the projects .
There may well be reasons for this requirement , but it poses major problems because there is no infrastructure for these European products and no spare parts , because deliveries are an extremely complex business .
That is why I should like to re-emphasize the need for great flexibility , and if problems arise or the products in question are abnormally expensive , it must be possible to fall back on products from other countries of origin .
The fact is that our main purpose with this budget line is not to support the European economy - that would be indefensible - but to help people .
If our ability to help is compromised because we put bureaucratic obstacles in our own way , then the budget line is failing to achieve its objective .
I had originally tabled an amendment on this issue .
However , I think that I should withdraw it , because I am confident that the Commission will interpret the Council 's compromise proposal here in a sufficiently flexible way to allow the NGOs and the Commission staff who are working on the ground to provide flexible help , rather than saddling them with unnecessary bureaucracy that prevents them from helping people .
Mr President , our group wishes to lend its support to the Howitt report , both because of its mention of the amendments to the regulations accepted in first reading by the Commission , referring to environmental considerations , the prevention of conflicts and the fight against sexual violence , and because of its insistence on re-tabling amendments which we feel are vital .
In my opinion , the most important are the following : the guarantee of health assistance , specific assistance for groups in especially serious situations , such as indigenous women or children , participation by the host communities and refugees in making sure that projects are successful and , finally , the position on comitology .
In other words , we still feel that these committees should be consultative , and we think that it has never been as clear as it is today that the lack of decision-making or excessive red tape can lead to scandals such as the one now taking place in Zaire , which is why we insist on the adoption of this amendment by the Commission .
Mr President , Mr Howitt has presented an important report on the refugee situation .
It has our support , and we were unanimous in approving it in committee .
Mr Howitt has just mentioned the figure of 53 million refugees .
I believe that there are many more than that .
The figure is somewhere between 200 million and 500 million , depending on who is counted as a refugee - whether , for example , environmental refugees are included .
There are many people in the southern hemisphere whom we completely fail to consider .
And that brings me to a problem in the area of internal affairs .
Refugees from the South are frequently refused entry to our countries .
The terminology is shifting : the concepts of asylum and protection from forced repatriation are being circumscribed in such a way that we no longer recognize these people 's human rights .
If a refugee has to obtain proof of his refugee status from a dictatorial regime , that proof will not be forthcoming - in other words , we should take a more liberal approach here .
It is important that refugees should be reintegrated into their countries .
But the conditions necessary for reintegration have to be created .
Mr Howitt mentioned mines .
We need far more resources to effectively clear the mines that have been laid , so that people are able to move about .
For voluntary repatriation to work , we also need people to have the land rights which they formerly held .
This is something that we must support .
The Commission was mentioned in relation to bureaucratic obstacles .
I hope that we can resolve this problem , that as a Parliament we can continue to exercise a control function , and that the people in the camps - 80 % of them women and children - can count on their rights and not be forced to endure sexual or other forms of coercion .
That is where the Commission 's duty lies .
Mr President , it is not an easy matter for the European Union to provide aid for uprooted people in Latin America and Asia .
A theoretical common position on the plight of refugees in two such different parts of the world - the rapporteur talks about Afghanistan to Guatemala - must inevitably be extremely general , and it is debatable , or I at least wonder , whether intergovernmental cooperation on an ad hoc basis , dealing with each problem as it arises , would not be more sensible , efficient and economical , particularly in view of the ' bureaucratic nightmare ' of comitology procedures which the rapporteur describes .

Having said that , I should like to take this opportunity to make two basic points about the plight of refugees in general , especially since the rapporteur felt obliged in his explanatory statement , quite unnecessarily , to criticize the European Union for its ' racism ' and ' xenophobia ' .
Principle No 1 : wherever possible , refugees must go to countries which basically have the same culture as their country of origin , in other words neighbouring countries , preferably .
This means that Europe need not allow any non-European refugees onto its territory .
There may always be exceptions which prove the rule , of course , but the rule must apply , and it must be enforced in practice .
Otherwise , the day will come when the people of Europe are no longer prepared to help genuine refugees because they have rightly had enough of bogus asylum-seekers , which in Europe applies to 99 out of every 100 cases .
Principle No 2 : refugees must be returned to their countries of origin as quickly as possible , and certainly as soon as they can do so without putting themselves in any real danger .
We have to realize that the presence of large groups of refugees often entails great hardship for the indigenous inhabitants of the host countries , and can even pose a threat to their own identity and become the focus of violent conflict .
We only have to look at what is happening in Zaire and Rwanda to see what this means .
I am sorry to say that neither of these two fundamental principles is mentioned in Parliament and Council documents which are before us today .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Howitt on the work which he has carried out , because I think that it is extremely important work on a subject which unfortunately , in recent times , has been permanently on the agenda of our political debates .
The situation of refugees is a desperate one , and it also calls for preventive measures .
It is vital that we act in the field of preventive diplomacy , but it is also vital that we should take and follow up a set of measures and policies which help most of the people who are victims of these types of situations and are now forced to live and suffer in ways which , unfortunately , are familiar to us all because every day we can see pictures on our TV screens .
I think , therefore , that this time we should criticise ourselves because we have failed to act .
Europe has not assumed its responsibility , Europe has fallen far short of what is expected of it , and Europe must now play a much more active role , a far more decisive role , so that the problem of helping refugees can be dealt with in a way which is not only humanitarian but also in a way which , as someone has already said , fits in with development policies , policies which are becoming all the rarer and whose practical results have become less objective .
I think that this report - provided that the amendments tabled by the Committee on Development are duly adopted and acted upon by the Commission and the Council - could create an initial fundamental framework so that we can deal with the problem of refugees in a more optimistic way and so that we can have a more human dimension , in fact .
I should like to focus fundamentally on those amendments which are connected with all of the efforts made to prevent conflicts , the principle of non-discrimination , and to put right all of the damage done to the environment , as well as those including in the programmes the notion of human rights - which I feel are fundamental questions - as well as specific aid for the more vulnerable groups .
I think that all of these questions call for much more active work , because there is no time to waste on a subject as sensitive as this one .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before proceeding I would like to commend Mr Howitt , the rapporteur , for the quality of the document that he has presented today and also for the close cooperation , the level of cooperation , that has prevailed throughout the preparatory stage .
I wish also to state at the beginning that the Commission considers the text that we are presenting today to be entirely satisfactory .
This legislative text will , in fact , establish a clear legal reference framework which will allow the Commission to continue its operations to aid uprooted people in Asia and Latin America .
We shall continue with our efforts to provide specific support for people who have left their country or region of origin as a result of conflict or internal disturbance .
We shall also continue our work of providing aid to people who require specific assistance after humanitarian aid has been provided and before a programme of classical development actions becomes feasible .
I am thinking here of the assistance required to promote self-sufficiency and integration or reintegration , as the case may be , into the social and economic fabric of the host country or the country of return .
The proposal provides for an extensive partnership network embracing the organizations of the United Nations and international non-governmental organizations and governments and local authorities .
It also allows for a wide range of operations : operations relating to care and maintenance , the training of health personnel and the restoration of the small-scale infrastructure .
In addition , there is provision for measures relating to the financing of credit systems aimed at stimulating the recommencement of economic activity . There is also provision for actions directed specifically at female heads of family and to protect the environment .
Taken as a unity these measures meet the requirement for flexibility in tackling situations which are evolving with extreme rapidity and also situations where the international community needs to act swiftly and effectively to forestall the infliction of further hardship on the people concerned .
In addition , however , the proposal meets the requirement of allowing provision to be made for the possibility that the restoration of communal peace may be impeded or delayed because of the tenseness of the situation .
The Commission is pleased that Parliament to a large extent shares this approach .
That closeness of approach makes it possible for the Commission to accept a number of the amendments proposed by the Committee on Development and Cooperation at the second reading .
Specifically , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 3 , which introduce into the legislative text the principles of non-discrimination and non-refoulement and the requirements for the establishment of democratic structures and the involvement of affected groups in the assessment of their needs .
We can also accept Amendment No 7 concerning stronger coordination with the Member States and implementing partners .
Amendment No 13 requiring that the assessment reports be made available to the European Parliament can likewise be accepted .
The Commission can accept Amendment No 4 if the word ' voluntary ' qualifying the word ' return ' in the list of operations is deleted .
On this point the Commission can only restate its position .
It is obvious that the return must be at the wish of the people concerned .
However , in order to cover the contingency of forced repatriation , which unfortunately cannot be excluded or avoided , we consider it necessary to retain the option of using the legislative text in question and the respective budgetary resources for the provision of support to people who are the victims of any such violation of basic principles .
Unfortunately , the Commission cannot accept , in its present form , Amendment No 5 relating to technical assistance and studies .
The priority that it accords to experts from the recipient country does not cause us any difficulty .
However , we believe that the limiting of the resources for the studies , audits and evaluation and monitoring missions to 3 % of the total cost of the operation is too restrictive .
In certain circumstances the studies , audits and evaluations required for the success of the operation may cost more than the percentage of total financing that is being stipulated .
Amendment No 6 , which seeks to impose a requirement for the regular exchange of information between the Commission and other donor representatives and operational partners and for coordination and consultation with the competent committee of the European Parliament and NGOs , is also unacceptable because the implementation of those principles cannot be reconciled with the serious shortages of manpower and material resources with which the Commission has to grapple .
Amendments Nos 8 and 9 relate to the subject of comitology and , specifically , propose the elimination of the obligation to submit projects costing more than ECU 2 million to the Member States Procedure 3A committee .
The Commission shares the view expressed by the rapporteur in the explanatory statement that these are wider issues subject to interinstitutional agreement .
The Commission has therefore decided not to accept the inclusion of those amendments in its proposal .
Nevertheless , the Commission can do no other than support - and , indeed , with enthusiasm - the compromise proposed by the rapporteur of reverting to the original proposal for a financial threshold of ECU 5 million .
In any event , the Commission believes that if a committee of the Member States does have to participate in the decisionmaking procedure it will have to be the committee on the developing countries in Asia and Latin America set up under Regulation 443 / 92 .
Lastly , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 12 requiring it to consult with the authorities , collaborating organizations and beneficiaries in the third country in which the operations are planned before the general plan of operations is discussed .
Such an obligation would be too binding and cannot be reconciled with the material resources and manpower at the Commission 's disposal .
There would be a risk of delay at the discussion stage and , by extension , in the execution of the annual programme of aid provision to displaced persons .
As regards the participation of the Member of Parliament , we must point out that the final composition of committees is a matter for the Council .
This issue has to do with interinstitutional balance and could be the subject of discussion in another framework , such as the intergovernmental conference .
To conclude , Mr President , I would like once again to compliment Mr Howitt and to thank all the Members who have spoken .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
Environmental measures in the developing countries in the context of sustainable development
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0340 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Regulation on environmental measures in developing countries in the context of sustainable development ( C4-0373 / 96-95 / 0161 ( SYN ) ( rapporteur : Mrs Taubira Delannon ) .
Mr President , Mrs Taubira Delannon has not been able to make it from Guyana to Strasbourg , held up no doubt by a few local difficulties we are all aware of .
As chairman of the Committee on Development and Cooperation I am therefore standing in for her at the last minute , although I cannot claim to match her charm , or indeed her knowledge .
I would remind you that this question arises in a very particular context .
Articles 130u and 130r of the Treaty stipulate that Community policy in the sphere of development cooperation shall foster the sustainable economic and social development of the developing countries , whilst among the objectives pursued the Community shall contribute to promoting measures at the international level to deal with regional or worldwide environmental problems .
A vast programme indeed !
The present proposal for a regulation aims to implement the principle of sustainable development and facilitate the integration of the environmental dimension in the development process of poor countries .
Such is the objective set by Article 1 of this proposal , which is to provide a legal basis for budget line B7-6200 set up at Parliament 's initiative in 1982 .
I would like here to point out some of the main arguments .
Since 1980 one and a half billion people in 15 countries , that is a quarter of the world 's population , have enjoyed a spectacular economic growth .
By contrast , around 100 countries representing another quarter of the world 's population have experienced decline and stagnation .
In 70 of these countries average income has dropped below that of 1980 and in 43 of them it has even plummeted below that of 1970 .
The wealth measured in dollars of the world 's 358 multimillionaires exceeds the aggregate annual income of countries accounting for about half the world 's population .
Since 1970 the water supply of the developing countries has fallen by two thirds .
These are the problems which Mrs Taubira Delannon highlights in her report and which pose a challenge for the Community 's sustainable development policy .
One billion human beings have no access to drinking water ; 1.7 billion are without any system of waste water disposal which , in terms of epidemiology and the effects on public health , is totally disastrous .
Desertification costs Africa 9 billion dollars a year , and the whole world 42 billion dollars a year .
Two hundred million people are affected by desertification .
Twenty million hectares of tropical forests are either seriously affected or else totally destroyed .
All of these factors go to show that this type of development is unsustainable .
Let me point out that the European Union is the world 's leading trading partner as well as the primary provider of development aid , achieving a contribution level of 40 % ; at the same time , however , it is also one of the main polluters .
Developing countries on the other hand produce four times less polluting waste than the industrial countries while their population is four times as great .
By the year 2000 , 15 towns will have more than 11 million inhabitants and 13 of these will be in the developing countries .
Mrs Taubira Delannon 's report not only deals with nature and its conservation , but aims in particular at protecting men and women in the developing countries and ensuring that the main beneficiaries of measures are local populations neglected not only psychologically and sociologically but also politically by development projects , so that in this way a solution can be found to the problems I have raised , namely those relating to water , health , energy , urbanization etc .
The author of the report , with the backing of the whole Committee on Development and Cooperation , attempts to strengthen the regional dimension by cutting across national boundaries and not just concentrating on the national dimension .
Finally , she stresses the shortage of resources and the lack of programme coordination that plagues all the sectors engaged in many efforts to protect the environment within a context of sustainable development .
It was obvious during the Rio Conference how powerful the ideas put forward were and what a lively interest they created , but then things very quickly quietened down as it is so much easier to just talk about the environment and even draw attention to a particular aspect which concerns us , us in the West .
By contrast , when it comes to development , if you would allow me to say so , Mr President , there is nobody around .
And I do not need any other proof here than the line taken by the Committee on Budgets and this Parliament in general when debating the budget and further and further cuts in the development chapter .
How can we talk about the environment in these conditions ?
The treatment given to amendments adopted by Parliament at the first reading borders on the caricatural .
Fortyfour amendments had been submitted , nearly all of them coming from the Commission .
They were all rejected except for one .
It makes you wonder whether the Council mislaid them , failed to read them or found them bad .
One out of forty four , I ask you .
We submitted them again .
These amendments on the whole sought to widen the scope of the Council Regulation .
It was , by the way , for this reason that the Council rejected them despite the pretext of limited funds .
The rapporteur , Mrs Taubira Delannon , suggests re-submitting the amendments adopted at first reading and rejected by the Council .
Furthermore , the Council has introduced new provisions concerning principally the life-span of the regulation and the reference budget figure .
The Council wished to give this regulation a life-span of three years whereas the Commission proposed that it should be of unlimited duration .
On this point the rapporteur supports the Commission proposal and shares its view that a long-term effort is needed in the field of the environment and the regulation should not lay down a time limit .
The Council proposes a reference figure of MECU 45 that is an allocation of MECU 15 per year .
Here again the rapporteur agrees with the Commission that it is not necessary to settle for a financial reference amount and suggests that such a reference should be omitted .
Finally , as regards comitology , the Commission has proposed that the ALA , MED and EDF Committees - nobody will be able to understand these acronyms outside Parliament - should be entrusted , as consultative committees of type 1 , with the task of drawing up opinions on the proposed measures .
Another attractive proposal !
True to form , the Council proposes a type 3a regulatory committee . The rapporteur herself recommends adoption of the Council proposal , which the Committee on Development and Cooperation supports , that is a committee of the consultative type .
Even the most hardened among us must be laughing at this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this programme - as the chairman of the Committee on Development and Cooperation has just said - was created by the European Parliament to respond to the Rio Conference and the problems raised there .
Unfortunately , the Council of Ministers has never backed it and it has taken years for this budgetary line to have the necessary legal base .
It is an extremely important budgetary line , enabling us to support local initiatives promoted by local authorities and non-governmental organisations .
It is a genuine line for assisting sustainable development .
However , the Council of Ministers , demonstrating great hypocrisy , has rejected the European Parliament proposals put forward at first reading in the Taubira-Delannon report , aimed at broadening the base of action in this budgetary line and the programme , and at the same time is rejecting it on the grounds of lack of resources ; in the 1997 budgetary process the Council of Ministers has tried to reduced the budget of this very programme .
In other words , on one hand , the Council says that the programme cannot be extended because there is not enough money , while at the same time , in the budgetary process , it has attempted to reduce the meagre 50 MECU which this budgetary line already contains .
It was the European Parliament , here , last month , which at first reading restored the meagre 50 MECU .
Ladies and gentlemen , the human dramas taking place in the shanty-towns of Rio de Janeiro and Cairo , the destruction of forests , which last year reached an absolute record since the Rio Conference in 1992 , the spectacle of human misery , the children of Africa from Rwanda to the Sudan , call for our action . All of this is taking place in front of our eyes and yet the European Parliament is unable to set up a credible programme , with appropriate budgetary resources in order to take measures in these parts of the world .
As the rapporteur for the Committee on the Environment , I can only echo what the chairman of the Committee on Development has said here .
We must support the amendments to the Taubira-Delannon report , we must maintain a stern position of ferocious criticism of the Council of Ministers ' hypocrisy in the area of sustainable development .
Mr President , the commitments entered into by the international community at the 1992 Rio Summit , but also all of the more serious analyses of the state of our planet lead us to conclude that action to help the natural environment must be given increasing priority in the definition of development priorities .
This is a global problem that needs to be tackled with great vigour in both the northern and the southern hemispheres .
Plainly , the protection and enhancement of the ecosystem cannot and should not ignore issues relating to the need to guarantee human kind , and the people of the poorer countries in particular , proper living conditions and development .
But if we are to avoid conflict between the environment and development we need the kind of ecologically-based change to the economy which has so far been more forthcoming in declarations than in actual decisions .
The fact is that even now we are continuing to destroy the natural environment and are not pursuing even the minimum objectives of human development .
It is therefore a great victory for the European Parliament that , for some years now , action by the European Union , in the context of cooperation with the developing countries , has begum to include environmental measures also . The objective of sustainable development has , however , at the same time , to inform all existing policies and measures .
The proposal for a regulation that we are debating at second reading will have also to incorporate the amendments tabled by the House if it is to be able better to cope with the major environmental issues .
We have , however , to be concerned at the fact that the funding earmarked for such measures is likely to be a token sum only .
Nonetheless , we urge the House to accept the amendments tabled by the Committee on Development and Cooperation , as an incentive to expand upon and influence measures to benefit the environment and sustainable development that the European Union can apply together with it partners in the countries of the south .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for her meticulous work on this report .
The number of amendments which have been tabled is a further sign that the Committee on Development and Cooperation takes this issue very seriously and has considered it in depth .
We are all aware that too little has been done in this area in the past , and the environmental aspect still receives too little attention .
On the other hand , we are confronted by a development which we are virtually powerless to check , when I think of the plans that a country like China may have in terms of mechanization .
I am prepared to bet that mechanization in this instance will not be accomplished using state-of-the-art technology , but rather with whatever technology the people in this emerging country can afford .
The report refers to the sustainability of environmental measures .
I believe that sustainability must be a criterion for all development measures wherever we implement them , whether in the health or education sectors or , as in this case , the environmental sector .
The previous speaker has already mentioned the fact that we also defended budget heading B7-5040 in the Committee on Development , and I only hope that we stick to our guns .
Of course , these are not the kind of sums that will allow us to improve the environment throughout the world , but we do wish to use them to support pilot projects .
In the amendments we have retabled , most importantly , we refer to local initiatives .
However , this does not mean that the governments of the developing countries can be allowed to evade their responsibilities .
We all know how many of these governments make heavy weather of problems such as the protecting the environment , and in particular the sustainable protection of the environment .
Local initiatives cannot make up for failures on the part of government .
It is unacceptable , for example , that governments should approve extensive deforestation programmes while , on the other hand , reafforestation is the responsibility of local initiatives .
I also wonder whether we can sustainably support the preservation of a healthy , biologically pure environment by the use of brochures which , for all I know , may be made from wood pulp .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the initiative of the European Parliament , budget line B7-6200 was set up to encourage the inclusion of the environmental aspect in the development process of the developing countries and to help improve the living conditions of the local people .
The key word used is ' sustainable ' and not ' lasting ' development : this means making changes in current development , production , consumption and behavioural models in order gradually to steer human activity and development towards sustainable , that is acceptable , forms that will enable us to live in an environment that is in a healthy state and , at the same time , guarantee a proper level of social well-being and public health for all .
The aim is certainly an ambitious one and its achievement depends on the coordination and consistency of the political strategies that are to be put into effect . It further depends on the effective integration of the environmental aspect into all other policies in order to limit , as far as possible , the inexorable pressures that contribute to the depletion of natural resources , with the resultant deterioration in the environment and , consequently , impoverishment of the quality of life .
The measures to be taken must take account of five sectors which directly interact with each other : industry , energy , transport , agriculture and tourism .
This new instrument will have therefore to combine flexibility and efficiency to produce important innovative effects in the developing countries .
I congratulate both the rapporteur and the Chairman of the Committee on Development and Cooperation : we agree that this proposal marks qualitative progress but , clearly , deplore the limited resources allocated to it : ECU 15 bn only .
We therefore support the rapporteur when she suggests retabling - with the sole exception of Amendment No 1 - all of the amendments tabled at first reading .
Mr President , environment policy seems to have been losing some of its impetus recently .
We have a great deal to say about the importance of integrating environmental considerations into other policy areas , yet we are cutting back many of the budget headings that would make this possible .
In May , as we all know , Parliament adopted 44 amendments designed to improve the integration of environmental measures into development cooperation , but only three of these have been adopted by the Council .
I also find it very strange that the Council has cut the duration of the projects to three years , which is surely difficult to reconcile with the longerterm efforts which this sector needs , and we are very surprised that the Council has made only ECU 45 million available , in other words ECU 15 m a year .



We simply have to provide more funding , which is why I think the amendment proposed by the Committee on Development and Cooperation to increase the budget by ECU 50 m in the year 2000 definitely deserves our support .
We need to provide this money to promote continuity in the developing countries , and to help them combat deforestation , erosion , pollution and desertification .

We need to set priorities , and I agree with the rapporteur that we should concentrate primarily on innovative projects such as solar energy and model projects .
We also , of course , need to take account of local environmental needs , and we should focus not just on rural areas , but also on cities with their enormous waste problems .
Let us hope that the Council will now adopt Parliament 's recommendations at second reading and actually do something to promote sustainable development , instead of merely paying it lip-service .
Mr President , the rapporteur has given us a report which is the product of much hard work , a report which is necessary because the sums of money being sought for budget heading B7-5040 are far from being available to us .
The rapporteur has detailed why the money is necessary : for raising awareness , for initiatives that will serve as models , for grassroots groups , NGOs and associations , for sustainable economic activity and urban planning , to support local initiatives , to reduce climate damage , for the economy , maintaining biodiversity , and a great deal more .
However , what we have available under this budget heading is ECU 15 million over three years .
In my opinion , that is less than peanuts .
It is not merely a slap in the face , it is worse than ridiculous : it is shameful !
This is a hypocritical budget heading , given the environmental damage that we cause in our own countries .
When I read in the report that we are seeking to run a green economy - green in the sense of being sustainable - I have to ask myself what damage is being caused to the environment simply through the kind of economy , attitudes and policies which characterize the European Union .
I have no need to look as far afield as Mrs Günther did when she used China as an example .
You are right , of course , automobile production in China does damage the environment - but who are the producers ?
I am German , and I know who they will be : Mercedes-Benz , Volkswagen and Porsche .
It is the same logic that we are pursuing here with the trans-European networks .
The capital which is diverted for that purpose will come back to us , because we are deregulating markets and promoting throughout the world a type of economic reform that will allow us to continue with precisely this kind of production .
It was said in Rio that we intended to reduce the level of CO2 emissions from vehicles : so what is the situation now ?
The situation is that none of what was promised in terms of reducing emissions has been achieved .
We know that these emissions are going to double by the year 2020 .
And just think of the tremendous debts incurred when a nuclear power station in Manila is built in a rift valley , and then construction cannot continue because of earthquakes , yet the people have to bear the costs - they have to pay the costs of our industry .
How are they expected to do that with ECU 5 million ?
If we wish to pursue a development policy , therefore , it is in these areas that we must begin .
We must begin with Shell in Nigeria , where the soil is contaminated , with the Community importers of rainforest products who are polluting drinking water , with energy production and vehicle production .
Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent report .
I fully support her amendments .
The concept of sustainable development is critical to the welfare of developing countries .
The European Parliament , Members will recall , initiated a special budget line in 1982 aimed at encouraging developing countries to take the environmental dimension into account in the development process and to help improve living conditions among local populations .
One of the main regrets that we have is the low level of financial resources set aside in support of this proposal .
I am certain that the Irish presidency agrees with the rapporteur on the issue of financing , which is shameful .
The proposal aims at extending the Fifth Environmental Action Programme to the end of this century .
It is timely that political commitment to the programme is renewed .
The European Union has an increasingly important role to play in helping to protect the environment , not only at Community level , but also in developing countries .
The main conclusion of the European Environment Agency 's assessment prepared as part of the review process for the EU Fifth Environmental Action Programme highlights the following priorities : first , while progress is being made in reducing certain pressures on the environment , it is not enough to improve the general quality of the environment nor to make progress towards sustainability ; second , if we do not have accelerated policies , pressures on the environment will continue to place an excessive burden on human health and the carrying capacity of the environment ; third , the actions that have been taken to date are not going to lead to full integration of environmental considerations into economic sectors or to sustainable development .
We must continue at all levels to promote greater public awareness of the need to protect and enhance the environment .
Better environmental management and protection is needed .
Regretfully , the necessary financial sources are not being made available .
As Mr Telkämper and other Members here have said , it is shameful and a disgrace .
I hope that the Council of Ministers will reconsider their position on this .
Mr President , we should not hold out too high hopes about the results of the Council Regulation on environmental action in developing countries in the context of sustainable development .
Mr Kouchner too has just made this point .
Clearly , the aims of the regulation are highly praiseworthy in that the Union is poised to develop its own environmental geostrategy .
The proposal for a regulation should therefore be regarded as complementary to existing aid schemes , mechanisms , procedures and interventions .
Nevertheless , it is tempting to say that the ambitious nature of the regulation 's objectives is ill-matched by the modest level of funding ear-marked for it .
To be frank , fifteen million or so ECUs over a period of three years are not going to be more than a symbolic step in the right direction .
Mr President , even with funding way above the levels I have just mentioned , the Union 's sustainable development strategy would have to contend with the international community 's numerous shortcomings and omissions .
The whole international community and not just the European Union needs to work together to achieve the aims outlined by the rapporteur .
The Commission , in particular , should use all its influence in the various international fora where the other major actors on the international stage are represented , namely the United States , Japan , not to mention others , in order to promote and foster the ideas underpinning these reports .
What I have in mind in particular is the next round of world trade negotiations .
Let us hope , Mr President , that the connotation ' sustainable ' in the report is going to apply to development itself , and not only to the symbolic amount allocated under the budget , so that the policy we all support wholeheartedly may be brought to fruition .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first of all to thank Mr Kouchner , as the chairman of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , for his introductory speech and presentation of the report .
Development cooperation on the part of the European Union conforms to the spirit of the Rio conference and the action programme for the twenty-first century .
Pursuant to Article 130u of the Treaty , our central objective in this field is to foster sustainable economic and social development in the developing countries , and more particularly the most disadvantaged among them .
The Union is pursuing that objective through its development programmes and projects and also through discussions at the global level .
The European Union has committed itself to placing environmental problems among the top political issues on the agenda in order to achieve the public consensus that it needs for further advance on the matter .
In that context it is important that the special meeting of the United Nations General Assembly scheduled for June 1997 for the purpose of reviewing the results of the Rio Conference be properly prepared .
Financial resources and institutional reform of the monitoring mechanism will be the main subjects on the agenda .
The measures which need to be implemented on the basis of the regulation on environmental measures in developing countries are clearly within the scope of that international framework .
They will complement the other Community instruments , and by optimizing cooperation in the environmental field and acting as a catalyst will reinforce operations carried out by the Member States individually and operations organized on an international basis .
The experience that we have acquired so far will improve the overall endeavour of the Union on the development front and engender an upgrading of funding through the traditional budgetary lines .
On behalf of the Commission I would like to thank Parliament , and in particular the rapporteurs , Mrs Taubira Delannon , for the Committee on Development and Cooperation , and Mr Pimenta , for the Committee on the Environment , for the excellent work that has been done .
The level of your experience and the political commitment that you have made augur well for cooperation between the Commission and Parliament .
The strong support offered by the European Parliament has enabled the Commission to become a leading player in the context of sustainable development , and I feel sure that the regulation on environmental measures in the developing countries will be significantly improved by the amendments that are being examined today .
The Commission is therefore in the happy position of being able to accept thirty-four of the forty amendments .
Specifically , we can accept parts of Amendments Nos 7 , 19 , 31 , 32 and 35 and 40 to 42 and Amendments Nos 1 and 2 , 4 to 6 , 8 to 18 , 21 to 24 , 26 , 33 , 34 , 36 and 39 to 44 in their entirety .
The Commission is particularly appreciative of the fact that many amendments seek to emphasize the importance of information provision and of close cooperation with local partners and initiatives .
These amendments , aimed as they are at tackling a crucial aspect in regard to the sustainability of the projects and programmes , will substantially improve the final draft of the regulation .
The other central theme of Parliament 's amendments is the incorporation of new priorities and new issues .
Demographic issues , health and the environmental impact of toxic waste must , for instance , have a place in the implementation framework where they have a genuine bearing on sustainable development .
Furthermore , in the provision of the aid to the developing countries emphasis will be placed on enabling them to cope with problems defined by the international conventions , specifically via preventive measures and the use of renewable energy sources in order to minimize climate change .
On the other hand , however , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 3 , 20 , 25 , 27 to 30 , 37 , 38 and 43 .
I would like to explain the Commission 's position on this .
In some cases , our hesitancy can be attributed simply to drafting reasons .
As regards the salient parts , certain of the amendments , such as Amendments Nos 19 , 20 , 28 and 30 , contain elements which would introduce a level of inflexibility which would not sit well with the objective of instituting model operations in the environmental field .
Other amendments , such as Nos 30 , 41 and 42 , would impose new procedural constraints , particularly as regards the demands for information provision between the institutions .
We believe that that is not feasible and that it would jeopardize best practice in the management of the appropriations , not least because of the limited human resources in the Commission 's services .
Lastly , many amendments , such as Amendment No 40 , would either necessitate modification of the Commission 's procedures or , in the case of Amendment No 38 , for instance , impinge on the Commission 's competence to organize the action in accordance with its own judgment .

Mr President , it is true , and we can all agree on the fact , that a lot has been achieved in the four years since the United Nations conference on the environment and development .
A significant and increased proportion of Community aid is being focused on the priority areas of the action programme for the twenty-first century determined at the conference .
Much has been done to improve the environmental returns of European Union 's aid programmes .
The Commission believes that adoption of the regulation on environmental measures in the developing countries that we are discussing today will sharpen this environmental focus .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
AIDS in the developing countries
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0341 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Regulation on HIV / AIDS-related operations in developing countries ( C4-0372 / 96-95 / 0164 ( SYN ) ) ( rapporteur : Mrs André-Léonard ) .
Mr President , poverty and the risk of HIV transmission do unfortunately go together .
Urgent action is needed since the fight against the spread of the epidemic is a real race against time .
The number of HIV infected persons today is put at 17 million , a figure which is likely to reach 40 million by the year 2000 , according to WHO forecasts , and this is an optimistic hypothesis .
The epidemic has hit both the North and South but by far the worst affected are the developing countries , which account for 80 % of all those infected by the HIV virus .
Opportunities for treatment are clearly also unequal and to the detriment of the South .
In some countries of Africa and Asia the epidemic has already reached serious proportions , since by decimating first and foremost the workforce , it is tearing the very heart out of the socioeconomic fabric .
In 1986 , the WHO launched a world-wide programme to combat AIDS .
Europe took over in 1987 and 1988 and the programme has been extended to embrace all the developing countries .
Two hundred and twenty projects in 85 countries have been financed so far , partly from the resources of the European Development Fund , which is practically the sole instrument for implementing a common development policy towards developing countries .
It is nearly ten years now since the international community first became involved in trying to limit the effects of the epidemic .
Various lessons have been learnt so that future action can be adjusted where necessary .
I set myself the task as rapporteur of establishing priorities to ensure that the AIDS epidemic in the developing countries is no longer seen as something ineluctable .
That is why this aid programme needs to be made a top priority .
Given the deplorable lack of funds , efforts have to concentrated exclusively on prevention .
The lack of funds has a way of cropping up as a leitmotif in European development policy even though Europe is the principal provider of development aid .
ECU 320 million have already been channelled by the Union into combating AIDS in the developing countries but we should still not delude ourselves .
If a new drug were to be developed to fight against this disease , its exorbitant price would preclude the treatment of HIV-positive persons in the Third World .
The figures circulating are in the order of $ 15 000 per year per patient .
Action should therefore be concentrated on prevention , with the poorest countries given priority as far as possible . We need to invest massively and preventively in countries where the epidemic is still in its early stages since it is here that we have the best chance to stem its spread .
Preventive activities should primarily be targeted at the poorest segments of society and at the groups most at risk since it is they who respond better to this type of information campaign .
Information on safe sex mainly consists of advice given to mothers and girls but it should equally reach the male section of the population who tend to underestimate the problem .
For the programme to be really effective we need a considerable increase in resources , in addition to a genuine political commitment at all levels and active cooperation between all concerned .
In this respect development aid cuts are deplorable .
We need to help stem the tide of the AIDS epidemic by adopting a strategy which takes into account problems associated with underdevelopment such as poverty , overpopulation and malnutrition .
It is lack of education that is mainly responsible for these ills .
To tackle this , it is necessary to make information on AIDS and its prevention into an integral part of basic health care .
We also need to train medical and paramedical staff for this task .
The groups concerned should have easy access to information , and especially to means of protection , through the massive distribution of condoms , free of charge or available at a modest price .
It is existing family planning centres that need to offer public information both on birth control and on methods of protection against AIDS .
In my report I was trying to redefine the target and high-risk groups .
This work involves political figures , representatives of religious communities , teachers , health and education experts .
These groups should be persuaded to cooperate on a voluntary basis in screening operations and the introduction of protective measures .
I would like to come out very strongly on the particular need to protect children .
Street children are sometimes forced to prostitute themselves if they have no other means of survival .
The worst hit are children who are themselves contaminated or who have lost their parents as a result of the disease .
There are thought to be several hundreds of thousands of such children in the world .
I would like to conclude by informing you that , thanks to a programme designed to combat sexually transmitted diseases , Tanzania has managed to reduce the incidence of infection by 42 % .
These results give cause for hope .
I would also like to pay tribute to those NGOs which are able to reach the most vulnerable population groups .
Finally , allow me to stress the need for Parliament to do everything in its power - and above all regard it as a question of honour - to adopt Amendment No 18 on carrying out a study which is to look into ways of setting up a solidarity mechanism in order to reduce blatant north-south inequalities of treatment .
It is becoming more and more likely that we shall succeed in wiping out AIDS in the years ahead .
The promising drugs now on the market should be accessible to everybody without discrimination between rich and poor , and regardless of race , ethnic group , culture or religion .
Let us remember that disease , just like pollution , knows no frontiers ; and what is at stake is the future of our planet .
Mr President , the recent conference in Vancouver was actually called ' One World , One Hope ' , but it soon became very clear that there are two worlds when it comes to fighting this disease .
As the rapporteur has clearly said , the two worlds are distinguished because of the poverty which exists in the developing world .
Any medical breakthrough that is achieved comes with a very expensive price tag , a price tag that 90 % of the people affected by Aids simply cannot afford .
A Zimbabwean women who spoke at that conference said that the conference should be renamed ' Third World , No Hope ' , and that was her view of the different situation .
As Mrs André-Léonard has said , some battles have been won .
We have seen educational changes that have brought about improvements both in Thailand and in Uganda .
We have seen the STD programme in Tanzania making a significant impact too : the population study there showed a 42 % reduction in the group that they studied .
There are too new interventions during the delivery of babies which are also having a good effect on the infections that babies have as a result of an Aids-infected parent .
The reduction is something in the region of 8 % , so that again is something worth looking at .
We need to ask the question : why is it that in the case of Botswana , of Asia , of South Africa , we are seeing increases ?
What is happening in those countries and why is that occurring ?
I was in Burma this weekend .
There they do not actually recognize the existence of Aids and any prostitute found to have a condom about her person is imprisoned and has a statutory jail sentence of one year as a result of that .
We need to know also why it is that many of our projects still do not really recognize the vulnerability of women and are , as the Commission has already said elsewhere , very often gender-blind .
I would like to know from the Commission what investigations have been done into offering protection that women can use , the drugs which can be used to protect women , and are we working with pharmaceutical industries to do that ?
Finally , will the Commission work with drug companies to bring down the prices of drugs under certain licensing agreements , because this is clearly critical to any methods we use to tackling the spread of HIV and Aids ?
Mr President , once again I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs André-Léonard , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , for the work that she has done .
I think that we agree on many points , and we have produced some satisfactory compromises and proposals for improving on the common position .
It may be that media interest in AIDS in the developing countries has declined , but in any event it is not a major subject of public debate at the moment .
However , there is a continuing tragedy in these countries , and it is important for us too , as the European Parliament , to send out a clear signal and show that we care about the problem .
A number of speakers have referred to the fact that there seems to have been a breakthrough in treatment .
Firstly , however , it is still unclear what the long-term prospects are and , secondly , it is also an unfortunate fact that people in the developing countries may never be able to afford the treatment in question .
We must recognize quite clearly that action must be taken here .
We must try to help everyone , but at present we can only regard prevention - the use of precautions - as the key element , and this is another aspect which should attract increased spending from the budget line .
It is also important that we should not adopt any sort of ideological approach in this respect , and I make no bones about that : we all know that condoms are a key to solving the problem , and the most important means of prevention .
That is why Amendment No 12 is also important , and the European Parliament should say unambiguously that condoms are a key to solving the problem .
At the same time , it is untrue , despite frequent statements to the contrary , that all we have to do is distribute condoms : we must take into consideration all the problems which prevent people from using condoms .
Nor should we be saying that the use of condoms is the only way to avoid AIDS - because that is scientifically incorrect .
There are still people who do not need condoms because they do not change their sexual partners - and we should simply state that fact .
But we do have to look after the rest of the population , and that is why Amendment No 12 should receive unequivocal support and has the backing of our group .
I am grateful to the rapporteur and to the House for the fact that we have been able to discuss this issue in a way that is genuinely free from ideology , without ending up apportioning blame , for example to the Church .
There were a number of amendments to that effect , which have not been retabled , but - as the relevant amendment says - what we should be doing is promoting a dialogue in cases where religious communities oppose the use of means of prevention .
In every religious community , sensible people are working at the grassroots and addressing the problem , and this is something that we should support .
Mr President , I should like to recall that AIDS is increasingly a women 's problem .
According to research , once infected with HIV , women are more susceptible to AIDS .
The risk run by women is 2 to 4 times as great as that which men face .
Women also pass the infection on to the next generation .
There is therefore a connection between the spread of AIDS and the status of women .
If women do not enjoy economic and social autonomy , they cannot impose conditions on their partners as regards sexual behaviour .
At the UN world conference on the status of women in Beijing it was stated clearly that it was essential to improve the status of women - that is , enhance it both economically and socially - in order to bring AIDS under control .
The common position of the Council now under consideration includes support for women among the measures to combat AIDS .
The amendments in Mrs André-Léonard 's report concerning increasing men 's responsibility in these areas are also very appropriate .
Now care must to taken to ensure that , in implementing this decision and selecting projects for support , enough stress is placed on measures to improve the status of women .
It has , after all , been observed that the best results are obtained if the AIDS issue is integrated , for example , into projects relating to basic health care and reproductive health care , rather than these being implemented as separate programmes .
Mr President , Mrs André-Léonard has submitted an important and practical report on this issue .
I believe it is important to call for resources from the budget heading to be made available for innovative measures .
Raising public awareness , communication measures , information and training are all important and necessary , if the further spread of AIDS is to be prevented .
There must be support for methods of providing early diagnosis .
Reinforcement of the health and social services sectors is also something that we can all support .
Another very important point , in my opinion , is a study of solidarity instruments to improve the treatment of people affected by HIV in the poorest countries : we must support this measure , just as we must support medical cooperation and cooperative exchanges .
The promotion of non-discrimination and action to combat stigmatization or the creation of ghettos are extremely important and must be supported if we are to help these people .
A crucial reference is made to support for measures to curb the spread of AIDS - and particularly for prevention - and I should like to conclude with a practical proposal : the House has already made numerous suggestions concerning support for condom sales and marketing , and making condoms available free of charge .
Another proposal was that a condom production facility should be set up in Africa .
I should like to add the following suggestion : tourists arriving by air from the North to the South - and I mean all of them , male and female - should receive , at the airport where they land , a packet of condoms and a leaflet with information about the causes and effects of AIDS .
Mr President , AIDS poses a serious threat to the third world .
The number of cases is rising not only in Africa , but in Asia and Latin America as well .
Besides the suffering of those affected , there are other problems involved : rising numbers of orphans , the strain on the health care system , and the fact that the impact of AIDS is felt particularly by the sexually active generation , which is also the economically active one .
We cannot accept the Council 's common position as it stands .
Although the text includes a verbal acknowledgement of the efforts that are being made to combat AIDS , there are crucial points where the Council shies away from reality .
What do I mean by that ?
Firstly , the proposed budget - the indicative amount is ECU 45 million over three years - has been set very low , and that is short-sighted .
Anyone with an understanding of the problem knows that we could use ten times as much .
No one is giving enough - and that goes for the USA , the Gulf States and Japan too - but we shall not help the situation by setting a bad example .
Secondly , Parliament called for special emphasis to be placed on the role of the mass media , and on using the mass media to raise awareness .
This is particularly important in countries with a high level of illiteracy , and with limited personnel available for awareness-raising measures .
Unfortunately , the Council has rejected our proposal - and that is unacceptable .
Thirdly , in a compromise between the socialists and Christian Democrats , Parliament came up with a formula on the following lines : we wish to see the European Union entering into a dialogue with the religious communities which continue , for religious reasons , to reject the use of condoms .
This has been deleted .
I could have understood it if the Council had said that a regulation was the wrong place for expressing such an intention but , at the same time , had decided to pursue it .
But it simply deleted the proposal without putting anything in its place , and that is a failure to face reality .
When an African miner is away from his family for three months , saying the rosary and going to church are not the only things that he misses .
Then when he comes home , he infects his wife and brings the disease into the village .
In deleting this paragraph , the Council is out of touch with reality .
I have been a Member of this House for 17 years .
Although we are away from our families for only five days at a time , I have never found it to be the case that all my fellow Members are happy to say their prayers and go to bed alone .
Thank you very much , Mr Schmid .
Examples can sometimes provoke comments which I shall not make .
Mr Kouchner , you have the floor for two minutes .
Yes , Mr President , I am going to abstain , no pun intended .
To get to the point , let me say how happy I am to have read and heard Mrs André-Léonard 's report .
It is an important document , indeed .
Nothing is more important in fact than to have the courage to challenge taboos , as Mr Liese said , and call a spade a spade .
Yet you know how we tend to reason today .
As things are getting better in the rich countries , Mr President , we tend to think that after all they might pick up one day in the poor countries as well .
Far from it , let us not delude ourselves .
It is enough to quote just two figures on life expectancy here .
It is little known , as has been pointed out on several occasions here , that the mortality rate is such both within the most active groups of the population , that is the young and those who work , as well as within the inactive groups that in some countries in Africa life expectancy is going to decline : by ten years in Zambia , eight years in Tanzania and several or more years in Rwanda .
This means that people are affected even in their everyday life .
I would like therefore to stress one point : there should have been more dialogue and , incidentally , as a former health minister I have received requests from religious authorities working behind the scenes who have been trying to save and prolong lives .
That could have been a fine dialogue indeed and I support Mr Schmid on that .
But to keep things simple , I think we have to seize the opportunity presented by Amendment No 18 .
We have talked a lot about this Amendment No 18 with the Commission .
The Commission feared that in research on therapeutic solidarity we would get to the point where there are two worlds , two types of individuals and two diseases : there are those who , particularly in our countries , can afford treatment thanks to three-drug therapy which , as we know is very expensive and those who cannot afford it .
Health in France costs 12 000 francs per person per year .
In Africa we are talking about 10 dollars .
So we need to study the problem together and I make this appeal to the Commission representative : we need to work together in order to go beyond theorizing and in order that , as Mrs Kinnock was saying , by trying to get the laboratories to cut their costs , and by acting here at the very centre of prevention systems as well as in each country we should all contribute and set up a solidarity fund financed possibly by Europe .
This idea needs to be discussed so as not to find ourselves once more in the shameful position of having to say to third-world countries : we have no treatment for you , you cannot afford it , just keep spreading the disease , we shall treat ourselves .

As Mr Liese has said , we do not know the future , but threedrug therapy is an important step forward .
Come on , let us work together so that therapeutic solidarity does not remain an issue solely for this Parliament .
Thank you very much , Mr Papoutsis .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Energy efficiency - gas and electricity
The next item is the joint debate on :
the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0350 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Decision concerning a multiannual programme for the promotion of energy efficiency in the European Union - SAVE II ( C4-0375 / 96-95 / 0131 ( SYN ) ) ( rapporteur : Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz ) ; -the report ( A4-0268 / 96 ) by Mrs McNally , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the proposal for a Council Directive to introduce rational planning techniques in the electricity and gas distribution sectors ( COM ( 95 ) 0369 - C4-0030 / 96-95 / 0208 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , the discrepancy , in the Council 's case , between what is said and what is actually done is particularly striking .
I should simply like to remind the House once again of the high-sounding commitments that were made after Rio and Berlin : reducing CO2 emissions to the level of 1990 was to be our foremost task , our most important task , a challenge , and so on .
However , the only programme that the EU currently possesses for making even a start on what is required is SAVE II .
But anyone thinking that the Council would be actively supporting that programme is in for a disappointment .
The Council 's preferred option would be to get rid of the programme completely .
This attitude is all the more difficult to understand when , for instance , a Commission study informs us that energy consumption will rise by 1 % a year until the year 2000 , and not only that , but we depend for 70 % of our energy on imports from third countries .
However , we now know that the very cheapest form of energy is energy saving , but anyone who thinks that this will mean plenty of money for the SAVE programme is in for another major disappointment .
On the contrary , SAVE II is turning into a face-saving programme for the Council , and it is fair to say that it is virtually falling apart .
The Commission had planned to spend ECU 150 million over five years .
While that may not be much , it is something .
Then the Council says the figure is to be ECU 45 m - or preferably a little less .
Yet when I take a look at the 1997 budget heading for tobacco , I see the figure of ECU 1032 m for just one year !
I do not wish to embark on that debate now , or to make an issue of our programmes in the area of preventive health care .
We also spend millions on demonstrating the harm that smoking does .
I simply mention this as an illustration of the kind of madness that sometimes goes on in this House .
I should also like to remind you that we used to have a programme called THERMIE II .
This was something else that the Council criminally neglected .
The purpose of THERMIE II was to introduce renewable forms of energy - and that too would have been useful , but the lobby groups always oppose such measures , and nothing happens .
Furthermore , there is a total absence of objectives or planning in the Council 's common position .
It remains general and non-binding .
As for the evaluation of SAVE II , it seems to me that evaluations are now carried out so that the subsequent action taken can be the opposite of what they recommend .
There is still , for example , no legislation on heating buildings , or on the fuel consumption of vehicles .
And what about combined heat and power generation ?
The evaluation of SAVE I clearly showed that legislative measures produced the greatest effect .
While we could understand that less money is available , we ought then to be saying that we should like to see legislation instead .
But what is now being planned and is destined for implementation is a truly crazy arrangement , inadequate for the tasks that we are facing .
In general terms , vast amounts of energy are being wasted in the EU as a whole .
If we really wished to make savings , we could save 30 to 40 % over the next five years simply on heating buildings , by using combined heat and power technology , for example .
What we are doing now is heating up the atmosphere .
When it comes to car fleets , the rule is still the bigger the better .
Fleet cars consume 10 to 20 litres of fuel per 100 kilometres .
That is madness , and a crime against the next generation !
For all these reasons , the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy has retabled the same amendments that eventually received almost unanimous support at first reading - and I am grateful to it for that .
I would reiterate that if we really implemented serious energy-saving measures , we would gain a double dividend : savings on both energy and costs .
Consider , if you will , what it is costing us to repair the damage to the environment !
And then there are the tens of thousands of jobs that would inevitably be created .
We behave as if we had full employment in the EU .
As far as I can see , the reality is quite the opposite !
There are many reasons why it is time to start behaving sensibly .
I fail to understand why we are not already doing so , but then I am not a member of any powerful lobby , I only work for hard-up environmental groups , and they do not yet have the necessary influence here .
We shall therefore continue tinkering with the problem , without effecting any significant change .
Mr President , I congratulate Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz on her speech .
I will read her an expression of support .
It says : ' We support the SAVE II programme .
It is rational and sensible and makes a valuable contribution to the Commission 's and Member States ' work on energy efficiency . ' She will be astonished to learn that that is the official view of the United Kingdom Government .
As she says , if they really thought that , why did they not vote some more money for the programme ?
Indeed Parliament , in its budgetary process , is trying to do exactly that .
I think that is unanimous throughout Parliament .
I think it is particularly important that the regional aspects of SAVE II are emphasized .
This is an ideal mechanism for bringing in these measures at regional , city and island level .
I agree with Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz that the suggestions for committees are completely flawed and will stop the work happening in the way we want it .
I agree with her too that legislation is the best way to bring about a change in attitude and behaviour in the European Union .
On that note I turn to the draft directive on rational planning techniques , a horrible title .
It sounds like something from the Soviet Union .
However it is in no way daunting and difficult .
It is a very , very lightweight directive - in boxing terms a fly-weight directive .
It has been considerably amended by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
I have to say that some of the criticisms levelled at the Commission 's document were justified in that there was some confusion between terms like integrated resource planning and others .
As amended it is really a document that can help .
It has to be considered in the context of an approaching single market in electricity and then gas .
In that context all it says is that we would like plans produced evaluating energy resource alternatives on a single , pre-agreed economic basis .
Member States will have very considerable freedom in deciding how to bring in these plans , who will bring them in , how they will be evaluated etc .
It is targeting households and small firms .
Large firms have already learnt that you must use energy sparingly .
In my view this is a single market issue , primarily in that context .
I think the legal base as suggested by the Commission is the wrong one .
I know that the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , in a very poorly attended meeting came , to another point of view but I cannot agree with them .
I think they must reconsider the context of this directive and what it is aiming to do .
So I maintain my request for a change of legal base .
It is , however , also a highly important environmental issue affecting climate instability .
There is a potential saving of 20 % of energy demand largely through households and small firms .
With that you would prevent the emission of two tonnes of CO2 per person per year .
We would save 20 % on unnecessary imports of fuels .
It would cost us 20 % less in terms of capital investment to build energy generating and transmission capacity .
We would create jobs , money would not be spent uselessly on energy and would be available to be spent on other things , helping the economy .
New Member States who want to join the EU would have to meet the standards of planning which would enable them to change from their currently quite appalling record on wasting energy .
The idea is that gas and electricity distributors sell warm houses , cool fridges and a guarantee that your television and your hairdryer will work .
They do not sell as many electrons and therms as they possibly can .
They do not make their profit in that way .
We must have a system that allows them to provide the warmth and the coldness , etc . , and still make a profit .
We know how to do it .
There is no big mystery about how to be more efficient in our use of energy : the technology is very well known and , of course , it is exportable technology ; it is something that we could sell all over the world .
Households on their own do not have sufficient motivation to be energy efficient .
It is , therefore , very important that we bring in the distribution sector if we want these millions of households across the EU to change their ways .
I have to say that large and powerful energy producers have been obstructive and have deliberately misrepresented this directive .
We have made changes following their suggestions .
They are still not satisfied .
Frankly , they never will be satisfied .
There have been some suggestions that a recommendation rather than a directive would be adequate .
No , it would not !
The voluntary approach has not worked and will not work .
There has to be more than simply exhortations and fine words .
This is an opportunity to put some reality into our fine words at Rio , which cannot be repeated at Kyoto without a change of action on our part .
So I ask the Commission : what is its stance ?
What will it do in order to ensure that the very sensible thinking in this directive is communicated to Member States in a way that makes them realize the benefits and stop their obstructiveness ?
That is very important to this Parliament , so that we can do the things I mentioned earlier - in relation to jobs , competitivity , the environment - and do them in a way which gets the approval of the Member States .
The challenge is upon the Commissioner to ensure that this happens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you have heard what has been said : the House supports the SAVE II programme because , in the Council 's declarations at the Rio and Berlin conferences , the European Union gave at least a political commitment to taking active measures to combat climate change .
And Parliament , at least , intends to honour those commitments and the promises that were made .
If we really wish to reduce CO2 emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000 - if that is our objective - then we need to make a substantial contribution to rationalizing energy use .
To do that , however , we need more money than the ECU 45 million which the Council has proposed as a reference amount for the programme budget .
The Committee on Budgets attaches particular importance to Amendments Nos 5 , 12 and 13 to the common position .
On Amendment No 5 , we support the call to prevent duplication of effort , and we are in favour of close coordination between SAVE and the other energy programmes .
On Amendment No 12 , we still take the same view that we did at first reading : the legislative hierarchy requires it to be made clear that the Commission derives its authority to manage the programme from the Treaty , and there can be no watering down of that provision by means of a procedural rule .
As regards Amendment No 13 , we are not in favour of this mixed Type 1 and Type 2 committee structure .
The only effect of this attempt to renationalize Community policies would be to increase the proportion of the costs that is spent on administration .
In any case , we already expressed our view at first reading that , to keep costs down , the advisory committee should contain only one representative from each Member State .
Rigorous budget management is what we wish to see .
But it is precisely at times of increased need for rigorous budget management that we must implement a meaningful programme - one that is adequately funded and will make a more than significant contribution to the protection of the environment .
You have already heard what Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz and Mrs McNally said : we know that national budgets are under pressure because of a reduction in tax revenue due to high unemployment and the steadily rising expenditure that is associated with it .
There is little economic or scientific innovation - and this is where we ought to seize the opportunity with both hands .
It has been convincingly shown that investment in reducing energy demand will create many more jobs than will result from any equivalent expenditure on energy supply projects .
A strategy for energy saving has positive net results in term of employment .
Employment generates tax revenue . Tax revenue relieves the pressure on the budget .
You see , more effective savings can sometimes be made by spending additional money in a budget line meaningfully , rather than by indulging in a kind of axe-wielding frenzy !
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mrs McNally on what I think is an excellent report and on the very good hearing that she organized on this subject in Parliament .
She has covered much of the ground as to the reasons behind her proposals .
I do not wish to go into the statistics in great detail , but it is clear that we could be saving 20 % of our fossil fuel imports - some £ 12 billion worth of energy every year - if we were to adopt the kind of proposals put forward here .
We would cut carbon dioxide emissions , we would cut business costs , we would create jobs in the energy-saving industries - by one estimate , some 3.4 million job years .
When the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy considered this report the main question to us was whether rational planning techniques were compatible with a liberalized energy market and with common rules for an internal energy market .
We found that they were .
The experience from the SAVE programme , the support from industry and from the 34 utilities that have tried them showed us that much can be done .
But there is a natural conservatism in the energy industries .
We need a framework which makes it legally and economically viable for distributors to become energy service suppliers rather than commodity traders and which urges them in this direction .
I believe that we need a study from the European Commission of the job-creating potential of investment in energy-saving technologies and the opinion drawn up by my committee calls for this .
But we regret , too , that the Energy Council has had no substantive discussion of the question of rational planning techniques .
Our governments seem to be rushing headlong into a liberalized energy market in pursuit of the dream of a market where more and more energy sold means greater and greater prosperity .
We have known for over 20 years now that we cannot go on like this .
We cannot have our energy ministers indulging in bouts of collective amnesia every time they meet in Brussels .
I urge support for this report .
The Commission proposal to introduce rational planning techniques in its arsenal of energy policy measures is a good proposal .
I believe we are all in agreement on that .
In any event the intentions are good and I agree with the rapporteur 's analysis of the necessary improvements .
I think we support her in trying to strengthen this proposal .
Why is it a good initiative ?
There are three reasons and these are widely referred to in the Commission 's explanatory memorandum : optimum allocation of available capital ; the greatest energy autonomy ; and especially a reduction in the impact on the environment as a result of relying less on fossil fuels .
I would like to draw attention here to the fact that the Commission and Council have pledged to stabilize carbon dioxide emissions by the year 2000 at 1990 levels .
Now we know , as the Commission itself admitted , that this will not be possible without changing our policy .
So if we do not change a number of important environmental and energy policy mechanisms , we shall not be able to keep this promise .
I would like to remind you that our Parliament , among others , has decided to go even further and , faced with the building up of the greenhouse effect , to cut carbon dioxide emissions by 20 % by the year 2005 .
Under these circumstances how can we do what the Commission does and dwell on ambitions and pertinent objectives and then put forward timid proposals .
Yes , it certainly needs to be said that these proposal measures are particularly timid .
Firstly they leave the initiative to the Member States , and then say that it is necessary to persuade distributor undertakings to move in this direction .
I believe that with such a lack of determination we are surely not going to succeed in implementing this directive and even less in getting the environmental protection results we want .
Moreover , I am surprised that some Members and some groups would rather see a simple recommendation than a directive .
Now this is being totally illogical .
It is obvious that we need a strong directive as well as a framework directive and this is quite rightly what the rapporteur is suggesting .
Allow me to make a number of additional remarks in conclusion .
I feel if we want to produce results it is essential to draw attention , as we do in Amendment No 10 , to the need to break the energy sector 's vertical integration - particularly in electricity .
If producers , distributors and suppliers constitute one and the same enterprise , it is difficult to see how this directive could have a really effective impact .
This is the reason why I insist on this Amendment No 10 , which I hope will be voted through .
Mr President , I shall not be talking much about the SAVE II programme .
I think Eryl McNally has said everything that needs to be said about the Socialist Group 's support for Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz 's report .
I was going to have a small joke with Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz but as she is not here I shall save it for when I meet her in private if you do not mind .
As regards Mrs McNally 's report on rational resource planning , I would like to draw attention to one of the problems .
I am not at all surprised that some groups have been thinking in terms of having the directive replaced by a recommendation although I myself am against it and would personally prefer to see a directive , as does the Socialist Group .
If we all agree about the need to control both supply and demand in the energy sector , it is also clear that we must once and for all take a firm line even if we steer a middle course .
We cannot both say that we want the most deregulated possible internal energy market and claim in the same breath , as the Commission does , that we need integrated or as we say now ' rational ' planning of energy resources .
The Commission is basically unaware of the fundamental incompatibility of these two schools of thought .
I have naturally read with interest the Wuppertal Institute 's report and if they cannot see any incompatibility then it because on the one hand the internal market is only likely to be liberalized to a moderate degree - and personally I am delighted with this - and because on the other rational planning is going to remain very largely a pipe dream .
In other words , in these circumstances there is no real incompatibility between the two approaches .
But in the future the Commission will have to be very careful not to tip the balance decisively one way or the other .
This is not going to happen now , Commissioner , and we thank you but in the future we must not allow the tension between the two poles to be too great or incompatibility will be inevitable .
What was also evident in this affair was the need to decide at what level this problem of integrated planning should be dealt with .
In a purely personal capacity , I would like to make a suggestion on this matter to the Commissioner .
After the adoption of the directive on the internal market he might perhaps like to discuss in a Commission opinion whether there is a case for considering the notion of rational planning as an aspect of public service obligations .
I believe that this might encourage a number of distribution and supply undertakings to take steps in line with the Commission 's thinking .
We shall of course support the amendments tabled by Mrs McNally and taken on board by the Committee on Energy and Research as they achieve greater precision , particularly as regards the assessment of ecological and social costs .
Here again I would like to say how far this recommendation accords with the European Parliament 's wish for harmonization .
Mr President , the core objectives of the SAVE multiannual programme are very laudable .
Other speakers have mentioned them so I will not repeat them .
I would just like to draw attention to two specific features of the SAVE II programme which are truly worth bearing in mind .
Firstly , it is based on an evaluation of the first programme and reinforces action , namely the pilot schemes , which is already in progress and , secondly , it introduces new measures to improve on-going evaluation .
We view those two features of the SAVE programme as very important .
The programme sets many complex objectives of a specific nature , and for that reason a substantial increase in its budget was proposed .
We ought to recognize , of course , that the plethora of objectives does perhaps impede a clear appraisal of the priorities and complicate the programme implementation procedure , whereas a clearer and disciplined setting-out of the objectives would do more to safeguard its effectiveness .
Furthermore , certain of the rapporteur 's amendments opt for legislative measures on a number of matters , whereas the programme attempts to avoid going down that particular road .
We in this group wonder whether this is the best way of tackling the serious energy and environmental problems facing us today , and whether the insistence on a legislative approach just makes the programme even more inflexible .
The programme 's genuinely ambitious objectives are inevitably enfeebled by the Council 's desire to reduce the funding to ECU 45 million - which works out at only ECU 9 million annually - from the ECU 150 million originally sought by the Commission .
We are saddened by the fact that this - one might say - fatal cut in the funding entails a retreat by the Council from its initial solemn declarations concerning an abiding environmental policy consistent with the Rio and Berlin conferences , and that it also , essentially , destroys any possibility of effective intervention by the Union to protect the environment and improve energy policy .
So it is a pity that Parliament has not shown a bit more determination and taken its co-responsibility for the drafting of the budget more seriously , and that it has not sought to renegotiate the matter with the Council before proceeding to its vote .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , on behalf of the Liberal Group , I should like to congratulate the two rapporteurs on their excellent report .
The Union 's energy policy has a prominent place on the agenda this week , with six reports on energy to be debated , two of them legislative ones .
A common objective in all these reports is the efficient use of energy or energy-saving measures , yet the Council has reduced the budget for this to ECU 45 million spread over a five-year period , which just goes to show what kind of priority energy and the environment are given in Europe .
The future energy situation in Europe and worldwide will primarily be determined by how we deal with our environmental problems .
Why is it then that the Union does not have an integrated common policy for energy and the environment ?
Why do we always talk about energy and the environment as if they were two different fields ?
The fact that we are to look at all the energy reports this week separately from the action programme on sustainable development is just one example of this .
As if environment costs did not hit us just as hard as energy costs !
My group therefore cannot understand why the Council is offering a sop to the SAVE programme by drastically cutting the reserved budget , and we therefore support the rapporteur 's amendments to remove the financial framework from the common position .
Parliament 's budgetary powers must not be affected .

Moving on to the report by Mrs McNally , rational planning techniques in the electricity and gas distribution sectors are important instruments for reducing CO2 emissions , since energy suppliers and distributors are in a position to encourage their customers to consume less energy .
A number of Member States , including the Netherlands , have expressed doubts as to whether this directive is really necessary , since their energy sectors are already taking action in this field .
But in most Member States , nothing is being done to promote the efficient use of energy .
That is why my group feels that European legislation is needed and supports Mrs McNally 's report .
I also agree with the points Mr Watson made about this a moment ago .
Finally , as I said earlier , the future energy situation will be determined not only by our environmental problems , but also by the growing energy consumption in the developing countries .
Alternative sources of energy are required .
The supply of fossil fuels is finite , and they cause CO2 emissions and possibly also climate change .
Renewable sources of energy are an alternative , but as yet they are too expensive to use on a large scale and therefore do not meet the criteria for use as a permanent energy supply .
So this is all the more reason to continue the development of these renewable energy sources , which would show that we are taking a long-term view of our energy needs and of our need for a sustainable environment .
Our view in the Liberal Group is that this is a sustainable option .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating both rapporteurs , but I wish to focus on the report by Mrs McNally .
We are looking at quite a number of reports which make pains to point out our failure and miserable position vis-à-vis the forecasts and commitments made at the Rio Summit .
Here we are debating a Directive which , in order to introduce rational planning techniques for increasing energy efficiency , is mainly concerned with the quantitative aspect of energy consumption and I wish to point out that we are not speaking in this Directive of renewable energies .
That is another debate .
Here we are referring to planning in order to achieve energy efficiency in precisely those energies which are the most consumed and the most polluting .
Other reports will look at the problem of the quality of the components and attempt to reduce their polluting character : sulphur emissions and other major emissions from petrol and its other components .
I would just like to say that I do not agree with the suggestion that we are doing nothing .
The measures proposed by the Council in certain directions are very tough on the sector 's companies , and are costing billions of ECU , which also means transforming refineries , etc .
However , I would like to point out that Mrs McNally 's proposal has resisted the temptation which we usually give into in this Parliament , viz. to tighten the screw much harder than the agreement reached in the common position of the Council .
However , this planning of rational energy saving techniques has not been exploited to introduce ingredients of industrial conflict .
I think that that is the very great merit of Mrs McNally 's position and I must therefore congratulate her on her report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when politicians are in charge of everything - and that is all very well in itself - they get things wrong .
And when the European Union is in charge of everything - which is also all very well in itself - it gets things particularly wrong , because it has an unfortunate tendency to attract criticism for what it does .
That danger is present once again with the proposal for a directive on integrated resource planning .
Behind this arcane concept lies something that is basically worthwhile .
The idea is that energy suppliers should invest not only in supply , but also in the efficient use of energy .
In other words , they should be providing services rather than simply selling something .
Of course , in many instances , this worthwhile activity is already going on and the companies are taking responsibility for it , but in our opinion - and in my own opinion too - it is not sufficiently widespread .
The intelligent thing to do , therefore , would be to make an appropriate recommendation and to rely on good examples and competition .
But if instead we wave a big stick with new legislation - a directive at EU level - then four brief comments are required .
Firstly , the proposal takes no account of the aspect of subsidiarity , which we are supposed to make a point of respecting .
Secondly , the proposal carries the whiff of a new bout of planning , new authorities and controls - in a word , of bureaucracy , with an extensive new planning apparatus for which the taxpayer has to foot the bill .
Thirdly - and I shall be blunt about this - it is disturbing to see how Parliament can sometimes duck and weave on the question of legal bases , in this case actually opposing the decision of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
The concern here is less about meeting the conditions for establishing a base upon which actions can be authorized than about whether the decision is to the advantage of everyone taking it .
I hope that the European Court of Justice will address this issue at some stage .
Fourthly , when I go on to read that the energy providers are supposed to set up two companies to offer third-party financing , then I have to wonder in all seriousness what the point is of Europe being well catered for by all kinds of banks .
Are energy providers now to take over banking too ?
In a nutshell , we believe it is right to be concerned about this issue , but this is the wrong legislation .
For that reason , we shall be abstaining as a group .
Mr President , there are a number of questions I should like to ask on this topic , the main one being whether the Commission proposal is still on the table ?
I have heard rumours that all 15 Member States have rejected it in the Council .
I should therefore like to ask the Commission what the status of proposal COM ( 95 ) 0369 is at the moment .
The answer to this will very much influence how we deal with the McNally report .

The subject of this document is a very complex one , and the terms RPT , or rational planning techniques , and DSM - demand side management - are bandied about very freely in the proposal and the amendments .
I do not think this is the right way to go about things .
What does the Commission think of the idea of converting the whole proposal into a sort of recommendation to the Member States to work on demand side management ?
The McNally report is also in favour of introducing legislation , but I find this a very heavy-handed approach to something which is really a matter for private industry to tackle .
This is also why I would criticize the Commission proposal .
In my own country , the Netherlands , we have already more or less finished with demand side management , and the conversion of the distribution companies into providers of energy services , which is what the Commission is proposing , is already a fait accompli .
However , my main question is still whether the proposal still exists as such ?
If so , what does the Commission intend to do with it and with Parliament 's amendments , in view of the position which the Council has adopted ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , permit me first of all to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , for her important contribution to this debate on the common position of the Council concerning the SAVE II programme .
Everyone is conversant with the fact that lack of progress on the energy tax issue is one of the factors which have impelled us to develop the SAVE II programme , which as an initiative is , of course , more wide-ranging and comprehensive .
But SAVE II is certainly not the only energy sector measure that the European Union will have to adopt in order to meet its commitments on the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions .
Together with energy-saving , we must promote the use of renewable energy sources .
On this point I take the opportunity to notify the House that within the Commission I have already presented a proposal on the development of an integrated strategy for the promotion of renewable energy sources which , I hope , will receive approval next week .
Naturally , I will be in a position fairly soon to discuss that proposal with the European Parliament , both in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy and , of course , in theHouse .
All of us here today agree on the urgency of the need , and not just as far as protection of the environment is concerned , to convince our citizens and industry and the state decision-making bodies of the wisdom of investment in energy efficiency .
Exploitation of the very considerable potential for energy-saving will reduce our dependence on energy , revitalize industry , cut public spending and give an impetus to the use of new energy technologies .
In addition , and perhaps this is the most important thing , it will generate a substantial number of new jobs and contribute to the creation of a new branch of industry , of a branch dedicated to investment in rational energy use .
The SAVE II programme will continue to promote the energy consumption label and the standards for energyconsuming equipment .
We shall continue to coordinate and provide additional support for the measures taken by the Member States to promote energy efficiency and better dissemination of information .
We shall seek to promote greater cohesion between the regions via improvement of the transfer of know-how on aspects of energy-saving strategy from regions with a developed energy efficiency dynamic to regions which are significantly behind in that respect .
In addition , we shall be working for the establishment of an energy management dynamic at regional and urban level and in small communities ; of a dynamic , that is , which will promote the development of endeavours to improve energy efficiency where such endeavours can have maximum impact and , of course , bring benefits to the consumer .
Lastly , we shall be monitoring energy efficiency progress on an ongoing basis .
Allow me , Mr President , to recall the view expressed by the rapporteur , which is totally in line with the position of the Commission , concerning the programme budget .
SAVE II is a response by the European Union to environmental and energy challenges .
However , with a five-year budget of ECU 45 million it is obviously not going to solve problems by itself .
Nevertheless , the programme is an important tool and will yield results - but only if it has the full support of all sides .
For that reason , I invite you to view the SAVE II programme as complementary to actions embarked on by the Member States , and I urge you , ladies and gentlemen , to combine with us in a joint and essential effort to get the budget for the programme increased .
Without a satisfactory level of funding for the programme it will be extremely difficult for the Commission to meet its commitments on the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions . And the Commission will not be alone , because the political leaders of the Member States will themselves find it difficult to meet the commitments that they , too , have entered into .
Turning now to the amendments , I would like once more to commend the rapporteur 's contribution and to say that the Commission can unreservedly accept the three Amendments Nos 6 , 7 and 11 relating to the financial reference amount , and also Amendment No 4 .
We can also accept parts of Amendments Nos 1 , 5 , 8 , 9 , 12 , 13 , 14 and 15 , and , in fact , if they were reframed we could accept them in their entirety .
Concerning Amendment No 13 , I would like to recall that the Commission agrees on a Type 1 committee , without the time-limit that it had proposed , but cannot accept the other proposed changes relating to itself .
The Commission is empowered to propose legislative measures to improve energy efficiency in the Union , and does intend to do so in the future , but only after other possibilities , such as self-binding agreements with industry , have been exhausted .
Allow me , in addition , to make the more general point that the taking of legislative initiatives by the Commission is not dependent on adoption of this programme .
That being so , the sections of Amendments Nos 4 , 8 , 9 and 15 which refer to the strengthening of the Commission 's legislative initiative are not necessary in this proposal .
Amendment No 9 in part and Amendment No 10 refer to new actions of a minor nature and to the funding of them .
Some of those actions are included in the Commission 's text and some fall outside the scope of the text .
For that reason those amendments cannot be accepted .
Amendment No 14 in part and Amendment No 16 reduce the flexibility of the programme management procedures and likewise cannot be accepted .
Nor can the Commission accept Amendment No 2 , because it is considered that SAVE I has , indeed , contributed to the improvement of energy efficiency in the Union .
Lastly , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 3 because we believe that the objective of 1.5 percentage points is too ambitious and would be very difficult to achieve .
At this point , Mr President , I would like to thank Parliament again for all the effort that it has put into expressing its view today , and for thereby making possible the final adoption of the programme by the next Energy Council on 3 December .
Turning now , Mr President , to Mrs McNally 's report on rational planning techniques , I wish first of all to thank her for her truly excellent report .
The draft directive on rational planning techniques in the electricity and gas distribution sectors is a particularly important proposal which is linked with the policy on energy efficiency and with the strategy to reduce carbon dioxide emissions in the European Union and , as such , will have a direct bearing on the achievement of our environmental objectives .
The draft directive requires electricity and gas distribution undertakings to establish planning techniques which will take account of all of the possible energy source options and estimate their demand-response potential in the context of demand-side management .
I would like to stress also that the directive fully recognizes the lack of uniformity among the public utilities of the Union and allows the Member States considerable freedom in regard to the manner of the directive 's implementation .
The use of these new planning techniques will allow the public utilities to assess investment from the standpoint of demand by taking it equally into account along with supply-side factors .
I believe that it will give an impetus to investment in energy efficiency and eliminate investment in supplyside efficiency of contestable value .
We believe that the adoption of these techniques in the Community as a whole will bring economic benefits to the public utilities and their customers and , of course , a wider social benefit as well .
That is the spirit in which the Commission presents the directive today , and I am very heartened by Parliament 's support in broad terms for the objectives of the directive .
The Commission firmly believes that there is a huge energy-saving dynamic which remains unexploited .
In addition to generating environmental and energy benefits , the development of an economically viable energy efficiency industry will generate employment and exports .
The application of these new analysis techniques will be entirely compatible with the internal market proposals aimed at breathing new vigour into the public utilities and at making them competitive .
On that point , in response to Mr Desama 's comment , I can say that his proposal is extremely interesting , and that after the adoption of the internal market directive we may well look at it to see whether the performance of the activities in question can in fact be viewed as a public service .
The new approach by the public utilities , with the emphasis it places both on competitiveness and service to the consumer , will require the deployment of new planning tools ; of tools which can facilitate more accurate assessment of the broad range of investments via which heightened competition will be stimulated .
The Commission 's proposal for a directive in this sector will , I hope , promote the adoption of these new analytical tools .
I believe that Parliament 's amendments significantly improve the proposal .
We can therefore accept the first part of Amendment No 5 , Amendments Nos 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 and 10 in their entirety and the second part of Amendment No 12 .
We are can also accept most of Amendment No 13 , excluding , that is , the part containing the reference to the determining of the competent authorities and the reference to the plans .
We cannot , however , accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 and the latter part of Amendment No 5 because they seek to impose Article 100 as the legal basis .
Article 130s is the accepted legal basis for this measure .
Amendment No 11 is also unacceptable , because the reference to the cost not being charged to the consumer could generate dispute .
The management of demand is a service , and as such must be paid for by those who reap its benefits .
The first part of Amendment No 12 is not acceptable because there is no case for the adoption of a quantitative target in respect of this measure .
Sub-paragraph a ) of Amendment No 13 is unacceptable because we believe that the Member States must be able to determine the competent authorities in accordance with their own regulatory practices .
Lastly , the fifth part of Amendment No 13 , referring to the use of regulatory mechanisms , is unacceptable because in our view regulation at this point would render the measure too restrictive .
Mr President , allow me to thank Mrs McNally once more for her report and for the support that she gives to our proposal .
In response to her question to me , I just wish to say that we have arrived here and had the debate on this proposal today .
We have indeed arrived , but I have to say that in getting here we had to fend off a great deal of opposition and resistance throughout the processing of this proposal , both within the Commission and also , of course , from various sides after the Commission approved it . We do not stand in fear of that opposition .
We shall keep on striving .
We shall pass as much information to the Member States as we can in order to convince the governments that this directive would be a correct measure , a good thing for the European energy sector . So my reply to your question is this : yes , I do take up the challenge that you place upon me .
I accept responsibility for the continuance of this endeavour , and I hope that in the end it will be crowned with success . But that success can only come through you , through your help and your determination .
Thank you very much , Mr Papoutsis .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.30 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , thank you for including my speech in the Minutes .
It appears a little cryptic , because the reason why I actually spoke was that I was the rapporteur when the Secretary-General was given the possibility of using force if necessary , but the immediate reason was , of course , the fight that took place in the corridor .
I do not wish to go into details , but the victim has now lodged a complaint , and I hope that you will treat it very seriously , leaving aside any amendment to the Rules of Procedure .
Let me first look at that section of the Minutes .
What is the mistake ?
Mr President , my brevity has made my speech appear rather cryptic , but the Minutes themselves are not incorrect .
I have expressed my thanks , but I feel that some clarification is necessary , as I should be glad to explain to you later .
Mr President , under item 5 of the Minutes yesterday - Membership of political groups - you announced that the Groupe Europe des Nations ( Europe of Nations Group ) had dissolved because it had not got enough nations .
As many colleagues know , Sir Jimmy Goldsmith has another party - the Referendum Party - and he will be fighting an election in the United Kingdom under his British citizenship .
You referred to Rule 29 ( 2 ) but that Rule simply says that ' The minimum number of Members required to form a political group shall be 29 if they come from one Member State ... ' - if they come from !
Mr President , could you confirm that means elected from , otherwise Mr Goldsmith could attempt to use his British citizenship and thereby establish another nation .
( Applause )
Mr President , in the item concerning the debate on energy efficiency and gas and electricity distribution , all the committees which delivered an opinion are referred to , with the exception of the Committee on Budgets .
I also delivered an opinion on behalf of the Committee on Budgets .
Is this not something of a scandal ?
That will be corrected , Mrs Haug .
Mr President , following my intervention yesterday concerning photographers equipped with longrange lenses in Parliament , several worried Members asked me who they were photographing .
The people concerned were Mr Francis Demange of the Gamma Press Agency and Mr Jean-Philippe Ksiazek of the AFP Agency .
They told Parliament 's Security Service that they were taking pictures for architectural purposes of the outside of the building .
I would leave it to my French colleagues to judge whether these people were actually interested in the architecture of the building .
On further investigation it seems that they were trying to spy on room IPE2 425 , which is the office of one of our former Members , Mr Bernard Tapie .
For the information of Mr Hallam and all other Members , the Bureau considered this matter yesterday evening , and we agreed that the rules which have long existed in writing must be respected in Parliament .
One of these rules is that filming and taking photographs is not permitted in the restaurants , bars and cafeterias , in Members ' offices , and in a third area which escapes me for the moment .
A copy of the decision in question is just being fetched for me .
That has long been the rule , and yesterday the Bureau agreed to instruct Parliament 's administration to ensure that these provisions are respected .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Decision on urgency
Mr President , the point at issue here is the question of the legal base .
We already have the report before us in the Committee on Budgetary Control , but this is not an urgent matter , given that we have been working on the question since December 1993 and have yet to receive an appropriate answer from the Council .
We therefore decided yesterday in the committee that urgent procedure should be rejected .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
Mr President , this was also discussed at our meeting yesterday .
Since the Court of Auditors has some very clear comments to make on the management of the appropriations , the committee is proposing not to deal with this report as an urgency , but to review it in the light of these findings , so that we can then produce a detailed opinion .
We are therefore against urgent procedure .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
Mr President , the Committee on Fisheries yesterday unanimously agreed to reject this decision on urgency .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
Mr President , the point here is that we have almost unanimously approved the Europe Agreement and now need to bring the interim agreement - which anticipates the economic and trade policy aspects , pending completion of the ratification process in the Member States - into force by 1 January .
The committee decided unanimously yesterday to agree to urgent procedure , and also adopted the report .
I would ask the House to take the same line here .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
Court of Auditors ' annual report and general budget activities
The next item is the presentation by Mr Friedmann , President of the Court of Auditors of the European Communities , of the annual report and statement of assurance as regards activities arising from the general budget for the 1995 financial year .
I give the floor to Mr Friedmann , President of the Court of Auditors .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great honour for me , in the first year of my presidency , to be able to present to the honourable Members of this House the annual report and the statement of assurance of the European Court of Auditors for the financial year 1995 .
This comes at a time when important decisions have to be taken for the future of Europe .
They include decisions on economic and monetary union , the development of the Structural Funds and of the common agricultural policy , the future financing of the Community and the eastward expansion of the European Union .
The audit findings of the European Court of Auditors are certainly not the only , but , nonetheless , an important criterion for setting the course for the future .
Let me now present the findings of our latest annual report .
On the revenue side of the budget , the Court makes mention of the following facts : VAT revenue fell in 1993 by between 5 and 6 % .
This is undoubtedly a result of the abolition of tax frontiers which came into effect on 1 January 1993 .
GNP figures calculated by the Member States are not always reliable , or comparable either .
This has repercussions on the contributions paid by the Member States to the EU , and on refunds to the Member States from the EU .
And because of the inadequate application of legislation relating to inward processing , the Community is losing several million ECU every year .
The European Court of Auditors is grateful to Parliament that it has entrusted the first committee of inquiry in its history with the examination of the Community transit procedure .
We have repeatedly pointed out , in our annual reports , the need for clarification in this field . We shall therefore be glad to support the work of this committee .
There are signs that the reforms of the common agricultural policy which were introduced in 1992 are beginning to take effect .
Stocks of grain in storage have been greatly reduced .
A similar positive development in the case of beef has been eclipsed by the effects of BSE .
The reduction in surpluses meant that in both 1994 and 1995 , storage costs and export subsidies fell . In its annual report , the European Court of Auditors makes the following critical comments .
Of the ECU 160 million which were placed at the disposal of the Member States in 1994 and 1995 for the purpose of detecting fraud , ECU 16.5 m - some 10 % , in other words - was not adequately vouched for .
In Germany , the channels of trade in pigs which had possibly been exposed to contamination with swine fever could not always be traced .
This means there was a risk that this meat may have reappeared on the market .
In connection with the export of feta cheese from Denmark to Iran , a total of ECU 16 m in export refunds was paid in error .
This figure is based on a projection by the European Court of Auditors , using the results of checks carried out by the Danish authorities , these having been incorporated in a special report by Denmark 's national audit body .
In the Member States which are the main producers of olive oil , there has still been no improvement in the olive cultivation registers , although this has been called for by the Council and Parliament .
This means that there is no reliable control mechanism in this sector .
There has been a similar lack of progress with the introduction of land registers for rice-growing areas .
On the other hand , the improved methods of control which the Court called for in its annual report for 1992 have been introduced for the cotton market .
Due to the rise in the amount of aid for flax cultivation , there is now a risk of overproduction .
Turning to fisheries policy , contributions towards equipment for the surveillance of fishing activities were too generous .
The Commission did not monitor rigorously enough the imposition of penalties on fishing vessels for infringements of the regulations .
Aid to further the modernization of businesses which are active in the fishing sector was even paid in areas where there was a lack of fish or of the necessary infrastructure .
Where investments in the fishing sector were financed by leasing contracts , the total amount covered by the contract was treated as valid expenditure .
This is incorrect , as the instalments will not be paid until the following years .
In the context of our certification audit we discovered , amongst other things , that land for which applications for subsidies were submitted did not exist ; that the data supplied concerning land , produce and livestock numbers bore no relation to reality ; and that subsidies were requested from the national paying agencies although the payments concerned had not been made .
The second-largest quantity of expenditure in the EU 's budget is accounted for by the Structural Funds .
From a budgetary point of view , their problem lies in the discrepancy between the payment appropriations and the payments which were actually made .
In 1995 , payment appropriations amounted to almost ECU 24 billion ; actual payments , however , came to only ECU 19.5 bn .
The reasons why payments fall short of appropriations are , amongst others : co-financing difficulties , the failure of the national administrations to cope with the demands made upon them , and absorption difficulties in the economies concerned .
It must be emphasized here , however , that it is not only important to disburse funds swiftly , but also sensibly .
This does not appear to be possible , to a sufficient extent , with the Structural Funds .
Of the Social Fund 's 850 operational programmes for the period between 1990 and 1993 , for example , a mere 37 % had been completed by the beginning of 1996 .
The situation is even more serious for the Community Initiatives - the figure there was only 15 % .
In addition , the following criticisms must be made : the Commission has difficulties in bringing dormant projects to a close .
In 1995 alone , a total of ECU 900 m of Structural Fund resources were committed to so-called ' dormant projects ' which could be cancelled .
Assistance is scattered too widely .
At present , about 50 % of the EU 's population is covered by the Fund 's objectives . A re-examination of the eligibility criteria in order to achieve greater concentration is necessary .
The Commission must continue its efforts to improve assessment .
Profitable investments should be financed to a larger extent through loans .
As in previous years , we find that ineligible expenditure is being subsidized , Member States are retaining commission and deductions from Community aid , applications are being submitted for subsidies towards expenditure which has not yet been incurred , estimates of expenditure are being entered as actual expenditure , and expenditure certificates contain higher sums than were actually paid .
In the case of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the newly independent states , the value of concluded contracts was , at the end of 1995 , approximately ECU 2 bn less than the commitments in the case of the PHARE programme , and ECU 644 m in the case of the TACIS programme .
The situation at Chernobyl , where appropriations are being disbursed only meagrely , despite a glaring lack of safety , demonstrates how alarming this can be .
In addition , the following observations may be made with regard to the PHARE and TACIS programmes . Staff management at the Commission must be improved .
The Commission should also be more circumspect in delegating to third parties tasks that should be performed by a public service body .
The EU delegations in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe should be given greater authority , so that on-the-spot management and monitoring duties can be carried out more effectively .
Serious consideration should be given to the possibility of co-financing by the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , so as to awaken interest on their part .
Conflicts of interest in the awarding of public contracts are to be avoided .
With regard to cooperation with developing countries and non-Member States , with the exception of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , the following points should be made : there is too great a discrepancy between commitment appropriations and payment appropriations ; many commitments were entered in the accounts only in December 1995 , in order to avoid the cancellation of unused appropriations ; payment appropriations which had not been utilized were carried over to the next year , contrary to budgetary rules .

When examining the European Development Fund under the Lomé Convention , the Court established that some countries have not fulfilled their obligation , when using counterpart funds , to pay special attention to the most disadvantaged sections of the population , that is to say the poor , women and children .
Some countries instead used considerable amounts to pay off public debts .
Last year , the Court also issued a special report concerning the signature of the contract for the construction of the new Parliament building here in Strasbourg .
In this , the Court pointed out that the contract had been concluded without the prior approval of the Financial Controller , that the European Parliament is nevertheless required to meet obligations it has entered into , and that , internally speaking , the European Parliament should ensure a clear separation of duties .
The Court also published a special report on the MED programmes and one on the administration of Mostar by the European Union .
As regards the MED programmes , the Court 's conclusions were , inter alia : that the delegation of powers to the Agency for Transmediterranean Networks - the ATMN - went too far , and that serious conflicts of interest had arisen , in that the same consultancies were involved in both the conception of the programmes and the drawing-up of funding proposals , and that contracts had been awarded freely to Technical Assistance Bureaux whose managers were also members of the management board of the ATMN .
In the special report on Mostar , it was established that the EU aid had made an important contribution to the economic reconstruction of the city , but that the basic political objective , that is to say to facilitate the coexistence of the different ethnic groups , could not be fully achieved ; that the EU Administrator was not involved in staff recruitment policy to any significant extent ; that there was no clear separation of responsibilities between the Council , the advisory working parties , the Commission and Parliament ; and that lasting structures should be established and suitable staff recruited for a common foreign and security policy .
I now come to the statement of assurance .
The Court has now , for the second time , issued statements of assurance pertaining to the general budget and to the European Development Funds .
Both statements are concerned with the legality and regularity of the accounts and the underlying transactions , not with sound financial management .
As regards the statement on the general budget , the following observations may be made : the accounts are reliable , that is to say the budgetary accounts for 1995 essentially provide a true picture of the revenue and expenditure .
On the other hand , as in 1994 , the Court was unable to issue a positive statement as to the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying 1995 payments , on account of the volume of the errors which were found .
On the basis of the errors found in the random samples , which amounted to some ECU 180 m , an error rate of 5.9 % of all payments made in 1995 can be extrapolated ; this represents an amount of approximately ECU 4 bn .
I should explicitly add , however , that these observations do not concern the Commission alone , since 80 % of the budget is , after all , implemented by the Member States .
These ' substantial material errors ' are errors with an immediate impact on the Community budget .
By far the greater number of cases involve aspects I have already mentioned , relating to set-aside , livestock numbers , and so on .
As in 1994 , the Court again found that formal errors relating to the legality and regularity of payments were occurring far too frequently .
These errors consist of infringements of statutory provisions and regulations , but do not necessarily have a measurable effect on the underlying transactions financed from the Community budget .
This is why no amounts or percentages were provided in this context .
Here I should like to thank my British colleague , John Wiggins , who is responsible for the certification as a whole .
The extent of the ' substantial material errors ' found by the Court is largely comparable to that found in 1994 , and this is something to be welcomed .
I would make the point , however , that the scale on which the Court was unable to carry out audits because of insufficient documentation , for example , has been considerably reduced .
Whereas 14 % of all expenditure was involved in 1994 , the figure is now only 2.3 % .
I therefore welcome the fact that this percentage has declined .
There are more errors in the Structural Funds than in agriculture .
About half the errors found were attributable to national and regional authorities , and the other half to the final beneficiaries .
The Court acknowledges that the Commission has made a series of improvements in its budgetary management , for example in the way that advance payments are dealt with .
In the case of the Member States , which as explained are responsible for 80 % of the management of Community resources , the Court was also able to discern certain improvements .
Mr Liikanen will no doubt go into further detail here .
At this point , I should like to express sincere thanks to both him and his colleague Mrs Gradin for their cooperation .
As regards the 1995 statement of assurance on the sixth and seventh European Development Funds , for which my Italian colleague Giorgio Clemente is responsible , the Court was able to issue a positive statement - unlike last year - despite a number of remaining weaknesses .
In the case of the underlying payment transactions , the Court estimates that substantial errors amount to ECU 32.6 m , or 2.1 % of total payments .
I should like to take this opportunity of mentioning very briefly some other activities of the Court .
In connection with the 1996 Intergovernmental Conference , the Court has put forward proposals to improve the efficiency of its audits .
The European Court of Auditors would like to express its satisfaction at the fruitful working relationship it has with the Council , and especially the Ecofin Council , the Commission and the national audit bodies .
In a few days ' time , the heads of all the national audit bodies of the Member States are meeting with us in Luxembourg .
Recently , we were also visited by the heads of the national audit bodies of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe for a two and a half day seminar .
I am particularly pleased with the fruitful cooperation with you , the European Parliament , and especially with the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on Budgets .
As the representatives of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I should like to thank you , Mrs Theato , and your principal rapporteur , Mr Wynn .
If you did not take up our audit findings and translate them into action , the Court of Auditors would be like a knight without a sword .
Many of our initiatives have been taken up with your assistance , and we in turn have received many valuable suggestions from you in the course of our discussions .
For this , I should like to express the heartfelt thanks of the Members and all the staff of the European Court of Auditors .
And I must thank the House for listening to me attentively at such length !
Mr President , President Friedmann , it is never a pleasant moment for an auditee to listen to the report of his auditor , even less so in public .
But if some of it is painful , it is useful pain which helps the Commission and the Community to improve the use of the Community finances .
Any improvement can only be slow .
The Community budget is not big in size , but complex to execute .
Many people have to change their approach : from the Commission to the Member States , to the regions , to the municipalities .
The Annual Report of the Court of Auditors for 1995 shows that there is no doubt about the direction to be taken .
It only takes determination to get there .
In many languages we have a saying that a big ship turns slowly .
But I am convinced it will turn and it is turning already .
The Annual Report for 1995 acknowledges the initiatives taken in the framework of the sound and efficient management 2000 project and I will come back to that .
But there are quite a few other changes which have been made on the insistence of the Court of Auditors and of the European Parliament , especially its Committee on Budgetary Control , and which the Court recognizes in the 1995 report have improved the use of the Community 's finances .
For example , I was glad the Court mentioned explicitly the good results of the PHARE programme for SMEs in Hungary and Slovakia .
Positive feedback can also be a tool for change .
Other specific improvements have been undertaken since last year 's report and should make themselves felt in the years to come .
Regulations have been changed as , for example , the new common market organizations for fruit and vegetables , which was a big issue last year , or the improved project selection mechanisms in the LIVE II programme .
There is also the improved management of the external delegations and the new electronic inventory for the Commission 's furniture , another big item in the press last year .
You will find in the Commission 's replies on to the 1995 Annual Report further commitments to draw lessons from the Court 's observations .
Encompassing such specific policy improvement is the attempt of SEM 2000 initiative to change the budgetary culture of the Community from the Commission to the actual implementing authority .
Stages I and II of this initiative concerning the Commission itself have already achieved visible results .
Let me refer to three points , beginning with the restructuring of the directorates-general to strengthen their financial management .
This includes the new financial directors , many of whom are now in place , as was the wish of the European Parliament .
Secondly , the new budget procedure .
The Commission now discusses its priorities first , before deciding on individual credit allocations .
This kind of budget priority debate takes place in January , well before the final decision on the budget contents .
The new procedure also strengthens the link between the allocation of financial and human resources , as is necessary .
Thirdly , there is a much stronger emphasis on evaluation throughout the house , in particular for new spending proposals .
As far as stage III of this project is concerned - the new partnership with the Member States - it was clear from the beginning that this would be the most difficult but also the most important element .
I am happy to inform you today that I was able to present a first report to Ecofin yesterday .
This report , which you will also receive , contains a number of substantial recommendations which also include the areas of responsibility of my colleague , Mrs Gradin .
On these recommendations , there is a large degree of agreement , but on the key issues we still need to work to achieve consensus .
This concerns the problem most often raised by the Court in the Annual Report , but also in the DAS , the question of eligibility for structural funds .
The Court has demonstrated that it is extremely important to clarify what expenditure is eligible for assistance from the structural funds .
I fully share this view .
If eligibility is not clear it is very difficult to have a coherent budget culture in the Community .
I am going to propose jointly with Commissioner Gradin that the Commission adopts guidelines which make the rules clear .
For this we need the support of the Member States .
A large majority of the personal representatives of the Ecofin Ministers supported our approach .
Therefore , I am optimistic that we can get the necessary support when the time comes for formal decisions .
We are not there yet , but I hope that before the Dublin Summit , for which Ecofin has promised a report which we have been preparing , we could already find consensus .
Clear eligibility rules are , among other things , also needed to clarify the circumstances in which the Commission should make net financial corrections to the structural funds ' expenditure where systematic irregularities have been detected .
While this is the approach for the current structural funds , there is an important discussion coming up on the future shape of the Community 's cohesion instruments .
I note the reflections of the Court and of its President in this area .
The Commission will present a report on the future of the Community 's structural funds by spring next year .
This will provide the basis of a debate which should also take the requirements of sound financial management into account .
In addition , I want to say that there are also areas of disagreement between the Commission and the Court .
There are instances where the criticism of the Court is slightly difficult to understand .
For example , the Court criticized certain reporting obligations which the Commission imposes on farm organizations using Community funds .
But would not the Commission otherwise be criticized for a lack of transparency and control ?
Secondly , in other cases it is important that the Court draws a clear line between its judgment as an auditor and its political opinion .
For example , with regard to the agri-monetary system , the Court as an auditor should focus on the correct application of the existing rules .
Any criticism of the system itself should be kept clearly separate .
I do not mean here that I may perhaps share some political views of the Court . As the Commissioner responsible for the budget , I have to respect the accepted regulations .
I cannot decide that these are regulations that we do not like , so we will do it our own way .
It is the right of the Court , but it is important that these two issues are kept separate .
Along with the Annual Report the Court is presenting for the second time its declaration of assurance , or DAS , on the legality and regularity of the Community 's accounts and the underlying transactions .
To arrive at its results the Court is mainly relying on the quantitative sampling technique introduced last year and on their being implemented this time with even more vigour and rigour .
The application of such a technique to the heterogeneous and multilayered Community budget is still experimental .
The Commission therefore shares the Court 's view that it would take several years before the DAS audit will have sufficiently gained in maturity to enable trends in error rates to be identified .
With this caveat in mind the Commission welcomes the Court 's confirmation of last year 's satisfactory result with respect to the accounts , to receipts and to commitments .
It accepts that errors have again been too high with respect to payments and there we must do better .
These errors are to a large extent concentrated in two areas , the agricultural guarantee fund and the structural funds .
It is thus quite promising that for 1995 the Court provides more detailed DAS for these areas .
This should be pursued to establish even more clearly at what level errors occur .
It also needs to be established more clearly what the real and lasting damage to the Community budget is .
Both agricultural spending and the structural funds have procedures which make it possible to catch errors and to prevent lasting damage to the Community budget .
Thus , for example , every single error detected by the Court concerning agricultural spending will be examined and recouped whenever justified in the context of the clearance of account procedure .
We have seen reports that today there are clearly a few problem areas , but when we come to 1995 in our clearance of accounts systems it is clear that the information we now get from the Court will be fully used to recover the money from the Member States .
With regard to structural funds , I have already mentioned the work on eligibility and corrections .
DAS , as such , has been an extremely helpful exercise for us because it has identified where the problems are .
It has strengthened our position in our discussions with the Member States . But , at the same time , I want to note that there is also a system of advances which prevents those projects which have been found to be ineligible from having a lasting effect on the Community budget .
Such errors should therefore be classified separately from the substantial errors .
Finally , let me conclude by congratulating you , President Friedmann , for the first Annual Report under your leadership .
The Commission is fully committed to working with the chairman of the Budgetary Control Committee , Mrs Theato , and the rapporteur , Mr Wynn , and all the Members of Parliament involved to draw the required conclusions .
Thank you , Commissioner .

We shall now begin the debate , starting with Mr Tomlinson , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
Mr President , I was glad to receive the Official Journal last night and to see that even it is trying to collaborate with the Commission .
When I received the English version I found that pages 17 to 24 are published in Finnish to make it comprehensible to the Commissioner but incomprehensible to anybody else .
At the beginning of this process we should acknowledge that there should not be the sort of rush to condemn based on the Court of Auditors report that we see in much of the press this morning and over recent days .
Members of this House in particular should have a proper sense of perspective as to what is happening today .
These are important reports , but as far as Parliament is concerned they are the beginning of a process not the end .
They are the beginning of the process of Parliament exercising one of its most important powers - that of discharge .
In that sense the Court of Auditors ' report is an important one and one which brings together four institutions : the Court is making the accusations , the Commission has to defend itself , the Council of Ministers who are also criticized in their individual capacities or in the capacities of their Member States , have to give us advice and Parliament has to decide .
We will not be required to decide until April of next year after full and due deliberation .
So , I welcome the report but I am not going to rush to judgment on the basis of it .
This morning I want to acknowledge that there are some serious comments in it but equally acknowledge what the Commissioner has said , namely that we have to distinguish between the auditing responsibility and the policies that sometimes give rise to the criticism .
Turning to the statement of assurance , this is a relatively new instrument available to us .
It is one which is extremely important .
This power was given to the Court of Auditors by the Maastricht Treaty and this is the second time the Court of Auditors quite rightly and properly has not been able to give us that statement of assurance .
And it does not just relate to expenditure .
If we look , for example , at own resources , in the statement of assurance the Court of Auditors is saying quite clearly to us that it is obviously not possible to provide an assurance that all taxable imports have actually been declared .
We know that is a very substantial understatement .
We may say that quite definitely not all the income has been declared and that is why this Parliament has established a Committee of Inquiry into the transit system .
That is one of the areas where there is a major loss of own resources to the European Union budget .
When we look at the criticisms of the payments side made in the statement of assurance , two or three things become very clear .
I was slightly disappointed that the Court of Auditors did not emphasize one of its own comments ; when looking at the very substantial errors , it could have pointed out in the statement , which will be covered by the press today , that most of the errors it chased in the statement of assurance procedure occurred in the Member States .
It says that 90 % of the errors that led it not to be able to give a statement of assurance were errors that took place in the Member States , largely in those very Member States that take the first opportunity to point the finger of accusation at the European Union .
That is certainly one of the things my party will be looking at very closely in the discharge procedure .
We welcome Mr Friedmann 's two reports .
We congratulate the Court of Auditors on them as providing the basis for our work but not the definitive statement of what will be the outcome of our deliberations .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President of the Court of Auditors , I have only a little time in which to thank you for presenting the Court 's weighty annual report for 1995 , together with a number of special reports and the relevant statements of assurance .
We are particularly grateful to you for the fact that we are not dealing here with a list of scandals putting Europe in a bad light , as some would like to have it , but with constructive criticism which can point the way for the future , as you were just saying .
On this basis , we in Parliament will now begin work on the procedure for granting discharge to the Commission , and indirectly to the Member States , exercising our responsibility towards the electorate to investigate the use of taxpayers ' money not only in accounting terms , but also from a political point of view , and to ensure that it is used more sensibly .
This applies , for instance , to the errors and shortcomings in respect of the Social Fund , which the Court has set out very clearly in Chapter 6 of its report .
The Commission has declared the fight against unemployment to be its top priority .
How can this be reconciled with the fact that nearly a quarter of the appropriations available have not even been spent ? And 90 % of the errors established by the Court in this respect in its statement of assurance were committed in the Member States .
To give another example , appropriations running into millions of ECU intended for stepping up the campaign against fraud in agriculture in the Member States were used for other purposes , notably to cover staffing costs .
The Commission must take on its responsibilities here .
It will have to explain to us how it plans to retrieve the ECU 16.6 million wrongly spent in this sector from the Member States .
In connection with the statement of assurance , Mr Friedmann , you referred to some substantial improvements in comparison with the previous year .
In my opinion , the statement turns out rather more negatively , however .
According to the Court , the ' substantial material errors ' amount to nearly 6 % of all payments , in other words around ECU 4 billion .
Last year , the figure was significantly lower , at ECU 2.4 bn .
How can this increase be explained ?
I would once again thank you for the report , and I am also grateful to Mr Liikanen for all his efforts , particularly with regard to SEM 2000 and improving the management of the budget .
Mr President , I wish to compliment the President of the Court of Auditors on his report this morning and I want to raise one particular matter .
Bearing in mind the severe financial strain of the construction of the new offices and buildings of the European Parliament , is the Court of Auditors satisfied that : ( a ) the appropriate procedure was followed in awarding the contract for the construction of these offices in Brussels ; ( b ) sufficiently rigorous controls were put in place to minimize the cost overruns ; ( c ) the final cost of this complex represents good value for money for the European Parliament , indeed , for the European taxpayer ?
Has the Court of Auditors any recommendations to make to the European Parliament concerning the procedures to be followed in awarding any future contracts , taking into account the experience over the last few years on this particular building ?
Finally , I was rather appalled last week at the personalized attack made on our friends Mr Tomlinson , Mr Wynn , the Court of Auditors , its President and Mr Balfe , who all represent the structures of this Parliament , by an independent television programme and at the fact that the President of this Parliament did not make a statement on it .
It was quite unfair that , of all people , John Tomlinson should have been singled out .
I may not always agree with him but as a working Member of this Parliament he is a fine example and always has been .
Mr Killilea , as you have all noticed , has taken advantage of the change of Presidency , but that will not happen in the case of the next speakers .
Mr President , despite the positive progress , there continue to be serious problems , and it is incredible that there should again be a massive criticism of the Commission 's accounting system and the economic management of the Community 's resources .
It is incomprehensible that the same criticisms should be raised year after year .
That is why we in the Liberal Group is no longer prepared to accept the unconcerned approach of the Commission , which is responsible for the management of EU resources .
We would therefore call on the Commissioners also to be involved one by one in the Committee on Budgetary Control after we have adopted the report , in the context of Commissioners being under obligation to follow the instructions issued .
If no solution is found to the problems referred to in the Annual Report , there is the possibility of Commissioners having to face a vote of no confidence .
I would also suggest that we amend the Treaty so that we can establish a procedure for following up the criticisms made by the Court of Auditors .
The problem facing us is that , once the European Parliament has approved the combined budget , it tends to be indifferent to any subsequent criticisms .
We need to put a stop to this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we should really be doing more to name names here , in political terms .
In view of the priority given to combating mass unemployment and social exclusion , we need to identify the real scandal , which is that the Member States are stalling in terms of quality and quantity , whilst the Commission has only blunt tools in its hands both as regards defining the objectives and applying sanctions .
In the agricultural sector , the Commission has quite different scope for taking sanctions .
Why is that not so in the case of the Structural Funds ?
There is a question for you here too , Mr Liikanen .
Is there not a danger , in connection with SEM 2000 , that we are formalizing matters and thereby creating a technically correct façade , behind which those who run the budget carry out refinancing exercises , spend the appropriations according to their arbitrary budget needs and thus exclude the specialist departments ?
And finally , is it not possible to coordinate with the national audit bodies in all these areas ?
Only by this means can we actually exercise some form of political control , through which the aims of a European social policy are then translated into substance .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I know that when the Court of Auditors ' report is presented here , and indeed for several weeks beforehand , the interested public waits for the great scandal which can be put across well in headlines .
Once this scandal has been announced , once it has been identified , calm descends again .
This is just the kind of process that we do not wish to see .
In the first place , of course , we do not wish to have any scandals , but secondly we should like the detailed everyday work , which is also a reflection of the whole issue , to be given rather more prominence .
I would therefore agree with Mr Tomlinson , who said that our work begins now .
I should like to illustrate this with a topical example .
This morning , we voted on a request for urgency from the Council , on which the rapporteur was Mr Garriga Polledo .
It was said that there was unanimity on his report in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
That is correct ; we were agreed unanimously .
But we were simply amazed in our discussions at how the Member States have so far dealt with the directions they were given .
It is precisely this sense of amazement , this incredible realization that directions are simply not being implemented and so time limits have to be extended , which is now reflected in the report from the Court of Auditors .
Today 's request for urgency was quite rightly not approved .
But that is the detailed work .
These are not the spectacular things which can be used to bring home to the public what is happening .
This is what is giving rise to difficulties , however - the fact that there are many good regulations which are being applied inadequately or not at all , and that it is hard to actually monitor their implementation .
I have one great concern .
SEM 2000 has been referred to , and it was said that , by and large , the Member States were in agreement with it .
However , I have heard that some Member States or parts of Member States are already letting it be known that the contents of SEM 2000 are at odds with their constitutional or administrative situation , not least in the area of the Structural Funds .
This means that while we see a remedy , people are already lining up in the Member States to undermine the decisions which are being taken .
That causes me a great deal more concern than one major individual scandal would have done .
Mr President , Mr Tomlinson has shown his usual acuteness in explaining the usual parliamentary procedure for dealing with the Court of Auditors ' report .
But I must point out that there is an anomaly in it concerning the procedure relating to olive oil .
In fact , the Commissioner for Agriculture seems deliberately to have used a future report by the Court of Auditors to justify the presentation of a reform of the olive oil COM which is clearly prejudicial to producers ' interests .
In this Court of Auditors ' report there seems to be no substantial change to previous years , so we can only deduce that there has been deliberate and partial use of the report in order to justify a reform which does not appear in a technical or accounting way in the Court of Auditors ' report .
Mr President of the Court Auditors , although I must congratulate you on the value of your Institution 's report , I am afraid that this might harm its image .
Mr President , I should like to focus on the subject of the European Union 's revenue .
The Court of Auditors ' report says - though 1995 was an exception - that revenue will increasingly have to be based on estimates of gross national product .
I understand from the report that these estimates are subject to a great deal of uncertainty .
If all goes well , new negotiations are to begin in 1998 on the European Union 's finances .
How confident are the Commission and the Court of Auditors of being able to develop a system for estimating gross national product more accurately by that date ?
Can we , for example , produce a rough estimate of what the official gross national product will be and of the proportion accounted for by the black economy , say ?
Mr President , the Annual Report is a good tool for the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control , but I must express the serious complaint that Denmark is once again treated shabbily .
In my view the Court of Auditors has done a good job .
It explains the Danish case and will provide a 100 % explanation .
If the Court 's and the Commission 's remarks are correct , the ECU 16 million should be paid back unconditionally .
Unfortunately the person responsible for this is no longer a minister .
Another government must now deal with the irregularities .
We must do all we can to ensure this is done , so that we have clear guidelines with regard to Denmark 's situation .
I will not allow this matter to be dropped by the Committee on Budgetary Control before we have a very clear understanding about what is correct and what is incorrect .
What I can say is that it is very difficult for a minister who has inherited such a situation to seek to restore life to these areas .
It seems to me outrageous that people have closed their eyes to this .
The Court of Auditors must therefore be praised for its work .
Mr President , it is regrettable , of course , that the first news we had of this report was in the media , as happened last year .
If the Court of Auditors cannot control this sort of leakage , well who can we expect to control anything in the European Union ?
It is to be welcomed that the agricultural situation has improved , and that experience and the reorganized CAP have created a better and more transparent state of affairs .
It is regrettable but understandable that problems have increased in the areas of the structural funds , because we have reached an unprecedented level of spending and the regulations in the first place were difficult , as was drawn attention to last year .
I hope that we will learn the lessons for the next programme of structural funds and that a regulation will be drawn up that will be easier to administer and that will not try to do everything for everybody in the entire Community with a very limited amount of money .
One point I want to raise : 5.9 % of expenditure .
This means that 5.9 % of our budget was exposed to risk .
This does not mean that we lost 5.9 % : it means we lost a small fraction of this sum , perhaps 1 % of the entire budget .
If the President can confirm this , I think it is not a bad performance and shows that we are coming to terms with the problem .
Mr President , I wish to thank Professor Friedmann and his colleagues for the annual report and the DAS .
They both show that the Court of Auditors , the Committee on Budgetary Control and Financial Controllers have much to do .
I have two questions .
The first is about the annual report and concerns the agencies and the satellites .
The twoand-a-half pages cover 1994 and 1995 , with the exception of Thessaloniki and Dublin .
Does the Court intend to produce individual reports for the satellites on which Parliament can give its discharge for 1994 and 1995 ?
On the DAS , I appreciate the difficulty which the Court has , because we have not allocated sufficient manpower for the double job to be done and it is putting up a good show with short resources .
I am glad to see that there are improvements mentioned about the Commission 's performance but the word ' improvement ' is not yet used often enough .
My question there concerns the former checking , because if we are looking at 5.9 % of transactions being irregular , that is more than 1 in 20 and the 2 different kinds of checking by the Commission and the Court need to be aligned .
Mr President , my intervention and my question relate to internal policies and the area of social welfare , and in particular , the strand which concerns the fight against poverty and social exclusion , of which the report reveals the rather derisory face of the action taken , with 38 , 000 people involved in it in a population of poor estimated at 52 million in the European Union , that is , one person in 1 , 500 , which is indeed derisory .
The report notes the fact , moreover , that there is no ' cost-result ' ratio given by the Commission in this area .
Finally , the report observes , I quote : ' that the efficacy of many financed European networks and their contribution to the reduction of social exclusion are not demonstrated at all and have never been evaluated . '
I think , then , that the problem posed in this report is that of the pertinence of the very small scale interventions of the European Union .
It is also the problem of the relevance of a multitude of grants to associations which are diverse and not always very well monitored .
My questions to the Court of Auditors are therefore as follows : does it have any plans to establish an inventory of grants awarded to associations under the Budget of the European Union , even though no public document lists the entire collection of these grants and there reigns in this domain an immense opacity , a total absence of transparency .
Secondly , does the Court of Auditors intend to proceed with an analysis of the conventional relationships between the European Union and the associations to whom grants have been made ?
What are these relationships , what are the rules of the game in this area ?
Finally , does the Court of Auditors envisage proceeding with a ' cost-efficiency ' study of the actions of the associations to whom grants have been awarded with respect to the aims which are pursued officially ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you have asked many questions , for which I would thank you .
Time is limited , however , and so I should like to be very brief .
Firstly , both Commissioner Liikanen and Mr Tomlinson said that , in their view , the European Court of Auditors was too political on occasion .
They mentioned the agri-monetary system .
What have we done here ?
We simply say that , after the former switchover system was replaced by the agri-monetary system , making it possible to save money through certain measures - half the sum provided for , in fact , at over ECU 680 million - we actually have comparable payments , though expressed in different levels of support .
In other words , we are now paying out aid at different levels of support , and ending up with comparable payments .
The fundamental question thus arises of whether this is compatible with the common market .
We are only asking the question , not criticizing the political decision .
I know that you are under pressure of time , Mr Tomlinson , and you have not been able to study everything , but I am nevertheless very grateful for the work done in your committee , and I am pleased that we were able to cooperate there .
You will certainly produce some important findings for us .
And I believe that transit traffic will require further examination in the future .
Perhaps there are some parallels with the problems of VAT , now that VAT is levied at the destination and not the place of origin .
In other words , the goods are outside tax during transport - a similar problem to that of the transit system .
Mrs Theato and other Members asked how the 5.9 % of irregularities are to be judged .
I would emphasize that this does not mean that these are cases of fraud ; they are irregularities in the broadest sense , including many things such as inaccurate reporting of set-aside areas , for example .
You asked how this is to be regarded in comparison with last year , when we identified 4 % of serious irregularities .
One has to see this in conjunction with the fact that , last year , 14 % of the budget in terms of volume could not be audited , because of inadequate documentation .
This time , we were able to audit virtually all the documents , apart from 2.3 % .
If we had been able to audit everything last year , the percentage of irregularities would have been much higher than 4 % , and so the difference this year would not have been as large as it appears at first sight .
Thank you for drawing attention to that point , however .
I am also grateful to Mrs Kjer Hansen for saying that our report should not be greeted with indifference .
In our discussions , I have the impression that we are doing our work very carefully , and on this basis my intention would be that we should proceed similarly in future .
Whether SEM 2000 is a façade is more a question for the Commissioner , but you also referred to coordination with the national audit bodies .
The fact is that the scope and rights of the national audit bodies are very different .
It has proved to be the case that bilateral cooperation with each national body works best , and we are cultivating and extending this bilateral cooperation .
I am currently on a round of visits to all the national audit bodies and , as I said , the heads of these will shortly be visiting us .
We have set up joint working groups to handle this cooperation .
We are therefore on the right path of working together , more than is the case with national audit bodies ; to be fair , however , one must of course also take account of the different scope and the different priorities of the national bodies .
Each national audit body looks firstly to its own parliament as a discussion partner and to its wishes , as indeed we do as well .
But we shall continue to make progress in this area .
I am grateful to Mrs Wemheuer for making it clear that the Court of Auditors ' report is not a list of scandals .
You are quite correct here : it is always difficult for an audit body to find the right line to take .
On the one hand , we have to explain what could be done better , but our criticism should not be destructive , and nor is it so .
Clearly , you cannot make an omelette without breaking eggs , and when a budget is predominantly one involving subsidies , as is the Community budget , the risk of one irregularity or another is greater than in those areas of national budgets which do not involve subsidies .
I would also thank Mr Garriga Polledo for making it clear that our report on olive oil is a pertinent one .
As regards the new negotiations on financing , Mr Mulder , I think the annual report can be judged positively in this respect .
Turning to what was said by Mr Blak with regard to the Danish Government , I said earlier that our work was based on that of Denmark 's national audit body .
The question is , ultimately , how to judge the fact that feta cheese is meant to consist of 40 % of fat in dry matter and 60 % of water .
The various testing methods produce different results .
We have made a projection based on the lowest figure of 3.3 % , and thus arrived at the ECU 16 m .
Finally , I should once again like to thank the House for the keen interest it has shown , and I hope - indeed I am quite sure - that we shall continue to work well together in the future .

Mr President , firstly , Mr Mulder 's question : as far as GNP figures are concerned , our understanding is that the comparability of national statistics is fairly well established today .
Questions about the exhaustiveness of GNP figures are still justified .
Intensive work is being done between the member countries and our experts in this area .
The conclusion is that burden-sharing is reasonably fair but the countervalue of the ceiling of the old resources is perhaps underestimated .
On Mrs Kjer Hansen 's rather critical remark on what has not been done , I can only say that when she reads the Court 's report - I must give credit here to that report and to the DAS paper - she will see that it carefully points out where the Commission - especially with regard to DAS - has taken action on what it has proposed .
One of the changes made by this Commission is that , wherever it finds a remark of the Court justified it takes action .
If we do not find a remark justified , we explain why .
The problem is that , even though we have implemented all these measures , there are tens of thousands of people in the European Union who take part in executing our budget .
It is unfortunately a heavy and slow process to get action reflected in final figures and we have to work to get there .
I shall come back to that a little later .
I am always available to come to the Committee on Budgetary Control to reply to any questions .
If there are any doubts that we have not implemented the Court 's recommendation , invite me there .
Or , better still , invite the Commissioner responsible for the expenditure , so that , every Commissioner running a spending programme speaks directly to you .
I take my global responsibility .
Everybody , I am sure , is ready to take part in this discussion .
The question by Mr Wolf and Mrs Wemheuer on the structural funds and eligibility raises a very important issue .
The SEM 2000 exercise which we concluded with member countries and to which the rapporteur of the Committee on Budgetary Control , Mr Colom i Naval , also contributed in a very positive manner , raises a constitutional problem in some member countries , because they think that , because the power of the execution of the budget has been decentralized to the Länder or to the provinces , the central authority does not really have the instruments to take decisions .
One of the conclusions concerning this budget is - and it is very helpful - that 90 % of the substantial errors take place in member countries : 42 % of all errors in the context of the structural funds .
If we want to have a positive DAS towards 1999 , we must find a solution to the most burning problem ; there must be a solution that provides a clear understanding of what eligibility is .
The same understanding applies to everybody - in the Commission , in member countries and in every single province , municipality and organization .
We must also have the same understanding with the Court of Auditors , because if we have different interpretations of what is and is not allowed , there can never be a clear , strict , coherent budget culture .
We are not there yet .
I must admit that there is no unanimity on this point .
But the Commission cannot give in .
We must have clear eligibility rules and also an instrument for financial corrections .
We have discussed a lot the possibility of enlarging the clearance of accounts system for the structural funds .
It does not function that well because they are different in character .
In the structural funds we accept whole programmes and finance them ; in clearance of accounts , we work receipt by receipt , because we often find that every single item of expenditure is eligible .
They are different concepts .
But financial corrections , when correctly applied , give us the same possibilities .
I am sure that if there is a strong will among the member countries to change DAS in the future , here is an area where we need a solution .
I need your support and your partnership also in this work .
President Friedmann very correctly replied to Mr McCartin 's question but perhaps I could just mention one point .
What is the problem in interpreting substantial errors ?
I mentioned briefly that the structural funds merely cofinance programmes by means of advances from the budget .
Advances are paid on the basis of declarations of expenditure presented by the Member States .
Weaknesses in Member State systems may mean that these declarations contain some items of ineligible expenditure .
However , Member States habitually declare considerably more expenditure than the sum required to trigger the next advance .
This means that even if the declaration contains some ineligible expenditure , the eligible expenditure would be more than enough to trigger the whole advance .
At least these advances were regular .
Frankly , 30 out of 31 cases were of this type , involving substantial errors .
We must have clear and strict rules of eligibility to avoid these problems of interpretation .
I usually do not want to talk about fraud in a debate of this sort because it does not have much to do with it , but Mr McCartin quoted a figure ; and I should mention that the report , prepared by Mrs Gradin , who is responsible for fraud , gave a figure of 0.6 % of expenditure .
These figures are not comparable ; this is just to give you an idea of the scale of the problem .
5.9 % has nothing to do with that .
Studies have been carried out to see where there are problems underlying transactions and these are based on statistical method .
Actually , the number of detected irregularities - substantial errors - was ECU 163m .
This most probable estimate is based on statistical extrapolation .
But I am sure that the Committee on Budgetary Control will examine the method carefully .
In the long run I hope that we get to a stage where we can compare the trends .
But , as the Court said , obviously there is no major difference .
Measures have now been taken and we continue to work towards improvements .
We have a long way to go but I hope that every year the ship will continue to turn further and that when your period of office comes to an end , and ours too , we will be on a better and more solid basis .
My thanks to President Friedmann , Commissioner Liikanen and all honourable Members who have spoken in the debate .
The debate is closed .
Television broadcasting
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0346 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Council Directive 89 / 552 / EEC on the coordination of certain provisions laid down by law , regulation or administrative action in Member States concerning the pursuit of television broadcasting activities ( C4-0380 / 96-95 / 074 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteurs : Mr Galeote Quecedo and Mr Hoppenstedt ) .
Mr President , in this debate on the reform of the Television without Frontiers Directive , I think that we are all aiming at the same objective : developing the European audiovisual industry .
But , although this is a common aim , there are obviously different ways of achieving it .
I should like to begin , however , with two remarks about areas I think we agree on : first of all , the appropriateness , not to say the need , for carrying out a reform of the existing text which , although it can overall be given a positive assessment , has now been outstripped by the fast developments taking place in the sector ; secondly , the desire for understanding which , in my opinion , must always lie behind politics and is now absolutely vital if we want the European Parliament to take a full part in the co-decision procedure .
Both of these considerations have to be taken into account in our decision concerning the legal imposition of compulsory quotas of European productions in television broadcasts .
With every respect for those who defend these quotas we , the rapporteurs , have maintained that this is a mistake .
Experience shows that there is no direct relationship between compulsory quotas and the development of an audiovisual industry , and we could even cite examples which contradict this idea .
On the other hand , the supposedly Europeanness of this measure has been shown not to be the case in practice , since the percentage of non-national European production broadcast on our screens is virtually non-existent .
I refer to the French model as the most exemplary .
Moreover , the establishment of barriers in the Union could put at serious risk access to developing markets , such as the Latin-American ones , for the European audiovisual industry .
Finally , this is an unpopular measure and this is obvious because , otherwise , we would not be debating whether or not we should make it compulsory .
In our opinion , the measures which , from a European point of view , should be promoted in order to help our industry should concentrate on direct financial support for European productions through the MEDIA programme or the Guarantee Fund .
Another question which has been debated at length during the proceedings relating to the draft reform is the inclusion of so-called new interactive services .
We , the rapporteurs , have maintained that it is still early days to look at any regulation without any knowledge of the genuine circumstances surrounding the development of regulated services still in the initial phase of installation .
The European Commission has just approved a series of proposals which are beginning the process of regulating these new services .
I believe , however , that we have made significant progress in the Committee on Culture about how to deal with the ways of giving it a sufficiently solid base .
The same can said about the quantitative limits on advertising , an area in which we have managed to strike a very delicate balance between the helping advertising market and protecting the viewer .
Advertising is the main source of funding for commercial television companies and these are vital for the proper development of the audiovisual system and information plurality .
At second reading , there was talk in the debate of restricting exclusive rights for broadcasting certain events of major interest or importance .
I agree that the Olympic Games and the World Football Championships must be broadcast live , guaranteeing free access to all citizens , as proposed in the tabled amendments .
In agreement with this shared sensitivity , the European Commission has been forced to present a statement on this matter very soon and we shall react to it when the time comes .
There is an obvious perception - an outcry , I would say - in our society , about the frequent excesses in television programmes such as the broadcasting of images of gratuitous violence or pornography , especially harmful for the development of young people .
While recognising that progress has been made in the common position , the result - I must say in passing - of initiatives taken by the European Parliament , sufficient progress has not been made .
However , we insist in our proposal that broadcasting bodies , under state tutelage , should set the framework for creating national self-controlled bodies to classify programmes according to their content ; this qualification would be applied according to a coding system in the receptor apparatus , which would give parents and guardians responsibility concerning the upbringing of minors in their charge .
Obviously , these measures do nothing to restrict the freedom of broadcasting but they put at the disposal of society an effective instrument for protecting minors , something asked of us as co-legislators in this case .
Mr President , as co-rapporteur on the broadcasting directives , I can see that once again there is enormous media interest - and indeed that is only to be expected .
The presence of other interest groups is remarkable .
The Council deserves two cheers for having included a considerable number of our amendments from first reading in the common position .
We are also grateful to the Commission which , under the direction of Mr Oreja , has followed our deliberations in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media and has kept us informed throughout on the shifts of thinking in the Council .
The committee has worked out a series of basic counter-positions .
Firstly , in contrast to our position at first reading , a compromise amendment has been tabled on Article 1 which provides , in broad terms , for a similar regulatory approach to similar content - in other words , television programmes .
Because , whatever the technical means by which programmes are transmitted , if their content is the same then the public has the same interest in having a similar level of protection for minors ; similar , uniformly defined minimum standards for advertising ; and a uniformly defined level of protection for personal rights , in the form of a right of reply .
The committee has also acknowledged the principle that the broadcasting directive must on no account prevent necessary investment in new technology .
There is some uncertainty on this point because of the degree to which Amendments Nos 12 , 13 and 46 may be open to interpretation , particularly as regards the future collective form which the new services will take .
That is why the great majority in the Group of the European People 's Party cannot support these amendments .
However , I believe that it is extremely important to enunciate the need for discussion on this question , because the process of technological development is continuing apace , so that we shall have to hold further debates on what is currently a snapshot of the present situation .
I am sure that there is no one in the Chamber who is not in favour of supporting the European cultural dimension and works of culture .
By a majority vote , the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media has retabled the amendments that were approved by the House concerning the compulsory introduction of quotas .
As you are all aware , the Group of the European People 's Party - like myself , of course - sees things differently .
Compulsory quotas have never produced new films and programmes .
The way to do that is through sensible structures .
The right approach involves good professional training and improved marketing strategies , underpinned by European support programmes - such as MEDIA I and II and the 16 : 9 action plan which have just been mentioned - the Guarantee Fund and , possibly , tax incentives and measures to promote investment in film and programme making .
It should be noted , as a matter of form , that the previous amendments on advertising have been retabled .
It is clear that balanced advertising will , of course , play a part in the further development of the dual system .
Whether everything must now be dealt with by means of tougher and more restrictive legislation , or whether viewers are sufficiently mature to take the initiative themselves and change channels if they find that advertising is intrusive , is an open question .
Some of the provisions for the protection of minors have been included in the common position , but not enough of them .
The Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media has retabled the original amendment seeking to create a fall-back option for deciding which programmes may be viewed by means of a technical screening device that can be used with pre-coded programmes .
One of our aims in tabling this amendment - and we have emphasized it repeatedly - is to provoke a general debate on this issue , and to raise the awareness not only of all the participants in the market but also of consumers , because the violence , pornography and excessive portrayal of sex on television , through the new services and via the Internet is no longer acceptable in its present form .
That is why , as regards the new services and particularly the Internet , it is necessary to pursue a common , global strategy in this area too .
A new issue at second reading is that of sports broadcasting , which has just been mentioned .
The committee has tabled a compromise amendment - in the form of Amendment No 20 - with the intention of at least contributing to further discussion of the question of sports broadcasting , particularly at national level .
I am sure that , with the Commission , we shall find a way of dealing with this very sensitive issue - and all the public interest that surrounds it - so as to allow us to move in an acceptable direction in the future .
I still take the view that sporting organizations themselves and those who broadcast sport should reach agreement , without regulatory measures by governments .
If they cannot do so , I believe that the European Union and the Member States must seek to lay down rules .
Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , I am here to explain the basic reasons which led the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , to support , by a large majority , the amendments which we , as a committee , are tabling here .
And I am doing this to show you that we have tried to interpret correctly the spirit of the principle of codecision contained in the Maastricht Treaty which requires us to try to reach an understanding - and that means that the different European Institutions have to listen to each other .
In an effort to do just that , after last July 's adoption by the Council of the common position which , in many respects , incorporated neither our proposals nor those of the Commission - which were very similar to those of the European Parliament - and in fact failed to take account of the reasons underlying them , we made an effort to understand the real reasons which had prompted some of the Member States - and some of our very own colleagues - to oppose the text approved at first reading by this House .
In the spirit of codecision and the search for a consensus , we approved in committee , at second reading , new amendments that provide a compromise on crucial issues .
First of all : to take account of the concern of the small countries in particular that the level of national production of fiction is not enough to enable them easily to broadcast at least 51 % European programmes , we have included in that quota the so-called plateau works also .
Secondly , as regards the new services , we have fine-tuned the definitions that distinguish between those which , although using new technologies , and thus new vectors , are still audiovisual transmissions - such as pay-TV or video on demand - and those available on individual request , such as , for example , the Internet , which do not share those same features .
We have included the former within the scope of the directive until such time as we have appropriate legislation - which is not the case at present - and have done so to avoid leaving a dangerous legal loophole , but - and this is the main point of compromise - we have excluded video on demand from the quota application , as regards both broadcasting and investment .
Commissioner Oreja has , moreover , recognized that the committee has made a considerable effort to restrict its own amendments and has stated that it will be politically difficult for the Council not to take account of them .
We should like to hope that the Council will show political wisdom and that it will be possible to reach the conciliation process without finding the door firmly closed - that would make a mockery of the principle of codecision and therefore be an affront to the European Parliament .
As you see , we are discussing two very important issues .
One is an issue of method , involving the role and dignity of the European Parliament and the democratic credibility of our Institutions . The other is a matter of substance : creating a European market - the ECM - might still have been a nice idea back in the 1950s and 1960s , but we now have the global market , and if the European Union remains just a market , then it no longer has a raison d 'être .
It has a point and a purpose only if it is something different , if it preserves and cherishes its own historical and cultural identity .
That identity is currently under threat because our national cultures are being eroded by international competitiveness , by the cultural industries which benefit from large internal markets and , as a result of the economic and financial clout they consequently have , are able to impose , at a world level , a thousand unwritten rules , which end up leaving us an impoverished monoculture .
Europe can , of course , meet the challenge but only if it is able to create what it currently lacks : a European cultural market which extends beyond narrow national horizons .
The directive that we are proposing to you specifically provides for measures designed to create that European audiovisual market , so that the imaginations , visions and personalities of our children and grandchildren are not left diminished .
Mr President , my dear colleagues , in its first reading , I hope to be able to say again today , on the basis of work carried out by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , and of other committees from whom opinions were sought , which include the Committee on Economic Affairs of which I was rapporteur , our Parliament worked out a good text , which defined a worthy European policy on the subject of televisual , audiovisual and cinematographic production and broadcasting .
Unfortunately the Council of Ministers failed to do the same , and the text giving the common position is muddled in form and broadly lacking in content .
Consequently , in this second reading , we will have to sort out just the essential points because we cannot rewrite it completely .
This is what I have done as draftsman , in putting to the Committee on Economic Affairs the four amendments which it has passed , with my report and my conclusions themselves being adopted by 28 votes to 15 .
Two of these amendments aimed to make the quotas effective and legally binding , while excluding studio-produced programmes and encouraging the broadcasting of European works .
A third important amendment aimed to strengthen the effectiveness of controls by the executive committee and a fourth reintroduced the period of 10 years for revision .
I can say now that , personally , I find here once again broadly the spirit of the amendments passed by our committee , including those adopted by the majority vote of the Committee on Culture , even if , personally , I would have preferred a little more specific detail for the exclusion of studio-produced programmes which diminish the very principle of quotas , and even if I deplore the absence of safeguards against relocation .
I now hope , as draftsman of the opinion , that there will be a majority in this Parliament to confirm our vote at the first reading on the essential points which have been brought up .
The collective world of European culture awaits from the European Parliament what our ministers have failed to do : to be stalwarts in the defence and promotion of our European culture .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposals made by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media and admirably explained by its chairman , Mrs Castellina , show that an attempt has been made , at second reading , to adopt a balanced and responsible approach .
We have not simply retabled all that we had proposed at first reading but have provided a genuine space for reflection and debate which will , we hope , be largely approved by the House .
In point of fact , we have proposed that the scope of the directive should be extended to include also some , but not all , new services . Basically , we want to see it extended to cover television on demand , to prevent serious situations arising in terms of competition and market duplication which would penalize television for all to the benefit of television for some , or vice versa .
Not only that , but through Amendment No 46 - and we would remind the House of the importance of that amendment - we have stated that the directive does not apply systematically to those kinds of new services but only the basic principles and , first and foremost , the protection of children .
It would be absurd to regulate the Internet , as the Commission is proposing to do , to regulate general and specialist broadcasters and leave a gap , a ' no-man 's land ' , that fails to meet any principle .
Therefore , the approach put forward by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media is a responsible one .
And that also applies to quotas .
Yes , we want them to be compulsory but we have stressed that the whole system has to be reviewed ten years from now and that there is the possibility of opting , in the case of specialist channels , for investment quotas .
Finally , on the issue of advertising , we have reintroduced elements which will make the advertising itself stricter , in terms both of the principles on which it should be based and the acceptable thresholds , both by the day and by the hour .
It is in fact completely pointless to provide for thresholds that are strict in relation to the day and then increase them indiscriminately in relation to the hour .
The same applies to minors and the issue of the so-called delocalization which we tackled in two very important points : the requirement that a broadcaster must , at any rate , broadcast through the country in which it is established and the possibility of triggering the rapid procedure , provided for by the Commission itself , not only as regards compliance with Articles 22 and 22a but other articles also .
We have done a good job then and so we turn to those sections of the House that are not completely in agreement with this approach , and in particular the European People 's Party , in an effort to adopt a consensual approach : that alone will give us the clout we need , at conciliation , to ensure that the sound motives of all of the democratic forces in this House carry the day .
Mr President , I declare my interest as a broadcaster , not merely a content provider or a facilitator of the information superhighway , but a broadcaster , though maybe we are all those other things too .
This is a broadcasting directive and it ought to deal with matters which are specific to broadcasting , that is , things offered by broadcasters through the television set , but no more .
When we debate Article 1 today , we should bear in mind that this is an attempted compromise which is dealing with many of the reservations which have been expressed by telecommunications interests and others .
They fear they will be ensnared by regulations designed for a different age .
We say no .
Read my lips , I would say to the likes of British Telecom .
You are not being ensnared .
Much of what you do will not and cannot ever be seen as part of broadcasting regulation .
We are looking here purely at those services offered by broadcasters and not subject to interactivity , whether it be of words , data or pictures , which genuinely new services will provide .
It is only where we are looking at services which come within the broadcasting remit that we say that they should be within the scope of the directive , although in the case of video on demand we are adamant that these should not be subject to the quota regime .
I hope those matters of reassurance will help to carry the House today because this is a flexible directive .
It aims at consensus .
I believe it has achieved it and it has in many areas , certainly in terms of how Articles 1 and 4 have now been drafted by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , and has reached the objective which has been welcomed by the Commissioner here today .
One final point on advertising .
We need a flexible measure of protection , but one that accepts that in countries like the United Kingdom advertising can finance public service television and should not be squeezed out from doing so .
The point of this directive surely has to be to build on the best practice we have wherever that may be .
Buried away behind this debate is the substance of what could be the best broadcasting service in the world where quality matters , variety counts and abundance is the friend and not the enemy of excellence .
That is why we commend the amendments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is yet another stage in a long battle for the future of the European audiovisual industry and even , I would say , for the European economy and European culture .
And the European Parliament , in full exercise of its powers , is playing a useful role in protecting that very European culture which it is our duty to defend and preserve .
But , in this fight , we must also avoid drifting off into a debate characterised by certain elements of cultural chauvinism .
This is the main accusation which can be levelled at the defenders of the ' Television without Frontiers ' Directive .
After all , American culture is the daughter of European culture and if we are now to be governed by images , symbols and aesthetic patterns which the American audiovisual industry is disseminating throughout Europe , we should do so with intelligence and balance .
This is what is being done by the European Parliament , in particular its Committee on Culture . The aim is to balance European culture vis-à-vis the hegemony of American culture .
It is also aimed at transforming European audiovisual production by defending European cultures , not only the great European cultures bolstered by the national territory which they present , but also other great universalist European cultures such as Portuguese culture .
It is this fight for maintaining the diversity , complexity and richness of European cultures which lies at the heart of the debate on the ' Television without Frontiers ' Directive .
That is why I wish to voice my support for the Committee on Culture and this set of proposals which have been voted at second reading , proposals of compromise from which the European Parliament cannot shrink .
Mr President , I am happier with the text of the common position as it stands than I am with some of the amendments being proposed by Parliament .
What broadcasting in Europe needs for the years to come is clear legislation which is not open to a number of different interpretations .
In a digital world and with information technology at its current stage of development , we need broadcasting rules which ensure pluralism and optimum programme quality .
Public service broadcasting must be protected , but this need not imply that commercial broadcasting cannot also develop .
Digital technologies will help us to maintain pluralism in broadcasting .
There are three important points in this debate , in my opinion .
The most important is how we define broadcasting .
The new media must not be covered by the restrictions laid down in this directive - they must have the freedom to develop .
Official rules may need to be introduced , but these should be specially tailored to the new media .
None of the provisions on television should apply to them either : not everything which has sound and image is television .
Secondly , there is the protection of minors , which is primarily the parents ' responsibility .
There are technical aids to help them determine what their children are or are not allowed to see and hear , and to enable them to adjust their hardware and software accordingly .
Official rules on the protection of minors must not impinge on freedom of expression or the fundamental right to privacy , which is another reason to regard broadcasting as a separate concept from the new media .
A distinction thus needs to be made between broadcasts for the public and programmes for the individual .
Finally , quotas .
As you know , and as I have often said , I am against quotas .
They seem to be a pointless exercise , since most public service broadcasting , and commercial broadcasting too in the Netherlands , more than meets the quotas now being proposed .
The situation is the same in a number of other Member States .
Imposing such quotas also seems to me to be contrary at least to the spirit of the World Trade Organization 's rules .
Europe 's audiovisual industry must develop and improve in order to protect itself against Americanization , but it will not do so by means of quotas .
Quotas merely work like sedatives .
Europe 's industry needs a free internal market and help in financing films , for example , which the guarantee fund can supply .
Many of the amendments proposed by the European Parliament do not take account of these considerations , but it is still the wording of Amendment No 12 which I find most problematic .
Mr President , what the ministers for the audiovisual are proposing to us in the common position adopted by the Commission and the Council is that Europe is built at every turn .
Here we are indeed at the second reading of the text of the directive ' Television without Frontiers ' .
The principle behind this text is the pursuit by the Member States of legislative and regulatory coordination in the sphere of radio and television broadcasting , and the amendments tabled are directed at this .
The will of parliamentarians to arrive at a text which is enforceable and sensible has led to many compromises with respect to the positions adopted by the majority at the first reading .
It is thus that we have accepted the new services of video on demand and made concessions on on-line services .
On this subject , we are still awaiting the Commission 's directive , but I am assured , the Commission promises it for tomorrow .
One of the most sensitive subjects in this directive is the application of broadcasting obligations wherever possible , as the Council has proposed to us .
This is inadmissible .
This is not a legislative text and in no way can it constitute a regulation .
It makes me think of my grandmother who used to say to her daughter : if you are going out , you can stay out until 10 pm .
If at 11 pm you are not back , at midnight I will lock the door .
Come on , it 's ridiculous .
Why did we fight together at the GATT negotiations for the principle of cultural exception ?
Was it not so that we could make Europe an area in which we could broadcast our own cultures through our own camera images and our own music , in front of a television audience of 370 million today , and one that may be 500 million tomorrow ?
Parliament really does have the will to coordinate legislation .
It wants to support its film industry , and it wants to support all of the jobs which will be created by the production of our own images , rather than the unemployment which would result from our buying in the images of others .
To obtain the majority broadcasting of European programmes , we are ready once again to accept the broadening of the scope of the quotas to include studio-produced programmes although , personally , I do not think that these productions are ' productions ' as such , even though , when they are programmes based on works of literature , we are maintaining a cultural witness to the development of authorship , which is very important .
The acceptance of this would enable some countries to meet the quotas and make the clause workable .
I would add that programmes broadcast in minority languages which are aimed at specific audiences may also be taken into consideration .
If the amendment on quotas is not adopted , we hope that the safeguard clause which authorises the receiving State to fight abusive broadcasting from other states would be adapted .
This clause is already in force regarding banking arrangements and is an attempt to avoid imbalance .
We are not unaware of the role of advertising and tele-shopping in providing income for commercial television stations .
We also know that too much advertising kills advertising .
We do not wish to kill advertising or tele-shopping , though we wish to confine them within sensible limits and to ensure that certain regulations are respected on the protection of minors and consumers .
We are also defending the principle of pluralism and of the preservation of access to broadcasts of important events , such as major sporting meetings like the football World Cup and the Olympic Games , and briefly , because I have very little time , we wish to make this directive enforceable always , because it constitutes one of the three important instruments available to European audiovisual policy , in conjunction with the MEDIA II programme and the audiovisual Guarantee Fund .
Mr President , I must declare that I have a personal interest in this directive .
First of all , I should like to create jobs for my children and , secondly , I want to be able to watch programmes because I like them , not because the quotas give me no choice .
For this reason , the vast majority of my group do not wish the new media to be covered by this directive , nor do we wish to see any legal strait-jackets that will cost us jobs because we cannot compete with the United States and Japan .
Secondly , we want to stimulate production in Europe through the guarantee fund and so on , but without imposing compulsory quotas for European productions .
Thirdly , mutual recognition is essential , in our view .
The only justified exception to this principle is greater protection for children against pornography or extreme violence . This should certainly be maintained , but there should not be any other exceptions , and so we reject the socialist amendments designed to create stricter rules on tobacco , alcohol and children 's advertising .
We should not forget that the directive has to guarantee the free movement of services across frontiers , and we therefore feel that the rules it currently contains provide adequate protection .
Fourthly , the Liberals wish to use technology to protect children , for example by integrating a V-chip or some other technological device into television sets .
Parents will then be free to decide for themselves whether to use the device or not .
This is a sound Liberal principle , and if the choice is between technology and stricter legislation , I would go for technology .
Fifth , the Liberals are in favour of guaranteeing the public access to major televised events such as the Olympic Games and a landing on Mars .
If the amendments I have just mentioned on quotas , the new media and so on are adopted , the majority of the Liberal Group will no longer be interested in this text as it stands .
We would prefer to have the original 1989 directive .
Carrying on institutional in-fighting for the sake of it is merely childish .
We are concerned about the substance of the directive , about jobs and about choice , and on these points , coincidentally , the Council and the Commission have got it right .
Mr President , today , we really do have our backs to the wall .
Those of you who still entertain any doubt as to the interest of clear obligations should be reminded , should probably have it emphasized to you , that we have the certainty , now , that the Guarantee Fund will be very difficult , even impossible , to implement , that the budget in general , and MEDIA II in particular , is and will remain at a ridiculous level in the eyes of those at stake in this sector .
Moreover , to save the principle of pluralism , the anti-concentration directive has been thrown into oblivion and the Green Paper on new services has been reduced solely to the protection of minors .
Mr Bangemann 's desire to dissolve the audiovisual sector within Telecoms , in the name of convergence , only serves to darken the context in which we are going to vote on television without frontiers , the only point of light within our reach , within our power .
Europe must not sign away the plurality of its cultures .
Are we going to let slip this opportunity not to have the market dictate the identity of Europe ?
What is at stake in terms of civilisation is , today , the bestowal upon ourselves of the freedom to express our history , our stories , our myths and our dreams in our own images .
So that Europe can save and develop its film and broadcasting industries , we must vote today and , tomorrow , the Council must understand the amendments which are aimed at tightening legal security concerning broadcasting and production obligations .
If our aim is to strengthen the production of fiction and documentaries , we should exclude studio-produced programmes and vote for Amendment No 55 .
As for Amendment No 51 , let us remember that at the first reading , this Parliament voted for measures to prevent the relocation of broadcasters in neighbouring states by 423 votes in favour , especially since this amendment does not challenge the rules of the internal market , but is aimed at pirates challenging national and European regulations .
On what strength would the European Parliament retract it partially today ?
Finally , if the market for new services is to bring in the future , as the great manoeuvres of the multimedia and audiovisual industries would have us believe , don 't let us miss this opportunity .
We are not asking the earth , that is the application of production obligations to the new services , merely that the provisions relating to minors and to advertising are applied to them .
I will not conclude today - cultural exception requires it - with a quotation , but rather with a figure .
At least that will not pose any translation problems , and in saying that I am addressing the booths .
It is not their competence I am calling into question , but the capacity for comprehension of some of my colleagues sometimes , and particularly those in the Council .
Anyway , I will quote a figure and not a man or a woman of culture .
This figure , and here it is , is the deficit of audiovisual exchanges between the United States and Europe .
It increased by 14.5 % between 1994 and 1995 , 14.5 % in one year , to reach 6.5 thousand million dollars .
Can we put it any more clearly ?
Mr President , yet again , there is a marked difference between the proposals of the European Parliament and the decisions taken by the Council .
While noting that some of the improvements made , in June , by the ' Cultural Affairs ' Council concerned the protection of minors , telesales and the freedom of reception , among others , the decisions on quotas and subsequent developments in broadcasting in the very near future - television on demand or pay-TV , for instance - are still totally unsatisfactory .
I think it appropriate to point out , on behalf of the Greens also , that there is a close link between democracy and the media and that there is no doubt that today 's main information service is television .
Consequently , a directive that guarantees , for the future also , a public broadcasting service able to meet the collective need clearly to guarantee the right to information , without political and economic strings attached , is crucial to the future of the Member States .
Equally important , however , is the relationship between television and culture , because the future of our various cultures , which is one of the great assets of the European Union , is particularly dependent on the development of television .
That being so , we must reiterate that the quota mechanism , albeit with the adjustments made by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , cannot be optional , as the Council would wish it to be .
We are not in fact facing a trade war between the United States and Europe in cinematography but we must realize that , unless we have quotas , European cinema is likely to disappear .
That does not mean that poor quality European productions should be preferred to higher quality US productions .
Alongside the quotas , there have to be measures to encourage and develop quality cinema in the different Member States , including through the use of those instruments mentioned by other honourable Members : the Guarantee Fund and the MEDIA programme .
Guaranteeing a public television service also involves proper protection of minors ; extending the concept of television to include new technologies ; the appropriate regulation of advertising and telesales and making sure that major cultural and sporting events remain accessible to the whole of the population ; as well as protecting all languages and cultures which , as I have said , are a European asset .
The Greens will therefore be voting in favour of the amendments , even though they are more limited and designed to achieve the maximum degree of consensus as compared with first reading , tabled by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , and those which take up again the issue of the interrupting children 's programmes with advertising and the problem of delocalization , that is to say television broadcasters that transmit outside the state towards which their broadcasts are directed .
Last February , during the debate on the first reading , the European Parliament demonstrated real determination by insisting that , within the perspective of the development of new technologies , television should remain a positive cultural vector , a synonym of entertainment and information , a tool for creation and production , with respect for those who watch it .
It is of fundamental importance that today , as we begin the second reading , we demonstrate the same attitude .
Indeed , public opinion , which shows itself to be more and more interested in the future of television and the professionals who have in turn enlightened and upheld us , would not understand it if we backtracked and challenged what they take for granted .
There will still be time , of course to make the necessary adjustments when the moment for conciliation arrives , but it will be utterly damaging if we should accept , within the perspective of these negotiations , that our demands be revised downwards .
And besides , it would be entirely contrary to the codecision procedure .
That is why it is important that we maintain the level of our demands , which are still completely legitimate moreover , if we want to avoid going seriously adrift later on .
There appear to be three fundamental problems as far as my group is concerned : new services , quotas and relocations .
Of course we are not unfamiliar with the need for better regulation of advertising and tele-shopping ; of course we would like the influence of television on young people , and not only in terms of violence , to be better controlled , but we consider that , in these areas , some progress has been made and that a well-conceived directive could make significant improvements .
However , we would like to highlight the points I brought up before and we will support the amendments tabled to this end .
Point one : the inclusion of new services .
We know , Commissioner , that a Green Paper will soon come and fill the legislative void which currently exists with regard to video on demand .
Nevertheless , for the coherence of our proposals , it would be best if this directive pointed the way and offered a general framework which the longawaited Green Paper must certainly fill in .
Second point : quotas .
It is indeed important to strengthen obligations to broadcast European work .
This would involve the implementation of a genuine quota system which should be both coherent and uniform .
We cannot therefore accept the maintenance of this idea of ' wherever this is enforceable ' , that would be imposed upon us once again .
As we all know , this is a breach open to all manner of misinterpretation and abuse .
We therefore ask for quotas , real quotas to enable a genuine European audiovisual programme industry to grow strong , and that presupposes , by consequence , the exclusion of studio-produced programmes .
Final point : the inclusion of a clause preventing the relocation of broadcasters to neighbouring states .
We must renew the amendment voted in very widely last February at the first reading .
Without this measure , we know that there is a high risk of broadcasters setting up in other Member States and backing out of their obligations .
To conclude , I would like to make a few general comments .
I find the anti-regulatory creed that some of our colleagues have struck up utterly paradoxical .
I can understand that one can have reservations on some points ; I understand less , at a time when the Americans themselves are seeing the need to impose a certain number of rules , to protect young people particularly , how we can still be advocating the absence of regulation .
We know that culture is not an economic product like any other .
It cannot be subjected to the principle of free circulation .
Consequently , my dear colleagues , let us not be either naive or hypocritical .
Let us shoulder our responsibilities and consider that the maintenance of our culture will depend upon the audiovisual productions which we broadcast .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it was very encouraging to see the PPE Group agreeing on 29 October that television on demand should fall within the scope of the directive .
Mr Hoppenstedt 's comments this morning were therefore all the more regrettable .
That is why I should like to remind you once again that it is clear in the amendment that the intention is not to include every possible new service , that electronic publications are explicitly excluded , and that a number of provisions of the broadcasting directive , such as the rule on quotas for example , will not be applied to television on demand .
The argument that the development of new services could be jeopardized by the inclusion of television on demand is no longer tenable .
I should be curious to meet a supplier of television on demand who is deferring his investment because his output is to be subject to the same conditions for the protection of minors that apply to traditional television .
I do not know of any .
In taking our decision today , we must also consider the political context .
The Commission has not kept its promise to bring forward a set of rules parallel to those in the broadcasting directive in its green paper on new audiovisual services .
In fact , the slimmed-down green paper on new services and the protection of minors explicitly states that legislation is to be postponed indefinitely .
I would say this to the rapporteurs : anyone calling for technical devices to filter programmes on traditional television , but failing to lay down legally enforceable conditions for the protection of minors in relation to television on demand , must begin by explaining that contradiction .
Today , Commission money is still being used to finance studies which conclude that we shall end up with the total commercialization of the entire television sector , but which also quite clearly provide backing for our contention that the transmission method does not matter , and all that is to be provided is a kind of electronic poorhouse for the less well-off .
I believe that the broadcasting directive is our only hope of regulating television on demand , and today could be our last chance of doing this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in an atmosphere more cooperative than that which existed before the first reading , I am extremely sorry that , despite our most intensive efforts , we did not achieve sufficient convergence of opinion in all areas to allow us a greater show of unity today .
As regards quotas , our view has not changed at all since the first reading .
We still believe that they are not an adequate means of bringing more European productions to our screens .
Stronger viewer demand for European productions and , above all , increased support for the sale of European productions would achieve better results than quotas .
At the present time , without quotas , many countries in Europe already devote more than 60 % of screen time to European productions .
We made an honest effort to reach a compromise on Article 1 of the directive - on extending the concept of broadcasting to cover the new services - partly because the Commission had told us in the meantime that the promised green paper on the new services would not appear .
I regarded Amendments Nos 12 and 46 on Article 1 as workable .
However , such was the outcry in media circles , from the press to television , that I was forced to conclude that the professionals had discovered pitfalls which I had overlooked .
Personally , I remain convinced that the compromise which was reached puts no obstacles in the way of dynamic economic expansion of the new services in Europe , since it must be seen in conjunction with Amendment No 46 , setting out the exceptions .
With regard to sport , I believe that we in Parliament must take pains to see that exclusive broadcasting rights do not create a situation in which large sections of the population are excluded from major sporting events .
The amendment in question , No 20 , is directed not only at the purchasers - the television providers - but also at the sports organizations , who must be at least as interested in their spectators as we are in our electorate .
It is the same kind of dependent relationship .
Amendment No 48 was simply intended to clarify what is meant in Amendment No 20 by inserting the word ' sports ' before the mention of what are termed particularly important events .
Someone who is very ill-disposed towards me has completely distorted Amendment No 48 .
For that reason , I have to withdraw it , but I would ask everyone to agree that we can , orally at least , add the word ' sports ' to Amendment No 20 .
I hope the House will agree to that .
Mr President , Commissioner Oreja , ladies and gentlemen , the audiovisual sector is the most heavily-regulated of the communications sectors .
The amendments tabled seek , as a whole , to impose still more restrictive regulation .
That is unjustified and counterproductive , particularly at a time when the sector is ready to invest resources in the production of the new technologies which will provide new jobs and wider access to sources of information for European citizens .
The new amendments seek to impose larger programme quotas on television broadcasters and to reduce the amount of advertising time .
That , clearly , is contradictory : you cannot , on the one hand , seek to require broadcasters substantially to increase their contributions to the development of European productions while , on the other , attempting to cut their advertising revenue which - let us not forget - is the sole source of funding for commercial television and an important source for pay-television .
It makes no sense to claim to safeguard what is on offer from the audiovisual sector , rightly free-of-charge , and , at the same time , deprive those who guarantee that offer , that is to say the television broadcasters , of the resources they need to cover the costs .
A colleague spoke a short time ago of television for the few benefiting television for all : I consider this to refer to the commercial television stations which are genuinely television broadcasters for all citizens .
As far as the protection of minors is concerned , broadcasters have categorically to shoulder their share of the responsibility here .
We are absolutely opposed to violence and pornography , including , in principle , because of the negative effects they can have on adults .
We have therefore to support the amendments tabled in the House on the protection of minors , with the exception of some , in particular those relating to the V-chip .
The V-chip is by no means an effective solution nor is it able to resolve the complex issues raised by violence and pornography .
In conclusion , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if we want better television , we should vote against this kind of revision of the directive : to vote for these restrictive amendments would be to take no account of the basic mechanisms regulating the sector .
Mr President , I would like to recall once more the fact that the quotas for European works , the application of the directive to video on demand and the measures which aim to develop independent production do not constitute intra-European protectionism .
This would all be unnecessary if the United States were to respect the rules for normal competition , which they do not do .
We cannot accept that they should consider Europe to be their audiovisual playground , and an extremely lucrative one at that , failing even to respect European rules such as those which prohibit the abuse of a dominant position , incarnate in UIP , the American film distribution organisation .
Protective measures are essential to guarantee our cultural diversity and develop our cultural creative production .
But they are also essential for economic reasons : in the next ten years , two million jobs will be at stake in the audiovisual industry .
We need to secure those jobs .
Finally , although the Council of Ministers has ignored the vote of Parliament at the first reading quite scandalously , we wanted to present some conciliatory amendments , in particular regarding quotas and new services .
By voting for them , you will be helping to develop cultural creation and jobs , but you will also be defending the credibility and influence of Parliament .
My own liberalism is not that of the fox set free in the chicken run .
It is the development of rules which make room for all to flourish , for diversity to be safeguarded , for European interests to be developed in the face of the desire for dominance of other parts of the world .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is in keeping with the importance of this directive that it has attracted a great deal of attention , but has also provoked criticism .
I should like to say two things to the critics .
The European legislation in this case is taking up and reinforcing the position that was adopted as long ago as 1989 .
It is not a question of regulation and restraint , but a decision to follow the path of cultural freedom , to which we are committed by Article 128 of the EU Treaty .
We all realize that market forces alone do not guarantee that freedom .
Secondly , the criticism that this is an attempt to subject the new information and transmission technologies to irrelevant regulation does not hold water .
The directive only covers the new media in so far as they include televisual elements .
If the directive were to exclude them , the whole regulatory package would be invalidated .
One thing is clear : where cultural freedom is at risk , the free market is also on shaky ground .
Freedom is indivisible .
I hope that I agree on that point with the representatives of commercial television and the media industry .
Mr President , if we do not have an absolute majority in Parliament in favour of this report today , or if we do , but the Council is not prepared to accept our key amendments , then we shall continue to have a situation in which the audiovisual industry in Europe is forced to compete with America on unequal terms .
Our calls for broadcasting and investment quotas were therefore made not just on cultural grounds , but above all for economic reasons .
American products come onto the European market at bargain-basement prices and are sold as packages , while the vertical concentration of producers and distributors on the American market mean that it is effectively closed to European producers .
So as Mrs Larive has already pointed out , there is absolutely no question today of viewers having freedom of choice .
Quotas are therefore not an end in themselves , but a temporary means of finally establishing fair competition .
Our opponents want us to adopt more aggressive methods , but we really wonder why the two should be mutually exclusive .
What is more , let us be quite clear , there is little good news to report .
MEDIA II is being cut from ECU 400 million a year to ECU 310 m .
It is also extremely uncertain , given that unanimity is required , whether the slimmed-down version of the film guarantee fund will ever see the light of day , although we must applaud the efforts made by the Irish presidency in this context .
Finally , we would urge that TV broadcasting organizations should be required to have economic and cultural links with the Member State in which they are established .
We would also call on the Commission to put an end to unlicensed television monopolies in certain Member States .
If we are clamping down on public monopolies , as we are doing a great deal at the moment , then there is absolutely no excuse for tolerating commercial monopolies .
Mr President , we all agree in this House that television is a critical industry not just in itself , but in its influence upon European society , culture and the economy .
It crosses national frontiers , so we do need European regulations .
The existing directive certainly needs updating , but we must not be too rigid .
Frankly , the common position of the Council and Commission was about right .
It is many of the amendments that have got it wrong .
Superficially these amendments claim to support European TV production .
In reality they actually would do real harm to European television .
I have time to deal with just a few issues .
Quotas : would we apply a quota on sales in bookshops ?
Would we ration Coca Cola ?
All of this smacks to me of cultural apartheid .
Quotas do nothing to improve the quality of programmes one jot .
They are concerned simply with quantity .
It is by encouraging public sector broadcasters , helping European film production that we can get better quality programmes , not by quotas .
Advertising : good quality programmes have to be paid for .
By over-regulating advertising we actually jeopardize the quality of European programmes .
Look at the restrictions that are being imposed on children 's programmes , on advertising medicinal products , advertisements that offend philosophical beliefs , controls on advertising time .
All of these will restrict money going into good European programmes .
Last year independent television in the United Kingdom put £ 40 million into quality children 's programmes .
All this is now at risk if children 's programmes are denied funding .
Instead of better programmes we will get worse .
This is a period of dramatic change in technology .
Digitalization marks the dawn of a new age .
We should not impose a ten-year regulation on looking at these quotas , but certainly should impose five years as a maximum period before we review the change .
It seems to me that these amendments are saying : do not trust viewers , do not trust TV producers , do not trust European companies and advertisers , but let us have controls , quotas , regulations .
Frankly , I think we should trust the viewers , and remember viewers are voters .
Mr President , Commissioner , the rapporteurs on the television directive deserve acknowledgement for their good work , although the long drawn-out procedural stages have annoyed many Members .
I believe that the perceived conflict between free competition and promoting European culture is groundless .
We are all agreed on the importance of developing European audiovisual production from the point of view of culture , the economy and employment .
We disagree only about the means .
The aim of the revision of the television directive is to establish ground rules in the light of the revolution brought about by the information society , as the new technology , which is developing apace , is destroying the basis for the previous regulation policy .
New methods of supporting the whole of European production in the context of an open market are therefore needed .
The competitiveness of the audiovisual sector and the development of new services must be strengthened .
The rapidly growing field of communications could create many new jobs .
Rather than stricter quotas and restrictive regulation , the EU should commit itself to doing more than at present to support the production of content , for example through the Media 2 programme and audiovisual guarantee fund .
European producers should be encouraged to produce quality programmes which interest viewers , so that television companies want to show them on their stations .
Protection of the under-aged is an important objective in view of the growing number of damaging programmes on offer .
The development of technical control systems should be monitored in order to find appropriate solutions .
However , finding ways of protecting minors is a matter which should be left to national level .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in terms of industrial and social policy , what we are dealing with today is the key question for the information society of the future , namely the production of content .
We have to decide whether we wish to shape the future democratically or simply manage the consequences , and this applies not only to how our civil societies reflect on themselves collectively and actively as a European entity and part of the global village , but also to cultural production and services as a source of new and lasting employment .
That will not be an automatic by-product of the increasingly monopolistic competition in which , I regret to say , Commissioner Bangemann still places too much faith - with its emphasis on rationalization , concentration , standardization and commerce .
So we need the compromise on the broadcasting concept , we need binding quotas , we need comprehensive support programmes which provide the necessary range of support , and we need adequate guarantee funds .
We do not need discrimination against the public service programme providers .
The Murdoch , Kirch and Berlusconi empires are the wrong alternative to the culture of Coca-Cola .
Mr President , many of our colleagues , showing an extraordinary capacity for hard work and common sense , have managed to present amendments which can be accepted by the majority .
They deserve our congratulations .
But as we can see from this debate there is some disagreement which could affect the final result and also the strength of the European Parliament in the co-decision procedure .
I still believe that we should legislate in legal and not rhetorical terms to ensure that our television companies have a greater obligation to broadcast products which have been devised , produced , interpreted and created in the countries of the European Union .
You cannot treat unequal situations with equality .
This is not protectionism but it is equity , giving more chances to the products of the European audiovisual industry which at present are unable to compete on equal terms and conditions for market reasons which have nothing to do with their quality vis-à-vis other countries .
We cannot build a Europe dealing with television companies as if they were some other means of production or as if their products were like Coca-Cola , ignoring the huge public service component .
However , we are all - the Council , Commission and the European Parliament - writing the history of the European Union and this history is young enough so that , despite all of the criticism that I have made , we feel that the European Parliament is taking a step forward by approving these amendments which should , before the Council , in the final stage , be given the whole weight of the opinion of all European citizens , people whom we always represent , in this case more than others .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , not many documents have provoked such a controversy as the ' Television without Frontiers ' Directive .
Within Parliament , within each political group , within professional sectors , within groups of citizens there are passionate objectors to and defenders of the Directive .
This is not without reason since Europe 's projection into the 21st century depends on the success of its application .
What are we aiming at with the revision of this Directive ?
The aim is , by harmonising national laws , to reconcile common objectives which are both cultural and economic and which concern the development of telecommunications and information technologies and the strengthening of the European programme industry .
The difficulty in this reconciliation lies in the very logics in the different sectors , which are contradictory .
In the audiovisual industry there is a predominance of a national and cultural logic while in telecommunications sector the logic is transnational and market-oriented .
However , Mr President , Commissioner , these logics are bound to cross over and merge .
And it is the success of this crossover that will decide the European model of the information society .
Ladies and gentlemen , this Directive , as suggested by the Committee on Culture at second reading , is a miracle of equilibrium .
It is a miracle which is due to the sense of responsibility and the pragmatism of those Members of this Parliament who , at first reading , dealt with positions which seemed irreconcilable .
In order to reach the compromise which is now being presented for our vote , the main objectives borne in mind were : disciplining new services , whose explosion could undermine market rules as far as legislation itself is concerned , and stimulating European production to make it competitive , in order to tackle the emergency provoked by its alarming free fall .
The express compromise on the new services , to which the rapporteur and coordinator of my group , in committee , made a lucid contribution , calls for our full support .
The amendments referring to quotas have been made acceptable - I believe - even for some of their opponents , since the application is made gradual .
However , as far as Portugal is concerned , they are limited because they do not grant a special status for non-European Portuguese-language productions .
I would like to conclude , Mr President , by saying that , with this balance , this Directive is a minimalist text : anything less would not be efficient at all ; but more would strangle the market .
We need this directive , contrary to what many people think , in order to tackle the WTO negotiations which will shortly be starting in Singapore .
Mr President , we are debating a very important subject , namely the exercise of television broadcasting activities .
My position is that we must strengthen the broadcasting and production of European works which , in my view , means establishing quotas to strengthen European production .
On the other hand , this European production must reflect the cultural diversity which exists and , in the future , make it possible to create jobs in the audiovisual production industry .
I would refer here to the opinion of the College of Film Directors of Catalonia who agree with a free market ; but can we really talk of a free market given the concentration of so many groups of companies that you find in the United States and the invasion of their products ?
Only if we approve anti-trust legislation will it be possible to have that free market , thanks to the temporary application of quotas .
Finally , I should like to add that quotas are something which also affect States with minority languages , nationalities and regions which could also ask for quotas in those languages .
In other words , States which are asking for quotas should not then be put out if certain national minorities living within those States then ask for those quotas also to be applied to the broadcasting of programmes in their own language .
Mr President , today Parliament is at a cross-roads .
Today we are to pass a resolution which is of quite exceptional importance as far as the opportunities for creating an internal market for TV companies are concerned .
The question of quotas is what makes the report controversial .
But for a healthy European culture and cultural diversity , quotas are necessary .
Like the majority on the Committee on Culture , I support the present wording of Article 4 .
For me , however , Member States & # x02BC ; legal jurisdiction over the TV companies , like the rights of the consumers , and - not least - those of children , are equally important in requiring clarification .
The regulation of advertising aimed at children , colleagues , has been the question closest to my heart during the whole debate on the TV directive .
I have received strong support for this , not merely from my own group , but also from others , for which I would like to take this opportunity of expressing my thanks .
To those of you who are still doubtful about my proposed amendment , I will say that Parliament & # x02BC ; s initial findings sent out a strong and clear political signal .
Representatives from all the Member States and from the majority of the political groups , voted for a strong regulation of advertising aimed at children on the grounds that they exploit children & # x02BC ; s credulity , not against the toy industry .
What I would like to see happen is that producers and advertising companies bear their share of responsibility .
I want them to respect our children and their needs for development before they are exposed to the " cross fire ' which more experienced consumers have learned to cope with .
We cannot accept that free market forces , using freedom of expression as their cover , subject children to violence , pornography and advertising on TV .
Your vote is very important today .
We must have the courage to decide upon a borderless and common market for TV companies which guarantees cultural diversity and high quality programmes .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have five extremely brief points to make .
First , the protection of minors .
I hope that the Commission and the Council will accept Amendment No 40 , because there is no point in promoting filters or V-chips if TV sets are not fitted with them and if the broadcasts are not coded .
Parents have a vital role to play here .
Secondly , quotas .
Our rules should not be restrictive but flexible , in order to give European culture a fair chance .
Thirdly , advertising should be subject to certain restrictions , but not banned .
It should not just be allowed to be shown anywhere and at any time .
Fourthly , I would support Amendment No 16 concerning the original rules .
However , I would ask Commissioner Oreja whether this is compatible with the two Court of Justice judgments of September 1996 against the United Kingdom and Belgium .
Fifth , sports broadcasts must also remain accessible to the general public .
Mr President , as co-author with other Ministers for Culture of the first Television without Frontiers directive in 1989 , allow me to formulate , briefly , two very blunt questions .
The first is : Europe , do you still have a soul ?
Can you really safeguard your creativity , your imagination and your creative genius ?
We all know , ladies and gentlemen , that the imagination of the younger generations is shaped increasingly by images from television and films .
Are we , European Parliamentarians , going to sit there with our arms folded and watch the bombardment of standardised television series made for international audiences which are killing the originality and the identity and the individuality in the hearts and minds of these young people ?
Do we accept that artists in our own countries might soon enough have no other choices for making their films than to try their luck across the Atlantic ?
The question which poses itself , which is asked of us , is a question of the life or death of our living culture and this power is in our hands .
I hope that there are enough of us , today , who will say no to uniformity , no to cultural colonisation , and yes to diversity , inventiveness and freedom . Only a clear , strong directive will allow this .
And the second blunt question that I want to put to you is as follows : do we accept that our Parliament should cease to exist at crucial moments ?
We have already in the past missed numerous opportunities to express strength of will .
I am thinking of the naming of the European Commissioners , and of our acceptance by majority , under pressure from the governments , of the economic agreement with Turkey .
In conclusion I would like to say , Mr President , that I hope that we will safeguard with a clear vote both European culture and European democracy today .
Mr President , I would like to compliment the rapporteurs on all the hard work they have invested in this report .
This is probably the most lobbied report we have ever had in this Parliament .
But what do the people in the gallery , what do the men and women in the street care about in terms of their own television ?
Obviously they want to be entertained and informed .
They are worried about the content of the programmes their children are watching , particularly the level of violence and unsuitable programmes .
Many complain that it is impossible for them to monitor the programmes that their children watch , and parents will need help to become considerably more media-literate in the future , if they are genuinely to protect their children .
They are also very concerned about the pressure they are under to buy expensive toys for their children .
They are angry at the increasing monopolization of well-loved sporting fixtures which they can no longer view without a significant investment for each event .
They are also concerned about the greed of many of the sporting organizations involved here .
They also want to hear their own stories told in their own way on their own national channels .
They want to support the young producers and directors who are making these programmes , very often grossly under-financed .
I do not believe that quotas will improve matters , but I think we need quotas to keep our broadcasters under control so that they do recognize our desire for our programmes made in our own languages and in our own way .
Mr President , the report by the Committee on Culture will make it possible to improve the current ' Television without Frontiers ' Directive in order to help the development of a high quality European audiovisual industry .
By means of this text , we are protecting children from the harmful content of certain programmes and commercials thanks to stricter regulation ; we are also clarifying and specifying strict regulation of television commercials ; we are guaranteeing access for the majority of viewers to the live broadcasting of major sporting events , rather than making them pay extra to watch these events by granting paying channels exclusive rights .
We now have a broader consensus between the European Parliament 's political groups but there are still differences over a vital point : the obligation to reserve the majority share of broadcasting time for European programmes .
The Socialist Group , with a majority of members on the Committee on Culture , has now made the European Parliament 's position more flexible by accepting that we can regard as European programmes those which are made in European studios .
In this way , television companies will have no difficulty in being able to meet the requisites of the European programme broadcasting quota .
In other words , we substantially agree with the position of the Commission .
However , the rapporteurs of the PPE Group have rejected this compromise proposal and yet are not proposing any alternative , which means it will be almost impossible to reach the majority of votes needed to keep the debate in Council alive .
If this does occur we would only be benefiting the already all-powerful American audiovisual industry and it will be very difficult to develop a competitive and high quality European audiovisual industry .
Mr President , on the occasion of the examination in its second reading of the Television without Frontiers directive , there is good reason for concern about the fate of the European audiovisual scene , if certain changes are not made to the Commission 's proposal .
Concerned as I am for the implementation of a policy based on the promotion of European productions , I urge you to vote in significant numbers in favour , firstly , of the inclusion of new services , such as video on demand , so that these services are subject to a certain number of rules on publicity and the protection of minors .
Secondly , it would be advisable to strengthen broadcasting obligations , or what are commonly known as ' quotas ' , by making them compulsory and by excluding studio-based productions from their calculation .
The quotas favour the production and broadcasting of European work , but they will also enable us - and there is no point in hiding this - to stand up to international , and particularly American , competition .
Finally , my dear colleagues , we must fight against abusive relocation in order to secure the protection and development of the film industries of the Members of the Union .
Such a clause , may I remind you , is nothing unusual : it exists , for example , regarding banking and the European Parliament had already adopted it by a large majority at the first reading .
Mr President , the debate in this House on the future of the audiovisual industry is one which crosses all political boundaries .
I know that our Commissioner here today is aware of the enormous strides we have made in reaching a consensus on the key issue , something which should be borne in mind by ministers .
We all have a shared concern for the future of television - the most influential medium in our democracy .
It is not about carrots , cars or coffee machines that we debate here today .
This directive is about building a strong , competitive audiovisual industry which should offer one million new European jobs by the year 2000 ; it is about Europeans benefiting economically and culturally from an expanding industry .
Quite simply , we must create in order to compete ; we must ensure that our cultures have space on our TV screens - our stories and our voices must be heard for the sake of our children .
The starting point for the debate on quotas is that there is no free market - let us be quite clear about that .
The American industry enjoys the huge structural advantage of immense archives , a huge self-sufficient home market and a dominant position in all distribution channels .
The deficit between us and North America in the audiovisual industry at the moment now stands at $ 6 billion .
This would not be tolerated in any other industry , I maintain .
The result is that US programmes can be invariably sold in our market at one-tenth of the cost of original productions .
The broadcast and investment quotas we put before the House today are therefore necessary to underpin European programme creation .
The investment quota alone would ensure that the top six pay-TV operators would invest ECU 300m in our industry - the total of the European MEDIA II programme - and that they do not solely recycle cheap imported programming .
Finally , this Parliament is at a constitutional turning point with this directive .
Let us remember that the Council of Ministers has ignored both the Commission and the European Parliament on the key issues .
Our whole future is at stake .
We must win an absolute majority on the most important issues and reach conciliation .
If not , it is quite simple : we will be excluded from any significant input into the most critical codecision procedure so far .
Codecision , quite simply , will have become a sham .
The question then is : can Europe ever really work ?
Can there ever really be European Union democracy which reflects the interests of citizens ?
I urge colleagues to vote today for economic and cultural pluralism and a directive which ensures Europeans produce and view TV programmes reflecting their own interests and values .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is intended that one of the main goals of the new broadcasting directive should be to promote the European programme-making industry and safeguard Europe 's cultural diversity in the audiovisual market .
Besides the most important aspect - that of cultural diversity and creativity , which was highlighted so eloquently by Mr Lang - the new directive is intended to generate increased investment in the European film industry by supporting the production and dissemination of European-made programmes .
According to the experts , it should also be possible to create two million new jobs over the next ten years and to enable our European broadcasters to be involved in the rapid rise of new technologies and the anticipated expansion of the audiovisual industry , so as to create a level playing-field for competition with American productions .
A further important aim of the new broadcasting directive is to make major sports broadcasts freely available to the general public .
In future , everyone should continue to be able to watch transmissions of major sporting events , not only at European but also at national level , without having to pay extra for the privilege .
That is why it is important that exclusive rights for major events should be handled in the Commission - and I would direct my remarks here to Commissioner Oreja in particular .
The final point on which I wish to express my views concerns the protection of minors .
Clearly , voluntary selfregulation is not sufficient .
However , we all know from educational theory , as well as from personal experience , that prohibitions and defensive measures are often counter-productive .
That is why I am arguing that positive steps should also be taken , so as to provide strong support for good , exciting broadcasting for children and young people .
That must surely be possible within the framework of the existing MEDIA programmes .
Madam President , I would like a little attention from our colleagues , because my intervention is actually based on Article 108 of the regulation concerning a personal detail .
An article published in the Dutch national daily paper Volkskrant , on Saturday 9 November 1996 , reproduces an interview with Mrs d 'Ancona , of the Socialist Group , in which it is written , I quote ' Mrs Van Bladel has now moved her seat to the other side of Parliament , where Mr Le Pen 's group also sits .
She has gone to sit on the right and she votes like Mr Le Pen 's group . '
We consider this to be an incorrect , tendentious , libellous and defamatory amalgamation and I would like to say that all members of my group stand by Mrs Van Bladel and that each one of them considers himself or herself gravely offended individually .
These facts should be considered alongside those mentioned yesterday by Mr Janssen van Raay concerning the regrettable incidents which occurred between the same people last week .
I therefore ask that the author of these remarks and these actions apologise or withdraw her remarks .
Votes
Madam President , as you know , my report was adopted in September by a very large majority .
But while , on the eve of the discussion , the Commission recognised the importance of this report , when it was invited to reveal its position , the Member of the Commission present , who happened to be poor Mr Fischler , - and I apologise for calling him ' poor ' because he is richer than any of us since he controls more than half of the budget - , answered me that the Commission could not support my proposals .
I therefore asked for the report to be sent back to the Committee on Women 's Rights so that the work could be taken up again with the Commission .
Madam President , could you ask the Commission to share with us its current position ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in response to the question put by Mrs Torres Marques I can tell you that the amendments which the Commission is able to accept are the following ones : Amendment No 1 , part of No 4 and No 5 in full , all of which refer to a typical work .

We can accept part of Amendment No 2 and all of Amendment No 7 on leave periods , and the second part of Amendment No 11 on the flexibility of retirement age .



These are important amendments in political terms which will also reflect the European Parliament 's concern for part-time workers , giving fathers equal rights for family leave , and the possibility of applying flexibility to retirement ages for both sexes .
Therefore , I am pleased to announce that these amendments can be accepted by the Commission .
As for the remaining amendments , I am aware of which of them attracts the greatest interest : they are the four concerning actuarial factors which the European Parliament would like to see banned for good .
The Commission understands Parliament 's political stand in this area but feels that it is impossible to accept these amendments just now .
The Commission has already asked for an expert study to be carried out by highly qualified specialists on this subject .
As soon as this study is ready , the Commission will discuss its findings with the Committee on Women 's Rights .
On the basis of those findings , the Commission will be able to deal with the specific problem in its next proposal in order to complete the subject of equal treatment between women and men in social security matters , and replace the 1987 proposal which is still pending before the Council of Ministers .
We should not delude ourselves .
We know that this is a very difficult problem to deal with but there is one thing which is quite clear : this matter cannot be dealt with until the preparatory work which I have just mentioned is ready .
At this time , we can and must work together to work out the best way of dealing with this .
On this basis , I believe that we can consider that we have reached a political agreement and the Commission proposal can now go ahead for Council adoption , in a modified form , following approval of Parliament 's opinion .
Madam President , I am lucky today that it is Commissioner Oreja who is replying .
Allow me to point out that if the articles which Parliament has approved on equal treatment for men and women and positive action to benefit the less well represented sex were defended by the Commission during the CIG , this report would not even be necessary .
Commissioner Oreja , from now I congratulate myself on your presence and your availability today to ratify these amendments which , politically , are very important and which concern unusual working arrangements , maternity and flexibility in age of retirement .
I congratulate myself as rapporteur and I ask you to approve this report .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
As Mr Adam is not present , I would just like to point out that , as you know , Madam President , this is the first application of the conciliation we have had with the Council about trans-European networks , and it is the application , therefore of the codecision on the additions and modifications made to the annexes .
Madam President , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure and the Verification of Credentials , I would ask that the vote on this report be postponed to tomorrow 's sitting , to the vote that is to take place at midday .
We will proceed as usual .
I am faced with a change to the agenda , because we have to move the vote .
I will therefore hear one speaker for and one speaker against .
Madam President , I see no reason to postpone this vote .
Furthermore , Mr Manzella says that he is speaking on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
As the President present will testify , this subject has never been broached within the Committee on the Rules .
As far as my knowledge permits , having been present at the meetings of this committee , what Mr Mazella is claiming bears no correspondence with reality .
Indeed , Madam President , that has never been discussed or decided in committee .
But I suppose that , since the rapporteur is the one requesting it and it is only a postponement until tomorrow at the same time , it should not pose any problems .
( Parliament approved the request to postpone the vote )
I shall make so bold as to say the following .
Both I and the committee put a great deal of work into this report .
You may laugh - perhaps you would not have gone to so much trouble .
That is quite possible . However , I should like to say that I am extremely surprised that when the committee has adopted this unanimously , Parliament should allow itself to be deprived of all its weapons , in the sense that it has relinquished any legislative measures - with your assistance over there .
I think that is a disgrace .
Amendment No 20 states that everyone must have access to ' particularly important events ' , via receivable broadcasts .
However , it should say ' particularly important sports events ' , since a particularly important event could be a fashion show .
I am simply proposing the addition of the word ' sports ' to Amendment No 20 .
I would urge the House to support this amendment .
On Amendments Nos 29 and 56 :
Madam President , we have adopted Amendment No 29 , on the time-scales , but that amendment can in fact be interpreted as not being incompatible with Amendment No 56 .


In point of fact , according to Amendment No 29 , which we have adopted , the ' Member States ' - and indeed it would not otherwise be possible - ' shall ensure that broadcasters under their jurisdiction do not broadcast cinematographic works outside periods agreed with the rightholders ' , whereas Amendment No 56 provides for what is to be done in the absence of contracts to regulate timing , the media time-scales , and can therefore be considered a supplementary amendment .
My group , among other things , wishes to state immediately that it has asked for a split vote : it will not be voting for the first part , but will vote for the second part of the amendment .
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
The Danish social democrats have today voted in favour of the European Parliament 's report on the equal treatment of men and women in terms of employment-related insurance arrangements .
This report contains important recommendations for the improvement of conditions for women , among other things in the areas of pensions and cover for part-time work , which the Commission has not included in its document .
Women who come late to the employment market , or who have been temporarily absent because of family commitments , should not come off worse in their old age .
It is sad that the Commission just does not understand that this situation needs to be sorted out in the Member States , so that legislation on the equality of men and women is not just words , but a reality .
Women in the EU are the most sceptical about cooperation .
Let us show that we have something to offer them .
We have voted in favour of the Torres Marques report because it proposes a number of improvements to the Commission proposal .
For example , the retirement age for women has already been raised to 65 - i.e. the same as for men - in all the pension schemes in Finland .
However , a long transitional period has been provided for in Finland to protect women 's previous rights .
However , because of the proposal for a directive now under consideration , the Finnish Government intends to propose that the law be amended again with the effect that 40 000 women would forfeit the pension rights they had previously acquired .
In our view , the Council should allow Member States a transitional period to implement the Directive , so that women do not suffer unduly .
Adam report
note in particular the draft decision of the Commission defining the specification of projects of common interest identified by European Parliament and Council Decision 1254 / 96 / EC establishing a number of guidelines relating to the trans-European networks in the energy sector .
In relation to the proposal that ' Parliament should receive more advance information on the projects included in the list , since the subsequent technical specification stage may prove a fiasco ' , attention should be drawn to the existing fiasco involving the Scotland-Northern Ireland electricity interconnector , where the core principles of transEuropean energy networks guidelines have been breached by the proposed electricity link , and where Commission support for the project will contribute to environmental and economic damage in the areas involved .
Measures must be put in place to prevent similar circumstances from arising again .
In the construction of Europe , it is extremely important that we can rely on an energy distribution network .
The European Parliament has positively modified the Commission 's proposal by including not only significant components of that network in the Baltic Sea and by paying special attention to the relationship with the Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement in the energy sector , but also by incorporating into it the compromise on hierarchisation and the security of financial prospects , so that the execution of common interest projects can be guaranteed .
For these reasons , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left is fully behind Mr Adam 's report and agrees with his demand that the consultation procedure should be begun .
Howitt recommendation for second reading
No one whose heart is in the right place , no one with any understanding who is a normal human being could remain unaffected and unmoved by the plight of millions of refugees and uprooted people in Asia , South America and Africa .
No one whose heart is in the right place could deny that massive aid is urgently needed for these poor people .
Europe can provide this aid , and it must play its part in alleviating this terrible distress .
But not just Europe .
People often talk as if Europe is the only source of aid , but have they tried knocking on Japan 's door , or that of the United States , Canada or Australia ?
If not , it just goes to prove that they are simply playing on yet another of Europe 's idiotic and criminal guilt complexes .
Idiotic and criminal , indeed .
There is no doubt that if Europe wants to help - and Europe must help - it must be in a position to do so .
Only a strong and prosperous Europe can , must and will intervene where aid is needed .
Europe needs to be itself , and to keep itself in good shape .
It must not lose its identity or allow itself to be swamped by what Jean Raspail describes so perceptively in ' Le Camp des Saints ' .
Otherwise , Europe will be reducing itself to the level of those whom it should be helping .
The vital call for aid for Asia , Africa and South America is therefore - and this is not the paradox it seems - a call for a strong , free and prosperous Europe made up of proud nations with their own identity .
This is the first and most important requirement if the nations of Europe are to be able to show their generosity .
Taubira-Delannon recommendation for second reading
I find it utterly regrettable that the Council has not accepted the amendment previously tabled by Parliament , particularly the fact that a derisory sum has been allocated to the budget item " The Environment in developing countries ' .
It is our responsibility to help the developing countries so that they do not make the same mistakes in their development as we ourselves have done .
Therefore it is of the greatest importance that we share our resources , both economically and technologically as well as in terms of our expertise , without the EU itself benefiting economically as a result .
Neither should we determine how the developing countries choose to act and operate .
The countries can decide that for themselves , based on the different circumstances which are relevant for them .
Parliament created this budget item after the UN Rio conference , which means that there is a global agreement on achieving sustainable development .
In view of the EU & # x02BC ; s enormous budget , the sum of 5 million ecus a year seems like an insult , compared with the 1 000 million ecus which the EU provides as support for the tobacco growers .
The global ecological threat to our lives is greater than the need for tobacco .
I have voted for the proposals which are moving in the same direction as the above .
Bloch von Blottnitz recommendation for second reading
If the programme for the promotion of energy efficiency is indeed to be ' efficient ' :
Firstly , it must be well funded , which is why we must revert to the European Commission 's proposal for 150 MECU instead of the 45 MECU proposed later by the Council.-Secondly , it must be better coordinated with the other energy programmes , ALTENER , THERMIE and SYNERGY , to avoid fragmentation.-Thirdly , all legislative and non-legislative measures should be in place to facilitate the programme 's implementation.-Fourthly , special attention should be devoted to ensuring that the programme operates correctly in smaller countries such as Greece .
We believe it to be of overriding importance that we protect our planet .
There are a number of ways in which energy can be saved , and we must use whatever means are available for cutting our energy consumption .
In particular we are of the view that an effort must be made in the area of renewable energy in order to promote the use of such sources as water , wind and solar energy , thereby reducing CO2 emission .
The report contains far too few initiatives directed at energy savings and renewable energy sources .
Many EU projects , e.g. the so-called TEN projects , are also based on increased use of energy .
I have nevertheless concluded that the report should be supported , in spite of its shortcomings .
Galeote Quecedo / Hoppenstedt recommendation for second reading
Of the EU & # x02BC ; s film market , 76 % consists of American films .
These have already covered their production costs in the USA and are sold to European TV companies at dumping prices .
This constitutes an abuse of a position of dominance going back a long way , and not a free market .
In order to safeguard European culture and cultural diversity , a quota system is necessary .
Such a quota system does not represent any encroachment upon freedom of expression .
The proposal has strong support , both from the actors & # x02BC ; European unions as well as other representatives of the industry .
The year 1995 saw a European trading deficit in the film sector , in relation to the USA , of 6.3 billion dollars ( a trebling since 1988 ) .
This amounts to about 200 000 work years .
The TV directive with stricter rules in respect of advertising and TV sales , provides greater consumer protection for both children and adults .
It is our responsibility to protect our children and not to allow them to be exposed to a " cross-fire ' in TV which more experienced consumers have learned to cope with .
We cannot accept that free market forces , using freedom of expression as a cover , are allowed to impose violence , pornography and advertising on TV upon children .
In this battle between the United States and Europe , between the interests of the world-wide audiovisual giants and the rights of our citizens , between a market exempt from accountability and cultural creativity , the honour of the European Union is saved only by the European Parliament 's Committee on Culture and not by the Council or the Commission :
Concerning the issue of quotas , these must be obligatory if they are to offer effective protection for the European industry against the American siege , at least during the coming decade and until a system is worked out for the protection of investments.-Concerning advertising , respect must be shown for citizens and consumers , in relation to both time and principles.-Concerning the protection of children , protection is needed at the European level .
With this opportunity I would like to express my sorrow at and disapproval of the arrogance of the Commission 's services for taking Greece to court for the restrictions - not ban - that it imposed on the advertising of toys for children.It is said that the House , mainly at the instigation of the PPE Group , failed to back the Culture Committee 's most important amendments .
The aim of the directive is to strengthen the European film industry , which , naturally , we consider to be important .
We also regard the proposal as being for the most part beneficial , but that the methods which are being put forward regarding quotas are not appropriate .
We recommend instead that European films should be supported via positive measures .
The regulations must be applied carefully and only when it is absolutely essential , e.g. when the question of protection for children is involved .
We go along with the recommendation that children 's broadcasts should not be interrupted by advertisements and teleshopping , and with the recommendation that one should not broadcast advertisements for prescribed medicines , or that pharmaceutical manufacturers should not be allowed to sponsor TV programs with their products .
Regarding the debate on quotas , we would comment that the debate in Denmark is quite different from that in other countries where the primary concern is to promote national production in order to match cheap soaps , etc . , from elsewhere .
National production also means Danish national production , or course , since Denmark is a European country !
However in Denmark the majority wishes primarily to strengthen national production by means of subsidies from media programmes .
Denmark has incorporated the relevant quota regulations into its own legislation following the ' suspended veto ' , but does not wish to go along with removing the softening words ' as far as possible ' from the objective of requiring that half of the programmes shown must be European produced .
This is where the conflict lies .
In principle the authorities of a democratic state should be cautious about directives aimed at the medium of TV .
On the other hand , freedom of expression presupposes that diversity may be safeguarded and that no special interests or products dominate over others .
TV policy must also be controlled from a public service perspective which , for film products , strives for high quality standards artistically speaking , and promotes serious production .
National and international rules are to be preferred , but supranational rules are called for where the market situation so requires .
American films account for 76 % of the EU film market .
These films have already covered their production costs and are sold to European TV companies at dumping prices .
This represents an abuse of a long-standing dominant position and not a free market .
In order to safeguard a European culture and cultural diversity , quotas are required .
Such quotas do not represent an encroachment upon the freedom of expression .
The year 1995 saw a European trading deficit in the film sector , in relation to the USA , of 6.3 billion dollars .
This amounts to about 200 000 work years .
The TV directive with stricter rules in respect of advertising and TV sales , provides greater consumer protection for both children and adults .
It is our responsibility to protect our children and not to allow them to be exposed to a " cross-fire ' in TV which more experienced consumers have learned to cope with .
We cannot accept that free market forces , using freedom of expression as a cover , are allowed to impose violence , pornography and advertising on TV upon children .
The imposition of quotas under the Television without Frontiers proposals will open up new markets for European programming .
This can only be good news for the audiovisual sector in Ireland as new areas of commercial activity come on stream .
I believe this is particularly good news for Teilifis na Gaeilge which will easily fulfil its quota of European programming .
This programming can then be sold to other markets in a dubbed or sub-titled format .
I believe that the imposition of quotas of European broadcasting will assist in the process of protecting national cultural diversity .
This directive is a welcome move given the growing prevalence of bought-in American programming on our television screens .
The imposition of quotas will help increase the diversity of programming , not reduce it .
The 51 % quota should not be applied to each public broadcasting station individually but should refer to 51 % of the programming globally of the stations involved .
In Ireland 's case this would mean not taking RTE , Network 2 and Teilifis na Gaeilge separately , but instead taking the output of the three stations together .
We do not share the view that quotas represent a good way of getting the EU countries to transmit more European productions ; nationalism is just as bad at the European as at the national level .
This does not mean that we wish to promote American film productions , but that we consider that it would be better to encourage the making of films within the EU in other ways .
Moreover , we do not regard it as being beneficial to introduce quotas , since there are actually films made outside of the EU and USA .
In one way or another one must encourage , for example , Asian and Eastern European film production to reach the EU market .
For example , India is one of the world & # x02BC ; s major film producers , but very few of her productions each here , and with limitations imposed via quotas , distribution of them is made even more difficult .
We have , however , voted for the amendment which relates to limitations on advertisements for alcohol and pharmacological preparations , as well as advertisements targeted at minors .
We also consider it appropriate that advertising , as a proportion of total transmission time should be limited .
European parliamentarians are battling to obtain quotas for the broadcast of European programmes , or in other words , to favour the Community 's audiovisual preference , including new audiovisual services and the inclusion of an anti-relocation clause .
We approve of this , but we are surprised that the same members , of all political tendencies , reject national and community preference in areas as important as employment , professional training , housing and social welfare , on the grounds that this distinction would be discriminatory .
How can we explain this unequal treatment other than by corporatist egotism in the audiovisual media which sees its problems from the small end of a camera , through the distorted lens of their differential interests ?
In what name are French and European citizens , the victims of an invasion of immigrants , denied the same rights as the audiovisual media ?
At a time when the European Union has more than 20 million unemployed and millions who are newly suffering poverty , this really should be the central question posed by the Galeote Quecedo Hoppenstedt report .
We await with interest the response of both European institutions and political groups .
At the second reading of the proposal to amend the television without frontiers directive , I shall only be able to support the Galeote-Hoppenstedt recommendation if a sensible solution is found to the following key issues .
Not a single high-quality European programme has yet been produced as the result of broadcasting quotas .
We should therefore adopt a flexible approach to this proposal , rather than seeking to impose rigid quotas .
Conversely , there is a need to make adequate financial resources available for the promotion of European productions .
The broadcasting concept should not be extended to include new audiovisual services - on-line services , video on demand , teleshopping and so on - so as not to jeopardize the development of those services .
However , in a number of important areas , such as teleshopping , consumer protection must be ensured .
With regard to the problem of the country of origin of broadcasts , it would be irresponsible to seek to re-erect artificially in the broadcasting sector the barriers which have been eliminated in the internal market .
In the interests of the protection of minors , it is essential to fit all new televisions with a technical filter mechanism - the V-chip - thereby ensuring that parents have the final say on what their children will see .
At present , children and young people are inadequately protected from the surfeit of sex and violence shown on our televisions .
The European Parliament today gave its verdict on the amendment of one of the principal instruments available to the Union for the development of a European audiovisual market .
When we are voting on a text such as this , we must not lose sight of our long term objectives .
The Television without Frontiers directive should be considered in a global context , defined in total coherence with other instruments of the Union , most notably the Media II Programme .
These various tools should really help us to structure the programme industry and the European market .
The directive should favour the effective circulation of audiovisual work , and should guarantee minimal regulation of the market .
The market should be organised fairly and transparently .
To this end , it seems legitimate to me that all services offering audiovisual productions to the public should be subject to the same regulations .
The Television without Frontiers directive should also participate in the strengthening of the European programme production industry and ensure its promotion .
I have therefore voted for the definition of a restrictive text , which will force broadcasters to broadcast in the majority European audiovisual productions which can only , in my opinion , be works of fiction .
The vote is now closed
( The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

25th report on competition policy - single market in 1995 - concentrations between undertakings - industrial restructuring - loans to SMEs ( ELISE )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0324 . / 96 by Mrs García Arias , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission 's XXVth report on competition policy ( 1995 ) ( COM ( 96 ) 0126 - C4-0240 / 96 ) ; -A4-0323 / 96 by Mr Secchi , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the single market in 1995 ( COM ( 96 ) 0051 - C4-0146 / 96 ) ; -A4-0332 / 96 by Mr Rapkay , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 4064 / 89 of 21 December 1989 on the control of concentrations between undertakings ( COM ( 96 ) 0313 - C4-0536 / 96-96 / 0224 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0339 / 96 by Mr Rapkay , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission 's Green Paper on the review of the merger regulation ( COM ( 96 ) 0019 - C4-0106 / 96 ) ; -A4-0335 / 96 by Mrs Hautala , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on industrial restructuring and relocation in the European Union ( INI0329 ) , -A4-0318 / 96 by Mr Kuckelkorn , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Decision on the provision of loan guarantees for investments carried out by SMEs creating employment ( ELISE ) ( COM ( 96 ) 0155 - C4-0314 / 96-96 / 0107 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , first of all I wish to thank all of the Commissioners who are competent for the different sectors which have been discussed in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for their attendance here .
I wish to begin by pointing out that there is growing concern among European citizens about the consequences on their work and families of the major economic and industrial changes taking place at national , European and worldwide level .
The opening up of markets , the acceleration of international competition and technological changes are leading to feelings in society that although there are new opportunities there is also insecurity about the future of their jobs , their children 's jobs and the level of social well-being .
The processes of liberalisation and deregulation in the public service and general interest services currently under way lead to contradictory feelings .
The introduction of elements of competition will guarantee better services for some but , for others , will incite fears , very often well-founded fears if we look at some of the experiences of reduced levels of services at higher prices .
The Delors White Paper - which should be repeatedly referred to - offered a European response to these challenges , opportunities and fears , pointing out that we must simultaneously develop economic growth objectives while improving competitiveness and creating jobs .
All of this should also be done within the framework of a general conception of economic and social cohesion .
In this framework of analysis and debate , it has fallen upon the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs to present to the House a set - an important set in my opinion - of reports dealing with competition policy , the single market , controls over company concentration operations , industrial restructuring and relocation , as well as the development of small and medium-sized undertakings .
All of these themes are closely connected .
Perhaps we should have included in this debate another report drafted by the Committee on External Economic Relations , on international competition .
This year 's report on competition policy has focused basically on four points : first of all , the need for the Commission , in its policy of controlling restrictive understandings and abuses of dominant market positions , to step up and improve controls over activities which certain financial and industrial groups can exercise on the economy .
Let me explain myself . I think that we must clearly define the financial links between the different sectors , especially energy and telecommunications which have a growing tendency to take on a strategic character , and we do not want the liberalisation and privatisation of enterprises and public monopolies - justified to date as guarantors of public services or general interest services - to give way to the creation of monopolies , duopolies or similar phenomena where individuals , legal entities or groups comprising boards of management take over , directly or indirectly , a given sector .
In Spain , people are very sceptical when this type of economic or political measure is taken or there is talk of market responses , and many people are beginning to wonder ' who these markets are ' , as their opinions sometimes seem to make better or quicker responses than Parliament or the rest of society .
Secondly , the report also concentrated on the debate about public service .
I note with some concern that , on this subject , there is no real consensus in the European Parliament and the outcome of tomorrow 's vote will show that we must continue trying to find a common position between the different groups in the European Parliament .
In any case , I think that we must send a message to the people of Europe guaranteeing to them , quite clearly , that they must hang on to public services , despite the pressures which the private sector exerts , in an attempt to reduce the levels of these services .
Thirdly , the report has focused on the coherence which must exist between economic and social cohesion and the control of public aids granted to companies in certain regions of the European Union .
This subject is leading to considerable distortion of competition , especially between small and medium-sized enterprises in one region and another , and we think that the Commission must begin to set objectives to try to reduce this trend and set up practical measures to reach the convergence objectives .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur , for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the third Commission annual report on the internal market in 1995 , I wish briefly to comment on the kind of debate that has gone on and the kind of proposals that have emerged . I should make clear from the outset that my committee has been in favour of that document , although it has felt it necessary to look in greater detail at important points which could contribute to more rapid development and improved operation of the internal market .
After considering the results obtained and , above all , the outstanding problems , we looked in greater detail at the important issue of making the internal market more accessible to citizens and small and medium-sized enterprises .
In point of fact , unless the latter are able to be fully and consciously involved , it will not be possible to speak in terms of a properly functioning internal market within a full economic democracy .
Not only are information and awareness campaigns needed , we need also to make rapid progress towards simplifying European legislation in the field and ensuring that Member States transpose it properly , without distorting it or making it more complicated .
Furthermore , the proper functioning of the internal market requires that infringement proceedings be made more effective , that there be more action on the part of the legal authorities and that the Intergovernmental Conference should set in place , for that purpose , machinery to protect the unity and integrity of the market , which should be at least equally as effective as those safeguarding freedom of competition .
I can only reiterate that a properly functioning internal market is crucial if monetary union is to be successfully launched .
The two processes are two sides of one and the same coin , as we pursue a strategy of restoring the competitiveness of the European economic system , with the ultimate goal of promoting prosperity , employment and the sustainability of social policies .
In that connection , and in the light of the developments taking place in the common economic policy , we have to be concerned about two particularly significant problem areas .
First of all , as regards what has been provided for in terms of the single currency and the future common monetary policy , certain aspects of the non-monetary management of the economy are currently defined in a way that is far less precise , less satisfactory and less coordinated , including as regards the powers of the European Institutions .
While , on the one hand , we have to welcome an opportunity of the kind we have today , when we are able to hold a joint discussion on issues of industrial , competition , trade and internal market policy , a systematically integrated approach , which took proper account of the main horizontal sectoral common policies other than those mentioned ( environment , research , training , consumer policy etc ) , would in fact be desirable .
The main problem that has to be resolved therefore involves striking a better balance between the future monetary policy and the whole complex of non-monetary economic policies .
Secondly , and looking at the issue from a slightly different point of view , we need to do something about an equally worrying imbalance between the common monetary policy , strict coordination of budgetary policy guaranteed by the Stability Pact and fiscal policy .
The inadequate progress so far achieved in that area prevent the internal market from operating more effectively , to the detriment of consumers and industry and , consequently , employment .
The negative examples of fiscal competition , the erosion of the tax base and the transfer of the tax burden from capital to labour also clearly highlight the urgent need to move towards forms of harmonization , if not genuine ' communitization ' .
The urgent review needed here will focus therefore not only on how to move towards more satisfactory solutions of the taxation problem but also on the whole basis for management of the non-monetary economy for the immediate future of the European Union .
The Institutions must take on that task , but it is the specific responsibility of the IGC to produce those long-sought changes , in particular by setting aside the principle of unanimity for all decisions connected with the proper operation of the internal market .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , cross-border mergers and acquisitions are one of industry 's most important means of being able to meet successfully the new challenges of the internal market .
If they do not harm competition , they can be considered a positive consequence of market integration .
In its resolutions on industrial competitiveness policy over the past year , the European Parliament has made it clear that global competition requires businesses to be able to hold their own as global players , and that our policy must create the room for manoeuvre which European industry needs to be able to increase its competitiveness : in other words , the Union 's competition policy must be geared to the situation of global competition .
I am well aware that this can sometimes become a balancing act , since Europe 's global competitiveness must not be increased at the cost of the equality of competitive conditions in the internal market .
It is not by chance that there is broad agreement here in Parliament that domestic competition invigorates the internal market and leads to increased efficiency , thereby assuring our prosperity .
However , competition is not an end in itself .
It is a means of achieving the paramount goals of employment , conservation of the environment , prosperity and social cohesion .
We wish to take a bold step forward with monetary policy .
The introduction of the single currency will not only further integration .
At least in the eyes of the great majority in this House , this major end-of-century change will also be a means of preparing Europe for global competition and gearing it to the goals that I have just mentioned .
That monetary policy is being made jointly , in accordance with our wishes ; but it is managed by a strong , independent institution .
We are making progress with integration .
As far as specific competition policies are concerned , however , we sometimes have the impression that the clock is to be put back .
With regard to aid policy , for example , certain provincial rulers in my own country are making a good deal of noise about the regions finally being masters in their own house .
It is hardly reassuring that such comments are not only being heard in my country .
Everyone seems to forget what our house actually is : Europe .
And that house must not be a dilapidated hut .
It must be weatherproof , and we must all be able to live in it .
Then this house needs a caretaker .
That caretaker cannot do just as he likes - he must act within a comprehensible framework that is clearly defined by the house 's occupants .
But this framework must provide the caretaker - I shall call him the Commission - with sufficient room for manoeuvre .
This also applies to the control of mergers .
Granted , we have an instrument - the 1989 merger control regulation - and this is to remain our framework for action .
However , in fields as dynamic as the internal market and the globalization of the economy , nothing remains as it is .
Consequently , the details of this instrument must be tested and modified .
And that is long overdue .
The regulation 's specific provisions have long ceased to be adequate .
At present , I do not wish to go into details on matters such as what the present circumstances are , or how high the thresholds are that trigger the Commission 's intervention .
Market dominance can still occur below those thresholds .
With the growing integration of Community markets , the number of cross-border mergers has risen .
Nevertheless , only a small number of these operations fall within the scope of the present regulation .
I find that difficult to understand - although that is not the decisive point .
Clearly , mergers which do not fall within the scope of the regulation also have an impact on competitive conditions throughout the Community .
It is doubtful that this impact can be adequately assessed by the national competition authorities .
In competition policy terms , therefore , this no longer makes very much sense .
We must rectify the arrangements that we have had hitherto .
In its green paper , the Commission originally proposed setting the intervention thresholds at ECU 2 billion of worldwide turnover and ECU 100 million of Community turnover , in the case of the participation of at least two Member States .
This proposal is continuing to meet with resistance in a number of Member States .
That is understandable , of course .
The present proposal for a regulation provides for thresholds of ECU 3 bn of worldwide turnover and ECU 150 m of Community turnover , in the case of the participation of at least two Member States .
Should three or more national notifications be required , however , the figures of ECU 2 bn and ECU 100 m will apply .
I propose that the House should approve the Commission proposal for a regulation amending the merger control regulation .
And I would call on the Council of Industry Ministers to adopt it .
It can signal this at its meeting next Thursday .
Indeed , that is essential .
Furthermore , this is what is required by subsidiarity - although the notion of subsidiarity must not be abused with a view to renationalizing competition policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are more than 18 million unemployed people in the European Community . Given this statistic , we can only conclude that the Community is facing a large-scale employment crisis .
From summit to summit , the European Council does not tire of declaring its great commitment to resolving this employment crisis .
Following every summit , the European public is told that measures aimed at the long-term improvement of the jobs situation will be introduced .
Now that it has become apparent that the trans-European networks cannot serve as the basis for a jobs offensive - because the facts speak otherwise - the Community must adopt credible employment initiatives .
Such initiatives could be pursued in the SME sector .
Vigorous support for job-creating small and medium-sized enterprises from the European Union , and especially the Council of Ministers , is certainly a logical step - particularly since this sector is repeatedly portrayed by the Council as the Union 's most important generator of employment .
The Commission and the European Parliament have recognized that with a small outlay , it is possible to harness the job-creating potential of the trade and SME sectors .
Accordingly , they have agreed an interest subsidy programme for job-creating measures in the SME sector .
ECU 50 million was voted for this programme in the Community budget for 1996 .
The only institution which has problems with the creation of jobs is the Council .
It refused to approve the programme or establish a legal base for it , and for the flimsiest of reasons : firstly , the need for subsidiarity , because the Member States supposedly fear a loss of powers ; and , secondly , the hope of obtaining funds to fill gaps in the budget which have arisen through negligence .
In this respect , however , the Council has made a fundamental error of judgement , since if the Council does not eventually establish the legal base , the Committee on Budgets , under the Notenboom procedure , will distribute the funds available to other budget lines .
The provision of loan guarantees will improve the access of small and medium-sized enterprises to external funding for job-creating investment . This is a convincing initiative , which has received a very positive response from the SME sector itself .
The amount of the loan on which the guarantee is extended should be linked to the number of jobs created .
It is in the interests of small and medium-sized enterprises to stand by the ELISE programme , and when we see the Council 's difficulty in bringing itself to approve this initiative , we have to conclude that the Member States - in particular , my own country - are systematically blocking the decision in the Council .
For here too , the Council is hoping for a return flow of funds to settle old debts , if no agreement is reached on the ELISE programme .
We have to ask ourselves how great the financial predicament of the German or other governments must be , if - against the background of budget gaps of billions of ECU - they are so dependent on such small sums that they put a stop to a promising European employment programme , especially since the funds available will be distributed to other budget lines if the programme collapses .
We can only wish the Commission luck in the difficult task of convincing the Council of the usefulness of the ELISE programme .
As Parliament 's rapporteur , I firmly believe that , through its decisions and jointly with the Commission , Parliament can bring this programme into being .
Mr President , I actually wanted to talk about the Wijsenbeek amendment on the two-thirds rule , which the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights has taken over .

We do not entirely agree with the rule - and nor does the Commission , incidentally - but now that I see Commissioners Bangemann and Van Miert sitting there side by side , I cannot resist the temptation to broach the subject of another concentration in which the Commissioners have been closely involved , in the world of football .
Commissioner Bangemann made a very laudable attempt to come to an amicable arrangement with the arrogant football barons on the nationality requirements .
They agreed in theory , but refused to cooperate in practice , and subsequently lost the Jean-Marc Bosman case in Luxembourg against the brave Belgian whom I have nicknamed little David , even though both Mr Bangemann and Mr Van Miert had warned them this would happen .
There has also been another court judgment recently in Amsterdam which found against the KNVB and said exactly what you have always maintained : that the KNVB must also allow competition for television rights , which is something they all prefer to ignore .
I would therefore ask you to examine whether the concentrations regulation , which we welcome in the Committee on Legal Affairs , could be adapted in this respect .
Mr Wijsenbeek managed to table an amendment at the very last minute which has been more or less accepted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , who adopted a more tolerant and moderate approach than we lawyers did . But we would ask you to look at the twothirds rule , as you yourselves proposed , and see if it could not be dropped in this particular instance .
Mr President , after that relocation into the world of football , I should like to come back to the matter in hand .
As the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , I wish to draw your attention to a number of points .
First , relocation is not in itself a negative phenomenon but forms part of a global process of rationalization , modernization , adaptation and cost-cutting .
However , in a socially adjusted market economy , it is up to the governments to identify , prevent , control and resist the adverse social consequences that it brings .
Secondly , we would point out that relocation is not a straightforward phenomenon .
There are relocations in general within the Union , outside the Union , between the OECD countries , between the Union and Central and Eastern Europe , North Africa and so on , and I think there are a number of general principles to be observed here .
We in the Committee on Social Affairs would urge that relocations and our view of the global free trade situation should give due consideration to the internal market and global regionalization .
Thirdly , as far as relocations within the EU are concerned , we have a clear position on a strategy for dealing with internationalization and evaluating the restructuring of firms .
If firms in the Union move to regions offering considerable competitive advantages , the resulting situation could well be extremely difficult .
We would therefore urge both Commissioners to look very seriously at subsidies and industrial policy , and to develop an approach for dealing with the impact on local labour markets .
If firms simply switch from one subsidized region to another , they take their workers and jobs with them , and the European Union seems to be pretending that this is not a problem , whereas in fact it is a major one .
Mr President , given the high rate of unemployment in the European Union and the importance of small and medium-sized undertakings for the labour market , it is easy to predict the great interest which will be shown in the ELISE Programme .
It will give these companies easier and less burdensome access to bank loans , always vital for making investments .
In fact , SMEs nearly always lack capital and face huge difficulties , long waits and very high costs when they do try and obtain banking loans , especially since , usually , they cannot offer the guarantees demanded by various financial institutions and conceded by the various Member States .
With an entity standing in for SMEs when it comes to taking responsibility for the necessary banking loan guarantees , the European Investment Fund and another institution bearing the costs of these guarantees - and this is what the Community is proposing to be - then the barriers to the financial markets will easily be brought down .
In agreement with the spirit of the ELISE Programme , we want to go right to the heart of the questions dealt with , making the programme both broader and deeper .
I myself drafted an opinion which was approved unanimously by the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment recommending not only the creation of jobs as vital for granting Community subsidies but also the preservation or maintenance of existing jobs in companies , so that we can see to the necessary and appropriate change to the budgetary line , linked to job creation , as a way of dealing with this new type of expenditure .
Also in this opinion we pointed out the need for express reference to be made to ' micro-undertakings ' , nonindustrial companies and the peripheral and ultra-peripheral regions , where there should be a better network of financial institutions in order to cover the whole of the Community territory . This is a very easy way of giving loan guarantees .
But , at the same time , it was deemed important to try and make sure that the jobs created or maintained in candidate companies should be lasting .
Finally , we wanted the rate of loan coverage of small and medium-sized undertakings to be made more flexible by the means of guarantees of investment funds , using higher amounts when investments a aimed at creating large numbers of jobs or when they are destined to benefit , via the interested companies , those groups potentially most affected by unemployment .
If this report is a good one , it is not only because it takes on some of our proposals , but we must express our very strong regret that it has not taken on board one idea which seems to us to be equally important and which must be repeated : that of supporting , as far as possible , the maintenance of existing jobs .
Taking that into consideration , in our opinion this report deserves the highest regard .
At least we are satisfied that it has been proposed in this debate and in good time .
Mr President , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy , I wish to say that , for our committee , the relocation of enterprises and the influence of structural policy in this context is a key issue .
In the forthcoming reform of the Structural Funds , this aspect of structural policy needs to be examined .
Consequently , the Committee on Regional Policy cannot understand why its readiness to cooperate with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has met with the response that its figures were not taken into account in the latter committee 's report .
For our committee , the question is : how adequate are the present Structural Funds in counteracting or facilitating relocation ?
The Structural Funds are currently geared to geographical ' objective regions ' , on the basis of criteria of weak development .
However , we are now seeing a rapidly growing phenomenon : subsidy shopping .
The fact is that the less-developed regions are currently sacrificing all their potential to this phenomenon , instead of exploiting it to promote sustainable development .
It is now a question of re-establishing harmony between economic , competition and cohesion policies .
We are therefore calling on the Commission to pay increased attention to this phenomenon .
It is clear to all of us that , after the forthcoming reform , the Structural Funds must be more efficient , and that abuses must therefore be countered .
Consequently , the Committee on Regional Policy believes that the question of the geographical criterion must be re-examined .
It already has an answer , however , since it does not feel that it would be sensible to eliminate this criterion altogether .
It also does not believe that it would be sensible to impose a further bureaucratization of the Structural Funds , and is therefore proposing the creation of a competition-related mechanism whereby EU support to enterprises would be made conditional upon a long-term commitment to the region in question , with a view to preventing companies from moving from one objective region to another simply in order to obtain EU benefits , without integrating on a long-term basis into the region 's local economic activity .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , this is now at least the third time during this part-session - and it is still only Tuesday - that we have had to reproach the Council for the lack of follow-up to its forceful , media-oriented summit statement .
Over and over again , the Council declares that the campaign for jobs is the main priority of the Union and its Member States , but when it comes to putting its money where its mouth is , it does nothing !
After every summit , stillness reigns , whether with regard to the energy efficiency programmes , implementing and managing the structural and regional funds , or - as now - support for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Each time , the Council is handed the opportunity to create jobs on a plate : it never takes that opportunity .
SMEs are the main generators of employment , growth and competitiveness in the European Union .
Over 70 % of all jobs are in small and medium-sized enterprises .
In contrast to the Council , with its politics of lip-service , the European Parliament is looking to translate its political priorities into action . Indeed , last year , it raised the funding for budget line B5-322 , ' Employment and growth for Europe ' , by ECU 50 million to over ECU 57 m , because the programme for granting subsidies to SMEs for job-creating investment was successful and enjoyed a high level of support .
The Council , however , was not prepared to establish the necessary legal base .
As a loan guarantee programme for SMEs , the ELISE initiative should now at least try to close the yawning gap between the politics of declarations and real politics .
The question is whether through this programme , involving ECU 25 m over two years in the first instance - with which a total credit volume of perhaps ECU 1 billion can be achieved - we can actually create a decisive impact on unemployment .
We are more of the opinion that the funding is too modest , not least in view of the resources available in the 1996 budget .
We firmly believe that , wherever possible , the Union must help small and medium-sized enterprises to overcome their shortcomings , because the job-creating potential of this sector deserves a comprehensive effort .
Action , not words !
We must not let our priority - combating unemployment - simply be sacrificed to the Member States ' attempts to bridge their budget gaps .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank the rapporteurs for their reports .
There are some excellent ideas in the various reports and I hope that the Commission in the context of their work in 1997 will take on board many of their ideas .
I would like to say to the Commissioners that it is by no means a coincidence that we are having a debate this afternoon where we are dealing with all of these reports together .
The reason for this debate is that we want to link industry policy , we want to link competition policy , we want to link the internal market , we want to link the policies on small and medium-sized enterprises together , because frankly , at the moment , it is the view of this Parliament that , while the Commission services in their own directorates-general fulfil a very good role on behalf of the citizens of the European Union , there still is not sufficient coordination and collaboration on these various policies .
I want to deal with some of issues in my short address .
We have to recognize that , given the growth rates in the European Union between now and the end of the decade , we are looking at growth of possibly around 2 % or 2.5 % .
That means that the unemployment problem in Europe will not be tackled .
We will still have very high levels of unemployment when we reach the end of this century .
It is also a fact that we are dealing in global markets .
It is no longer the case that we have European industries .
We have global industries operating in European markets .
Therefore we need to create a climate that will allow those industries to thrive and to allow the small and medium-sized companies that form part of the supply chain also to thrive in the future .
That is why the policy on small and medium-sized enterprises on industry policy , on competition and on the internal market must be brought together in a clearer focus .
We will ask - my group will certainly be asking - in the context of the Commission 's work programme in 1997 for a new annual report to be produced by the European Commission .
This should link these areas of policy , look clearly at the competitiveness of the European Union and ensure that there is compatibility between these various policies .
We also need to look at the economic impact of these various policies .
I know , for example , that DG II in the European Commission produces reports on the economics of certain major policies that the European Commission may put forward .
I suspect those reports filter as far up as directors-general in the European Commission .
I suspect those reports do not touch the desks of European Commissioners .
It is essential that DG II - those people who are analysing the economic performance of European Union policies - are allowed to express their views directly to the College of Commissioners .
We want to see that that happens in the future .
I want to deal with some changes in the business environment and the way in which these policies of competition , SMEs , industry and the internal market need to work more closely together .
In particular I want to look at the supply chain that industries are involved in .
Let us look , Commissioner Bangemann , at an industry that you and I have dealt with recently - the car industry .
In the car industry of the past , all of the research and development , many of the components and so forth , were dealt with by the core company themselves .
Those days have now gone .
We now have a supply chain which means that in many cases research and development has pushed down the supply chain to the first , second or even the third-tier suppliers in this sector .
There are many other sectors of the economy where the supply chain now is completely different to the way it existed ten years ago .
It is the small and medium-sized enterprises that are the key to that supply chain , the innovative industries who are now designing , who are involved in value-added manufacturing services .
So our policies have to reflect that .
If we look at competition policy , too often it is used as an excuse for industry policy .
Again , if we look at the car industry , we have had the bloc exemption in the car industry as far as the sale of cars is concerned .
That really is using competition policy as a mechanism for industry policy .
Of course , we have had the voluntary export arrangements which will last until 1999 , again using competition policy or trade policy largely for industry policy .
We have got to get these policies of internal market industry , small and medium-sized enterprises , research and development working closely together .
Unless we do that we are going to continue to have growth rates of around 2 % .
We are going to continue to have unemployment levels of 18 million and our impact as a European Union is going to be absolutely minimal .
So next year , we want the Commission to come forward with an annual report which ties these policies together , which links it to competitiveness , to see whether or not there is real compatibility between the various directorates-general and the policies that are pursued by the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today 's debate on a series of reports has one basic aim .
It is designed to show that the European Union has a range of instruments at its disposal with which to pursue a coherent and effective economic policy , if it so wishes .
This is what should emerge from the reports on the single market in 1995 , competition policy , the control of concentrations between undertakings , loan guarantees for small and medium-sized enterprises , and industrial restructuring and relocation in the European Union .
These various reports serve to illustrate the fact that we are currently too inclined to consider the operation of the internal market , the application of the rules on competition , industrial policy and support for small and mediumsized enterprises separately , as if Articles 85 to 90 of the Treaty did not concern the internal market or the competitiveness of a particular industrial sector .
We have long been calling on the Commission - and we are doing so again today - to coordinate its policies , over and above the various directorates-general and the portfolios of the individual Commissioners .
By way of a first step in this direction , it is worth noting that the number of Commissioners present here today is almost equal to the number of Members currently in the Chamber .
We are in the process of building a strong European monetary union with solid institutions , an independent central bank ensuring sound financial management , stable prices , reduced and controlled deficits , and a strong single currency - the euro - from January 1999 onwards .
This will provide the European Union with a stable monetary and budgetary policy framework for the development of its economic activities .
However , should we not at the same time be developing a dynamic economic policy , designed to foster and promote growth and employment in particular ?
Such a policy should not be restricted merely to providing a counterbalance to the central bank .
It is a question of equipping the European Union with all the instruments that will enable it to encourage economic development .
Although such a coordination of policies in the interests of competitiveness is not provided for in the Treaties , there is no need for a Treaty amendment , since we already have all the necessary economic and social policy instruments with which to pursue this economic policy .
Undoubtedly , among the most powerful of these instruments are the Commission 's rules on competition .
We shall do all we can to prevent the Commission 's capacity to act in this field from being restricted in any way .
Using the powers conferred on it by the Treaty , it is the Commission 's task to set out , in a coherent framework , the way in which it proposes to use the various instruments of economic policy .
Responsibility for a policy of this kind also lies with our own institution .
The European Parliament needs to be associated as closely as possible with the shaping of the policy .
This will enable it to play the role in achieving monetary union for which the Treaties have not yet made adequate provision .
Since the decisions are currently taken by the Council of Ministers , it must be ensured that the latter is in a position to introduce this policy .
I would therefore propose that during each Council presidency - in other words twice a year - a special meeting of the Council should take place .
This ' Economic Policy Council ' would be required to deliver an opinion on the guidelines presented by the Commission , after consultation of the European Parliament .
Naturally , this Council would include the Finance Ministers , but all other ministers dealing with economic policy matters would also have to be involved in some way , in order to create the essential linkage between economic policy and the monetary policy conducted in the framework of the Ecofin Council .
Mr President , the source of the reports - or rather the group of reports - that the House is today discussing is the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , which has evaluated them as a whole because they do in fact link up with one another .
That has to be the case : we cannot think about competition policy without assessing the rules on mergers ; similarly , we cannot think about restructuring and dislocation unless we appreciate the value of small and medium-sized enterprises .
We therefore applaud all members of the Committee on Economic Affairs and Monetary Policy for the work they have done and for the information provided to the Commission , enabling it to furnish an improved draft of the final directives .
There are , however , a number of aspects in particular to which we should like to draw attention in this general assessment of the Community economy .
The first can be summed up in terms of the policy guidance to avoid assessments based on size : the future of the economy no longer resides with the ' big boys ' ; it is in fact in ' small ' and ' medium-scale ' enterprise that the best opportunities for growth , development , investment and , therefore , in the final analysis , new jobs , are to be found .
Secondly , we have an operational guideline , designed to assess differently sectoral value in the economy : ever more attention will have in future to be paid to those sectors whose potential has previously been undervalued .
I am referring in particular to tourism , trade , the crafts trades and services , including the environment , technology , the social economy and others .
The third point was well put by Mr Secchi in his report on the internal market .
There is now a different relationship between monetary and non-monetary policy and therefore , in the final analysis , with fiscal policy .
We need therefore to allow businesses and businessmen both a greater degree of administrative and bureaucratic deregulation - giving them the time and the opportunity to be entrepreneurs and not bureaucrats - and , consequently , more extensive and improved fiscal harmonization , as hoped for by Commissioner Monti in what he rightly calls an internal rather than a single market .
My fourth and final point : in seeking qualitative and quantitative improvements , we should look to meeting consumer demands , the only real objective of the efforts made daily by hundreds of thousands of businessmen - in small , medium-sized and large businesses - in Europe , with their millions of co-workers .
It is in fact the market alone that should regulate the legislative efforts that the European Institutions make and provide for the Member States : it will therefore be the market that determines where to make concessions , where to regulate and where to restrict .
If we succeed in getting the market - which is currently suffering from a dangerous fall in consumers - going again , we shall be getting the whole of the Community 's economic and social system back into gear .
Mr President , I wish to take this opportunity , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , to congratulate the various rapporteurs .
Since my time is limited , I want to focus politically just on two issues .
In respect of the García Arias report on competition policy , I wish to put down a very clear political marker that whereas the Liberal Group is prepared to support this report in general , there is one specific blockage and condition in respect of our support and that relates to paragraph 15 and the call for the amendment in the IGC of Article 90 ( 2 ) .
It is the definitive view of our group , and has been consistently the case , that the amendment of this article would be a form of Trojan horse .
It would introduce a form of creeping protectionism and an attempt to block the completion of the internal market in sensitive sectors .
This represents a very reactionary response to problems which doubtless are there but which politics exist to overcome .
In a global competitive market we have no option but to ensure that we press ahead and we believe that Article 32 should remain unchanged .
I appeal in particular to the Group of the Party of European Socialists to try to give us a way out on this , because we want to support the overall thrust of the García Arias recommendations .
In respect of the Hautala report , very briefly , we have consistently opposed the concept of a speculative tax on capital movements .
Implicitly in paragraph 2 this reappears .
I want to see that changed .
If it is changed we will support it ; if not , we will vote against .
Mr President , we have a series of very important reports and I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs , both on their efforts and on their ideas .
However , I should like to refer in particular to the relocation of businesses .
The practice of relocation is a fundamental weapon in the hands of those who are pressing for lower levels of social protection , tax exemption , abatement of environmental protection measures , and relaxation of the rules of standardization and consumer protection .
It is no matter of chance that exactly in the name of that threat , privileges and grants are provocatively being extorted which ultimately lead to abuse of the Structural Fund resources .
It is also no matter of chance that the European Union is increasingly encouraging relocations to Third Countries , mainly towards the Central and Eastern European countries .
For some countries such as my own , the phenomenon has assumed the dimensions of a national disaster and is a basic factor in the contraction of the productive base , the dislocation of the economy , de-industrialization and decline .
There are many examples , the most recent of which are GOODYEAR and LEVIS , while SIEMENS is holding its employees hostage in order to establish new contracts .
We would like to congratulate Mrs Hautala on her many-sided examination of the problem .
We want to stress that now , besides statements and expressions of concern , immediate and effective measures are needed at an international level to restrict the unaccountable actions of major multinational capital .
We call upon the European Union and its Member States to show in this connection the decisiveness that they show when imposing policies that reduce the level of social protection and overthrow the basic rights and social acquisitions of working people .
For example , the European Union could , in the context of the World Trade Organization , consider reviewing its statutes so that protection of the fundamental rights of working people , as defined in the relevant conventions of the International Labour Organization , would be included in multipartite agreements and would become a criterion for application of the principle of the most-favoured state .
Mr President , we must grasp the fact that dislocation and de-industrialization of the Union 's less developed countries to begin with , and of the Union as a whole later on , will become a nightmare for all who determine their political strategies on the basis of yet more extensive opening of the markets , and of the subjection of everything - social and environmental demands - to the holy cow of competitiveness , which transforms our society into a dismal one .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at first sight , they appear to be very different subjects : competition policy , support for small and medium-sized enterprises , the promotion of employment , relocation , the internal market .
In reality , however , they all come down to the same thing : the fact that , as far as economic policy is concerned , we are living in very interesting times .
They are times in which the neo-liberal plan is clearly running out of steam , in which the idea that markets will by nature provide rational solutions is proving to be unrealistic , and in which the need to regain democratic control over economic policy is becoming clear in many areas .
I would simply point to the ILO report on child labour .
There is indeed a need for regulation in the area of environmental and social standards .
The fact is that markets do not occur naturally : on the contrary , we must create the necessary political preconditions so that we can constitute them in such a way that they function as rational instruments and mechanisms .
We need to put this philosophy into effect down to the very last detail , and I would of course be pleased if Mr Van Miert , Mr Bangemann and the rest of the Commission were able to endorse this enlightened concept of a market economy .
Mr President , given the abundance of work done by this House - the reports drawn up by rapporteurs , the ideas and policies put forward - it is interesting how low attendance is .
It is also very interesting that while a certain Mr Goldsmith is getting prime time on all our televisions , this anti-European is not here today to tell us all the ways we are going wrong .
He comes only 3 % of the time , so I suppose we would be lucky to catch him in this particular debate .
With regard to the García Arias report , the rapporteur got it just about right in his attempt to balance the public service and privatized facilities .
There is no panacea , but what I have to say is that if you are concerned about peripheries you have to realize that normally only the public service will have a social element at the top of the agenda and that on the whole you cannot expect the privatized facilities to do so .
Would it not be extraordinary if , whatever country you were in , you paid a different postage stamp according to whether you came from Paris or the south of France , or from the Island of Tiree or London ?
We take it for granted that this is not so and yet we have to accept that for water , electricity and other vital services , this is exactly the situation .
This is wrong unless of course you want all the people in these faraway places to leave these faraway places and come and live in the cities where probably they would have no jobs and be a burden and the faraway places would then be uninteresting deserts for the tourists .
I represent a periphery , often called a wilderness .
But it was turned into a wilderness by the greed of men who took the resources and eventually left fewer and fewer people .
You have to realize that while both the public and the private have advantages and good qualities , there has to be a recognition of the social element .
I wonder whether that can possibly be done if we encourage privatization to take over the public role .
With regard to the Secchi report , the internal market and integration are meant to go hand-in-hand with our move towards EMU .
As a citizen - albeit a reluctant one - of the UK , I find this quite interesting because sometimes I wonder if it is a dream the Germans have because frankly the articles in the press from both the major parties suggest that we may not be going towards EMU .
It is interesting that the entry of three new states did not disrupt our move towards integration .
It was said they would , but they did not .
We have gone along with it .
There have been good aspects and defects and the good aspects have been many - the customs 2000 , administration , convention bankruptcy , harmonization of products .
The defects are perhaps there too - public procurement , insurance , intellectual property .
I would go with Mr Rapkay 's proposal of the reduction of the threshold .
We are in favour of Mrs Hautala 's code of conduct for multinationals and we know that multinationals when they move into areas like mine sometimes do not stay .
So I agree with the phrase about longevity of investment .
I support Mr Kuckelkorn all the way in his support for ELISE .
Mr President , my dear colleagues , Commissioners , the report presented to us by our colleague Hautala on industrial restructuring and relocation is to the point and I would like to pay tribute to his work .
I also think that the European Union must quickly take some action against the negative effects of relocation favoured by international trading rules which encourage the installation of manufacturing plants in countries in which costs are lower .
Every day we see the negative effects of both fiscal and social dumping .
Political power owes it to itself therefore to counterbalance the flagrant injustice of certain market mechanisms .
Within the Union , EMU would constitute a decisive element in the fight against currency speculation which is speeding up the rate of relocations .
I would like in this case to lend my support to our colleague the rapporteur for his proposals which aim to set up European work councils with responsibility for careful examination of restructuring and relocations .
This is both urgent and fundamentally important .
In the same way , we must use structural funds for the sustainable development of employment in disadvantaged areas .
All too often , funds and aid are experienced as a kind of Community jackpot which causes intolerable relocations with no sustainable benefit for anyone .
We can all bring to mind examples of such scandalous events .
We have the means to avoid them , provided that we have the political will to do so .
So , like the rapporteur and like many others here , I consider it essential , internationally , that social clauses are instituted not just to safeguard the European economy , but also to help developing countries to rise up out of their difficult conditions .
This is also possible - again , it just requires the will .
Our debate , Mr President , is thus a true political debate in which the supporters of absolute freedom and the partisans of economic regulation come face to face .
It is a difficult combat , but one on which depends the credibility of the European Union , and its very existence in the eyes of public opinion , as well as the action we will be taking on this particular matter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report presented by Mrs García Arias on the Commission 's twenty-fifth report on competition policy displays an ideologically-loaded rejection of the Community 's policies geared to competition , privatization and liberalization .
To that extent , it opposes the Commission 's consistent liberalization and deregulation policies in the fields of transport , telecommunications and energy .
And , lastly , it castigates those Member States which have give privatization and deregulation precedence over the maintenance of public monopoly undertakings .
The political preconceptions are particularly evident in the explanatory statement , and less so in the motion for a resolution .
On behalf of my group , I should like to make the following points clear : if , in tomorrow 's vote , paragraph 15 is not removed from the report , then we shall reject the report as a whole .
The Christian-Democratic group - like the Commission - opposes any amendment of Article 90 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
The calls for restriction of the application of the Treaty competition rules to public service undertakings and the deletion of Article 90 ( 3 ) , above all with the aim of preserving public service undertakings as state-owned enterprises , are rejected by my group .
Also , the result of such a measure would be a reduction of the Commission 's role and , of course , an extension of the powers of the individual states .
The deletion of Article 90 ( 3 ) of the Treaty would undermine our policy of liberalization in the fields of telecommunications , energy and postal services .
These proposals would lead to the reorientation of the Treaty in favour of national public services , at the cost of market integration .
Furthermore , I believe that paragraph 16 in the report - which obviously coincides with the Commission 's views - is extremely questionable .
Such an addition to Article 3 of the Treaty would have considerable and fundamental repercussions in the European Union .
If the amendment which is called for were to come about , basic services would acquire a scope that could no longer be circumscribed .
The introduction of such a clause would thus have a serious impact on the application of the competition rules , and in particular on the aid regulations and in the area of cohesion .
Moreover , such an amendment would be an additional means - or at least a possible means - of preserving the monopolies of state-owned enterprises . It is a second way of achieving that aim .
That cannot be our policy !
The PPE Group has always advocated strong integration and competition policies .
That is why we have made our misgivings clear , and I hope that in tomorrow 's vote we shall be able to make a number of amendments to this report !
Mr President , in the short time which is available to me , I should like to look at the Kuckelkorn report .
In my country , the president of the organization of small and medium-sized firms was recently appointed as a Royal Commissioner , which shows how much the government appreciates the experience and knowledge of people working in SMEs .

A good deal has been said both here in the House and in the Member States about how important SMEs are for employment , and I am therefore very pleased with the Kuckelkorn report , which not only creates more job opportunities , but also shows the people of Europe just how much Parliament and the Commission have their welfare at heart .
It is not easy for small businesses to have access to the financial markets , and this undoubtedly puts them at a disadvantage .
The Council must finally realize that the ELISE initiative is a sensible way for the Community to take responsibility here , ensuring that European integration does not simply pass small businesses by .
I have to say , however , that there is a considerable gulf between the Commission 's ideas , the actual objective and the funding available .
As I see it , it should be a basic principle that the level of funding is linked to the number of jobs created .
Providing funding for 24 months with an assessment after 18 months seems perfectly reasonable to me , and I am quite happy with the idea .
But the programme will only succeed if the loans provided are large enough , and if it is to be really successful , it needs to ensure longer-term continuity .
In the short term , I hope that the project will enjoy the same success as the Beethoven composition of the same name .
I am für Elise , Commissioner Bangemann .
Mr President , I will concentrate on the report on competition policy and the question of state subsidies .
Unfortunately state subsidies cannot be done away with immediately , so we must instead ensure that when such subsidies are provided , they take place in a predictable and transparent fashion .
Both competitors and consumers must be able to see what is going on .
This is why the Liberal Group has proposed a public , accessible register of all state subsidies within the Union which Member States provide to various activities .
I very much hope that Commissioner Van Miert agrees with point 18 of the report which is in line with the Irish presidency 's suggestion of a register .
The other point I would raise is the question whether the Commission should ally itself with those activities that are generated by state subsidies .
These activities will often be the best way of assessing the distorting effects on competition in a given field , and the views of the industry may also help the Commission to stand up to pressure from Member States in doubtful cases .
The most consistent way of ensuring predictability will be to introduce provisions laying down rules designed to regulate Member States ' requests for approval of state subsidies , the publication of cases and the setting of time limits , in short a framework for the overall consideration of such cases , which will also define the involvement of third parties , including rules on the right of access to documents and the possibility of commenting on cases , e.g. in the form of a public hearing .
I therefore encourage my colleagues to give their support to point 26 of the report which is also supported by the Liberal Group , and I will be interested to hear the Commission 's reaction to the idea of involving third parties and competing companies in the fight for state subsidies .
Mr President , hundreds of thousands of jobs are sacrificed or threatened in the short term in the European Union by relocations carried out by companies in the name of competition , particularly in the textile , footwear and electronics sectors and increasingly in service industries .
These relocations , which put populations into competition with each other by playing on differences in pay and conditions , are often carried out without warning or consultation with trade union organisations , with disregard for wage-earners and with disregard for the economic interests of regions .
The report of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has put forward some interesting proposals for combatting currency speculation , in particular the proposal championed by our group , the application of the ' Tobin tax ' on movements of capital .
But the impact of these proposals will be limited as long as they subscribe to the logic of the Maastricht Treaty based on liberalisation and deregulation for the exclusive benefit of capital .
In conjunction with the trade unions , we oppose these mutilative relocations and we call for new rights , nationally and on a community level , for paid employees , so that they can safeguard their assets , defend their jobs and control the use of public funds granted to companies .
Mr President , there can no longer be any doubt that small and medium-sized firms are the darlings of the European institutions .
ELISE , what a marvellous name for a system of loan guarantees designed to promote employment in SMEs .
Who could possibly be opposed to something so nice ?
It is even the name I gave my daughter .
But a pretty name can hide something far less pleasant , and this seems to be a case in point .
The Member States ' governments have argued , with some justification , that Community programmes of subsidies for SMEs are incompatible with the principle of subsidiarity , but despite this the Commission has carried on with this proposal , claiming that the size of the unemployment problem in the European Union makes Community measures necessary .
I would be prepared to agree with this if the ELISE programme were the only one of its type , but it is not .
We have a similar kind of loan guarantee system in the Netherlands , and our Council for small and medium-sized firms says that ELISE will simply interfere with the operation of this system , instead of working alongside it .
It seems that ELISE will not act as a supplementary scheme , but will run counter to the one that is already in operation .
The Commission needs to clarify this .
I am also surprised at some of my colleagues .
Amendments Nos 3 and 6 complicate the system for employers .
What is important for small firms is that the loan guarantees should be swift , simple and straightforward , and should not impose an extra administrative burden , otherwise employers will have no interest at all in this offer from Europe , and ELISE will be nothing more than a white elephant .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's report on the single market is an open call for us to use the instruments at our disposal to organize the Union 's economic management more effectively - whilst not forgetting , Mr Konrad , the social dimension of the market economy , and not thinking only of the free movement of capital , goods and services , but also of the free movement of persons .
We must ensure that we build a Europe which is in the interests of people , and the reports which have been presented to the House today are a good starting-point for this .
It would be welcome if responses and proposals in this area were forthcoming from the Commission .
With regard to the single market and its completion , I would point out that , as long ago as last year , Parliament produced a list of criticisms , including the inadequate harmonization of environmental and tax regulations and the shortcomings in the training of customs and tax officials in the operation of the internal market .
Furthermore , something else is becoming clear in this debate : the fact that , in the Maastricht Treaty , which has been improved since the launching of the single market , we have a genuinely effective set of European policymaking instruments .
On the one hand , there is the single market ; on the other , there are the competition , merger , structural and industrial policies , and also - as Mr Kuckelkorn has made quite clear - the policies in favour of small and medium-sized enterprises , which together form the basis for us to establish a genuine confidence pact for Europe .
That element is still missing , and I believe that our enthusiasm in calling on the Heads of State and Government to add this component should remain undiminished .
I mention all these factors together because the report by Mrs García Arias also clearly refers to the fact that competition policy - aid monitoring policy , for example - must be sensibly linked to the review of structural policy .
The instruments exist , therefore , but they are not yet being used efficiently enough . Clearly , we must seek to persuade the Member States to make greater efforts in this respect .
It is particularly unacceptable , in my view , that there are still distortions of competition caused by inadequate tax harmonization , with the effect that there is sometimes talk of cut-throat tax competition within the single market .
I believe that a number of Members of the Commission could help to put a stop to this .
I should welcome it , Mr Van Miert , if the next report on competition policy were to go into greater detail on the extent to which tax concessions - tax allowance programmes and provisions - in the different Member States contribute to the distortion of competition , and what we must do to counter this .
I should also like to know how regional cooperation and industrial policy can be brought together more effectively , without jeopardizing competition .
So I think this report on the single market represents a further step towards the European institutions being able to say with a clear conscience that , if the division of tasks between the regions , the Member States and the Union works properly , then they do have something to offer .
Mr President , I should like to begin with the García Arias report .
Major concentrations of power and distortions caused by state aid are undermining the single market , and the Commission has a very clear role to play here .
State aid is usually granted as an act of generosity , so opposing it is never a popular move .
To save jobs in France 's textile sector , the French Government introduced experimental measures to reduce its social contributions by applying the de minimis rule for companies with less than 50 workers .

This affected almost 11 700 firms out of a total of 13 000 , and was contrary to European competition policy in that it gave French firms more than 10 % - in fact 12.5 % - more competitive power than foreign textile sectors .
As regards the steel sector , my group would urge the Commission once again , as our amendment makes clear , to continue to apply a strict code on state aid for the sector beyond the year 2002 .

Turning to the ELISE programme , my group will be voting against Amendments Nos 3 , 6 and 8 , which link the amount of the loan to the number of jobs created .
Unlike my colleague Mrs van Bladel , I find this absurd .
Small firms cannot possibly say in advance how many jobs they are going to create if they are given a loan to build premises .
It is an impossible demand .
If the programme fails because of bureaucratic nonsense like this , then the Council will have all the more reason to oppose similar projects next year .
My group has a number of fundamental objections to Mrs Hautala 's report , and we shall be voting against a number of paragraphs in which she calls , for example , for a crackdown on working with financial derivatives , for firms to make long-term employment commitments with a particular region , and for a permanent monitoring centre to keep an eye on relocations .
My group feels that proposals like this are simply going too far .
Moving on to Mr Secchi 's report , Mr Monti promised us a businesses ombudsman who would deal with complaints within six months .
We should like to remind him of this fact and have tabled an amendment to this effect .
I should like to talk about the relocation of businesses .
Relocation happens all the time , and in a free market economy we shall never be able to prevent firms from establishing themselves where they have the best operating conditions .
I have two comments on the report .
Firstly , subjecting firms to too many rules and regulations is not the right way to set about things .
Investment in third countries must be seen as a way to promote economic development , and ultimately to improve their standard of living .
It is a process which has to be gone through in order to achieve social well-being .
Too many rules will simply put firms off before they have even started .
Instead of making subsidy-hopping possible by giving firms aid directly , the European regional policy must focus on any local structural factors which can benefit from the rules as a whole .


The Liberal Group is also vehemently opposed , as Mr Cox has already said , to a tax on currency market operations , which would simply encourage capital flows out of the Union , giving the financial markets less liquid assets and wider currency fluctuations , which is precisely what we wish to avoid .
Mr President , relocations are a contemporary phenomenon linked to the free circulation of factors , in particular capital , making use of technological progress and implementing transnational strategies of productive specialisation and concentration in cahoots with the executives of certain Member States .
Whether this takes place within Community and European countries or outside Europe , the aim is always the same : creating and making the most of opportunities to accumulate capital .
The worldwide liberalisation of capital , now within the framework of the WTO TRIM Agreement , makes it possible to leap from one country to another , from region to region , exploiting natural and human resources , going completely against the aim of economic and social cohesion , without any concern for regional consequences , for the social impact which results from it , increasing regional imbalances and also creating precarious and provisional jobs which , here and there , only helps to worsen the very high levels of unemployment .
The report drafted by Mrs Hautala - and I must compliment her on her work - reflects serious concerns , translated into interesting and worthwhile words and yet , contradictorily , it accepts what lies behind transnational relocations and justifies them on the grounds of industrial restructuring , which seems only to exist as an excuse or alibi for these relocations .
Mr President , I will begin also by congratulating the rapporteurs and I should like to emphasise that , in terms of competition policy , there are indeed particular concerns about recent cartels in the private sectors of energy and telecommunication .
On this score , I think that transparency is the order of the day . With transparency as the order of the day , we must take a set of decisive measures , paying particular attention to the growing disparity in the amount of public aids between regions ( and I think that it is , therefore , very important that the Commission should very quickly publish a thorough list containing those aids ) ; we should also mobilise more resources for DG IV and reject , from the outset , any proposal , wherever it comes from , to create independent cartels in application of any competition policy ; it is now urgent to coordinate the different Community policies influencing industrial competition , in particular the industrial competition policy of the internal market and trade policy , and we must also combat any type of obstacle - and alas there are some still remaining - to the free circulation of persons and goods .
As to relocation and the restructuring of industry in the European Union , we must bear in mind the economic and social effects and many of the reasons which unfortunately lie behind these relocations .
We must not forget that monetary speculation is one of the main reasons for the monetary instability which is undermining the decisions taken in terms of the real economy .
These relocations should lead the Commission quickly to produce proposals to discourage speculation in derived financial assets .
The liberalisation of foreign investment and other forms of capital mobility must place emphasis on sustainable development and cannot be a loophole for the disrespect or destruction of the fundamental social interests and rights of workers .
It is important , for the sake of fighting unemployment and defending a Europe with a social dimension , to control capital movements and fight fiscal and social dumping ruthlessly .
As for small and medium-sized undertakings , they are so important for competitiveness , growth and employment , that we really must improve their access to funding sources , and we must also strengthen the Union 's budgetary efforts in accordance with the proposal made in this report , in order to stimulate and facilitate the implementation of any project which has a positive impact on job creation .
Mr President , on a point of order concerning Rule 13 of our Rules of Procedure relating to political mandates in this House .
You no longer comply with the conditions of Rule 13 , paragraphs 1 and 3 .

Paragraph 1 states that anyone who is Vice-President , and therefore who fulfills the mandate of Vice-President and has been elected by the House in its entirety , should have been nominated by a political group or by 29 Members .
You have been nominated by a political group , the liberal group specifically .
Paragraph 3 of Rule 13 states that , in the election of Presidents , VicePresidents and Quaestors , it is appropriate to bear in mind that Member States and political tendencies should be represented fairly over all .
You began your mandate representing the liberal group , but you did not have the decency to give up your mandate as Vice-President when you changed your political colours , and I am wondering what you are up to up there .
My dear colleague , may I draw your attention to Rule 17 , which you have forgotten . ' When a Member changes political group , he retains any seat he may occupy within the Office and the College of Questors , for the remainder of his mandate of two and a half years ' .
It is clear , Mr Wijsenbeek , that if I were to occupy this position for a longer period I would not hesitate to follow his advice or that of the chairman of my group , if it had one .
But there will be a constitutive session in January and so there is no ethical or legal problem at stake .
That is all I am willing to say to you .
I must extend my gratitude to Mr Wijsenbeek for raising that point of order when he did .
My purpose this afternoon is to intervene briefly on the question of the relocation of employment within the European Community , the subject of Mrs Hautala 's report .
There was a difficult vote in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on this particular report which in the end was a straight left / right divide .
I would however like to pay tribute across the great political divide to the valiant work that Mrs Hautala has undertaken in order to try to cobble together some compromise .
I fear though that it has not been possible to get to a compromise which would enable us on this side to support the report in its present form .
We will be asking for a number of split votes , largely in those areas which contain rather provocative phrases about social dumping and about the chase to the bottom of the social scale , implying that some Members States are deliberately undercutting others by reducing social protection .
This is not the case at all , as I know because I come from a country which is frequently criticized for its attitude towards the Social Chapter , but which has in reality much stricter health and safety conditions than other Member States .
Indeed the famous six-pack was heavily over-implemented in the United Kingdom imposing burdens which are not imposed in other countries .
Mr President , it is interesting to note that Mr Cassidy is out of breath .
He did not take the opportunity of welcoming you to his group .
He is no doubt out of breath because , given the thinness of his majority last time round , the Liberal Democrats are keeping him on the run .
I wish to raise two points in this debate with regard to the Secchi report .
Amendment No 4 : in the pharmaceuticals industry , we still have a situation in Europe where national price controls are seriously distorting the free market .
There are great opportunities in Europe for the development of generic medicines .
In the United States the market in generic medicines is estimated to grow substantially over the next ten years and this could be the case here .
We are currently exporting jobs to Turkey , Iceland and other countries by our policies and my amendment to this report seeks to rectify that situation .
The second point I wish to draw attention to is access to justice .
I drew attention to this in my report last year .
For many small businesses in the Community there is still no real access to justice when the single market fails to offer them the freedoms it promises . The ' Monti package ' has made things better but there is still a lot to be done .
I feel that we are hampered in the European project by what François Mitterrand called the stubborn presence of the centuries .
Every time you try to move a country or move a continent , history grabs you by the ankles .
What is needed now is extra effort to complete the single market before monetary union comes along .
Mr President , without any kind of support in the form of economic theory and without any kind of empirical evidence , the rapporteur , Secchi , maintains that the various tax rates in Member States create a " serious distortion of the goods , services and capital flows markets ' .
This is one of the most common misconceptions about the internal market .
In the first place the different tax rates are not discriminatory , i.e. they affect domestic and foreign production equally .
The distortion which different tax rates create , is of minimal , and far from serious , loss of efficiency , amounting perhaps to a few tenths of a percent of the gross national product .
Secondly , taxes reflect the democratic choice of the citizens of the various countries .
In Sweden we have high taxes .
This reflects , for example , the fact that we have a positive attitude towards the public sector and a developed social welfare system .
To harmonise taxes with other EU countries means , in our case , lowering taxes and thereby lowering standards in the public services .
This involves a loss of welfare for Swedish society , since we would not achieve the kind of society which citizens wish to have .
I have often asked myself what is the reason behind this " fetish for harmonisation ' .
It is a myth that it leads to economic advantages and that it increases growth .
It is , however , not a myth that it goes against the wishes of the citizens of the countries of the union .
Citizens of the Union wish to formulate their own tax systems so that they correspond to individual countries & # x02BC ; differing cultures , customs and political constitution of the Union .
They do not want a Commission to interfere in this for the sake of an abstract principle .
Mr President , unlike Mr Wijsenbeek , I am delighted to welcome you to the PPE Group .

It is a great pity that Mr Wijsenbeek has run off somewhere , and I can only hope that this is not typical behaviour in his group .
I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs García Arias , though I have to say that I cannot agree with everything which her report contains .
On the one hand , she says that she has great confidence in the Commission 's competition policy , but on the other she is less than enthusiastic about its policy towards firms with exclusive rights and its liberalization policy .
On the subject of liberalization , Mrs García Arias insists that the quality and cost of a service should be firmly fixed .
My group is also in favour of having a package of services to be offered to people , but fixing them as firmly as Mrs García Arias wishes would simply undermine the whole principle of competition .
Look at the situation in Sweden , or in my own country , the Netherlands .
As soon as competition appeared on the mobile telephone market , the price of the service fell , availability increased , and there was a noticeable improvement in quality .
This is exactly what Mrs García Arias wants .
I therefore think that the definition given in my amendment is a much more accurate reflection of how the liberalization policy is working in practice .
Finally , there are the changes to Article 90 .
I think the House needs to take a very clear view of this .
If we look at the text of Article 90 more closely , it refers directly to Articles 85 and 86 and prohibits Member States and businesses from occupying dominant positions , from charging consumers excessively high prices , from applying unfair conditions in contracts with other trading parties , and so on .
So why should the PSE Group want to change Article 90 ?
I would ask them to reconsider whether they are right to oppose my group 's amendment .
Mr President , the Secchi report on the single market shows us how far we have come , but also how far we have got to go in achieving a truly efficient single market working for Europe 's citizens .
Here we are in 1996 , but 1992 's single market still has not arrived .
The four freedoms are still unliberated and we are the losers for it .
Who is to blame ?
Certainly the Member States who are the culprits in the one third of the 128 infringement procedures initiated by Commissioner Monti this year .
Half of the governments accused of failing to apply EU law have not replied to Mr Monti 's letters six months after they were despatched .
The Commission , too , must take some blame .
The courage and the commitment shown in applying Community competition policy is diluted when it comes to the single market .
And who loses out ?
Small businesses for certain .
There is a tourist firm in the railway town of Crewe in my Euro-constituency which is getting cheesed-off with the cross-border operations in France , because of the threat of double taxation , and the confession that progress is still grounded in the sensitive area of border checks on individuals is bad news for Europe 's tourism industry and its tourists .
When are we going to stop frisking free citizens at our frontiers ?
Last week I found it easier to enter non-EU Slovenia with my parliamentary laissez-passer than to escape from British jurisdiction where such checks are generally effected in triplicate .
With the absence of Europol , unsavoury citizens of the EU , like big-time criminals , child pornographers , paedophiles and drug barons , seem to have the liberty to cruise as pirates and buccaneers throughout the single European market .
Especially vulnerable are children for whom the single market should offer future hope and prosperity , not present peril and danger .
All this is the more regrettable given the first signs of success associated with the single market .
I refer to Commissioner Monti 's 36 market reports detailing the sources of Europe 's 900 , 000 new jobs , which are directly attributable to Europe 's noble exercise of implementing a magic market .
We need to rekindle the Delors spirit of 1992 and ensure by the end of the century that a true single market is done and dusted .
In this regard I welcome the determination of the UK 's PM-in-waiting - Tony Blair - to complete the single market during the forthcoming British presidency .
Mr President , I am going to refer to the Hautala report on relocation .
From the point of view of regional policy , we have studied this report very closely and it must be recognised that it does have positive parts on which we congratulate Mrs Hautala .
But we have also come across some problems and , therefore , wish certain points to be improved in the debate at the Committee on Regional Policy .
Certainly , something has been done but not enough for us to accept the report in full .
This report has certain lacunae and it also deviates from the original concepts ; we are afraid that this might be an obstacle to foreign industrial investors intending to invest in any European Union country .
Although we have found no convincing justification for the fact that this proposal contains nothing about the proper use of Structural Funds to make economic cooperation between the European regions possible .
Furthermore , in paragraph 15 there is a vitriolic criticism of the Funds , a claim based on isolated examples that lack of coordination is widespread , exaggerating the counter-productive effects of the Structural Funds .
This generalisation could not be further from the truth .
Because of this , we have certain reservations about accepting this report as a whole .
Mr President , to illustrate the situation in graphic detail , I can tell you about 600 workers in Ballyfermot in Dublin who were employed in the Semperit Plant , a subsidiary of Continental AG , one of the largest employers in this deprived area of Dublin .
Two months ago employees were given notice that the plant would close this December .
I have seen documents from the works council that suggest that production will be moved to India .
Also there is a suggestion that Continental AG is putting obstacles in the way of selling the plant to another company or to a management / workers buy-out .
Negotiations are still going on and hopefully they will be successful , but other plants in Scotland , Belgium and Austria are at risk .
This is a graphic illustration .
I believe we must now decide as a matter of urgency to put procedures in place to ensure that industries cannot move simply to take advantage of less stringent controls and , if they do move , that they do not adopt anticompetitive practices to stop somebody else taking their place .
I wish to make a personal statement , pursuant to Rule 108 .
I would simply point out to Mr van Velzen that although some Liberals may occasionally be absent from the Chamber , liberalism is on the increase in our country and in some of our neighbours , which is more than can be said for Christian Democracy .
Our party is also the biggest party in our country .
Mr President , high levels of employment , economic and social stability , competitiveness of the industrial sector , sustainable development and a fair distribution of products : these are the objectives that a Community policy of restructuring and industrial dislocation should be pursuing .
Industrial dislocation currently , however , represents a complex problem which may have two implications : a positive implication , where it creates jobs in specific sectors and a negative implication where it penalizes employment in those regions in which there is no possibility of relocation .
We should , of course , be able to limit the negative effects , were we to succeed in combining a twofold action plan impacting on both the internal and the external aspects of the Union .
At internal Community level , what matters is to give priority to the objective of lasting and sustainable development and take the measures appropriate to discourage the kind of currency speculation triggered by economic circumstances .
We are of the view that proper social and fiscal harmonization which , among other things , limits the granting of any exemptions , could prevent all forms of fiscal or social protectionism . We are similarly persuaded that Community support , that takes the form of the Structural Funds , should include a safeguard clause , closely bound up with a specific guaranteed long-term commitment , specifically in order to protect existing jobs , create employment guarantees and guarantee the possibility of localized development .
It is currently a matter of regret to us that the Hautala report has not provided the opportunity for real coordination of Community policies on competition , industrial policy , trade and the internal market .
It is therefore our hope , as the social arm of the right , that in its external activities the Union will stress the absolute need to include social clauses in trade agreements , based on the rules provided for by the International Labour Organization , in relation to both trade and investment , and that these will in the end serve to safeguard freedom of association , the minimum working age , non-discrimination and the banning of forced labour .
Mr President , a debate of this kind is clearly also a debate on economic policy - and economic policy is , of course , marked by the different attitudes of the various political parties .
However , I should like to draw the honourable Members ' attention to the Treaty of Rome - because in Rome , a decision was taken whose consequences as regards this important question , and also as regards globalization , we must live with , and which I believe was the only possible decision .
Allow me to explain .
If different markets are to become integrated , if different social systems wish to enter into competition with one another in important areas , then we need rules .
In other words , if we assume that those different social systems - whether socialist , liberal or otherwise - will not harmonize overnight , but will retain their different political complexions , whilst wishing to create a common market , then we need rules to prevent that competition from becoming unfair .
That is precisely the problem with the internal market , and it is precisely the problem with globalization .
Therein also lies the problem of relocation and similar matters that we are addressing in this forum , including unemployment : how can economic strength and competitiveness be maintained ? Or - if they have been lost - how they can be regained ?
They can only be regained through competition .
Competitiveness presupposes competition .
Of course , it is also possible to imagine that a public service can exist and provide certain services without operating with optimum efficiency .
That is possible .
Many postal services of the traditional kind - i.e. public monopolies - have only survived at all because their monopoly position has never been threatened .
They have offered a certain level of services , but not the best .
Here too , the Treaty of Rome pronounced a judgment of Solomon .
It did not decide in favour of or against public undertakings .
It is matter of complete indifference to the Treaty of Rome whether an undertaking is privately or publicly run .
It made only one provision : if an undertaking is publicly run , then its conduct must be judged on the basis of Article 90 , since otherwise the balance of power that arises naturally between private undertakings in competition with one another will not exist .
A public monopoly can simply do more than a private undertaking which is in competition with others .
So there is a logical connection between Articles 85 , 86 and 90 - and my colleague , Mr Van Miert , will no doubt say something in detail about this - and the decision to foster competition .
Applying this to the global system , we must first of all ask the simple question : can we divorce ourselves from what is going on around us ?
Can we , so to speak , create an independent and original political system ?
Our Swedish colleague said that it should be left up to the people of Sweden to decide for themselves which system they wanted and how much in taxes they wished to pay for it .
In this way , the whole Union could say : ' Leave it up to us to decide what we wish to do and whether we wish to have more or less competition ; we are going to divorce ourselves from this global economic and political system ! '
This question is entirely rhetorical .
We all know that .
We cannot do this .
So what else can we do ?
We must seek to ensure that the same rules that we have laid down for the internal market are increasingly introduced for the global market : and those are the rules of competition !
There are no other rules with which it is possible to organize such coexistence .
Naturally , there are limits to competition , and I endorse Mr Rapkay 's comment that competition is not an end in itself .
That is right !
Competition is an instrument - a set of tools , if you like .
But it has always led to the creation of more jobs than any other method .
If we really wish to take serious action , therefore , if we no longer wish to confine ourselves to rhetoric - there are 18 million unemployed people , unemployment is our number one priority , and we shall do everything necessary to combat it - if that is meant in earnest , then we must introduce what we recently proposed : namely , benchmarking . And we shall be discussing this further in the context of our debates on industrial policy .
Let us make some comparisons , and begin by looking at different companies .
What , for example , are company employment policies like at Ford in Cologne , or at VW in Wolfsburg , in comparison with those of other car manufacturers ?
If , for example , both companies have agreed with their workforce to introduce flexible working hours within the framework of rules on maximum working time , is that something that has been forced on employees ?
In the summer or spring , when orders are larger , employees can work more than the normal daily working hours .
The extra hours they work are recorded in a working time account , and they receive no overtime pay .
In the winter , when orders decline , this credit on their working time account allows them to work fewer hours .
This works !
The result is that the workers ' jobs have become more secure , whilst the companies have remained competitive , although wage levels are substantially higher than in India or elsewhere .
I have always maintained , and I repeat , that cost levels alone , especially wage levels , are not the decisive factor in the choice of an investment location .
An undertaking will go where it can operate most productively , and if it is flexible enough , it will be able to absorb a certain wage level in the organization of its work .
The debate on the call for lower wages is a spurious one , but the debate on flexibility is very important .
And some of the proposals you are making here are contrary not only to the spirit , but also to the practice of flexibility !
I shall now take the example of a small undertaking , also in relation to the concept of benchmarking . Let us take the example of a man who wishes to set up a business .
By way of outsourcing , a large car manufacturer decides that it no longer wishes to make the lights or some other part of its vehicles itself .
The man in our example has gained some previous knowledge in this field at university , and says to himself that he could pursue this activity .
He has inherited a house , which he sells for DM 1 million .
Then perhaps he has a grandmother who gives him another DM 500 000 .
So he has DM 1.5 million .
Then he approaches a bank , and perhaps he says to his associates : ' If you can also get some money together , then perhaps we can raise some DM 10-20 million and start a business ' .
Then the following stipulation is imposed on our entrepreneur : ' You can invest here , but you must never leave this location , otherwise you will have to pay a penalty tax or compensation of X % of wages ! '
Leaving aside ideology , I ask you to put yourself in the position of this man or woman , these people who wish to set up this business .
Where will they go ?
They will not go somewhere where they have to deal with such regulations .
Or let us take the example of the pharmaceutical industry ...
Dear Mr Caudron , it is perhaps far too pragmatic , but it is not ideology ...
( Interruption by Mr Caudron : ' it 's demagoguery ' )
( DE ) I shall take Mr Watson 's example of the pharmaceutical industry .
No , I shall take another example ; I shall just take the example of benchmarking .
Over the last four years , we have lost three important research laboratories to the United States - not to a developing country , not to a country whose wages are far lower than ours !
Why ?
Because our regulations just do not provide more room for manoeuvre in the field of biotechnology or similar areas , because they are simply too cumbersome and onerous for undertakings .
If such undertakings - in this case , it is a question of larger firms - have the option of moving to a country in which they can operate , in which their staff do not have to seek approval for everything they do , then they will do so .
Is it any wonder ?
That cannot possibly surprise anyone .
I often ask myself whether we seriously wish to tackle the problem of unemployment , or if we simply wish to moan about it and constantly put off what we can do .
Benchmarking also applies to different systems , and national systems sometimes prove to be flexible .
In Germany , for example , it is now permitted to bake bread rolls on a Sunday morning .
Previously , it was not .
To read the reports in the German press , you would think a revolution had broken out in Germany , such is their surprise at the fact that so many people wish to have bread rolls on a Sunday and think it is wonderful that they can get them !
Anyone who knows how dull Sundays are , and that a warm bread roll for breakfast is perhaps some people 's only pleasure on that day , will shake their head and wonder where these people live who prohibited bakers , or other people who can bake , from producing something for which there was a public demand .
We go so far that we prevent ourselves from doing what we actually could do , and then we wonder why there are so many unemployed people .
I do not understand it !
Let me take the example of Mr Donnelly 's region .
Anyone who really wishes to learn how unemployment can be tackled should go to the Newcastle area .
There , everyone - industry , the unions , municipal organizations , local authorities and a university which we helped to build - has got together .
There , they do not moan about the distribution of working hours or the like , but roll up their sleeves and set to work . And this is a region which has suffered every crisis that the Union has ever known , in the steel , shipbuilding , textile , coal and fishing industries !
It has put all those crises behind it , and it now has the highest growth rates in the Union .
It is a region where people can actually work , because nobody prevents them from doing so !
Shall I tell you why a large undertaking from another Member State has moved to this region and invested billions in a project that will initially create 3000 jobs and subsequently many more ?
I went there and asked the reason .
You should do so too !
Go to places where undertakings from other Member States locate .
Ask them why they moved to that country .
I did , and the answer was : ' Certainly , wages are lower .
Ultimately , however , that was not the decisive factor .
The decisive factor was that we were told within three weeks that we could build here , whereas in our home country we should have had to wait at least six to eight weeks for that , and in practice over a year . '
What , then , is competitive about such public decisions ?
Finally , I shall take the example of a Member State which is not entirely unfamiliar to Mr Caudron , thereby referring to the debate on public services .
A country can freely decide - in the way described by our Swedish colleague - to run a public service as a public monopoly undertaking , and spend a great deal of money on it .
It can maintain other public undertakings in areas in which the idea of a public service is not as common as in the postal sector , for example , where there is a public service tradition .
In a country which has a state airline , a state railway , and one or more state banks , all these undertakings will constitute a considerable drain on tax revenue , because of their inefficiency .
A great deal of money which could well be spent on more sensible things - research and development , for example - has to be poured into these businesses .
They are black holes , constantly swallowing up money which has to be collected from taxpayers .
A country can do that .
I do not dispute that every country has a right to do that !
Here too , however , the internal market provides for something very sensible : competition between systems .
So there is not only benchmarking of the individual companies that must prove themselves in the market-place .
There is also the benchmarking of systems .
Ladies and gentlemen , the mystery of relocation is explained by the fact that the benchmarking of systems is leading companies to vote with their feet .
Anyone who cannot see that is living in a dream world !
I want us to live in a world in which we really do something to bring down this high level of unemployment at long last , because the improvement in the economic situation over the next few years will not be enough , unless we summon up the strength to throw off the chains we have forged for ourselves : too much regulation ; the obstruction of investment ; and , in particular , the complication of the lives of small and medium-sized enterprises . If we do not summon up that strength , we shall never be able to combat unemployment !
I should like to begin by saying how pleased I am that we have had this combined debate , which has attempted to consider the problems of competition , economic development , employment and the single market from different angles , and to draw certain conclusions about them .
I should like to thank the chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , who I know has expressed concern about these issues in the past , and everyone else who worked with him in organizing this debate .
I should also like to thank the three rapporteurs , Mrs García Arias and Mr Rapkay , who have dealt with issues directly under my own portfolio , and Mr Kuckelkorn , whose report I was happy to take over from my colleague Mr de Silguy today .
Their reports are generally very positive , although they do make a few comments and criticisms here and there , which is perfectly right and proper , and they are also of a very high quality , which I think provides an excellent foundation for a good debate .

Since there is only a limited amount of time available and Commissioner Monti has fortunately been able to join us , I should like to run fairly rapidly through a number of points that were raised during the debate , so forgive me if my answers seem rather brief .
On the subject of Mrs García Arias ' report , I should like to say once again how pleased I am that there is basically such broad agreement between the Commission and large sections of the European Parliament on competition policy .
There is bound to be some criticism of certain aspects , of course , but generally speaking there is a broad degree of consensus , probably also because we are in such regular contact with each other .
We have a special agreement with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy to hold full and frank discussions on a regular basis on the various issues and problems which crop up in this area .
I am delighted that we are able to do this , and that after a somewhat lengthy debate , the committee has come round to the position which the Commission adopted a while ago , namely that we do not need another separate agency in the European Union to deal with certain aspects of competition policy , and that it makes far more sense to leave this policy in the hands of the Commission , where it should be .
It is a policy in which others are rooted and which lies at the very heart of our industrial policy , or whatever you may wish to call it .
When a sector is liberalized , one of the aims , of course , is to improve competition , but there are also other aspects which should not be forgotten , for instance social , environmental and safety concerns , and so on .
We are therefore trying to use competition policy as a key instrument , but at the same time to incorporate the necessary balances into the policy .
This is why we need a proper policy , rather than just an agency which simply looks up the rules and tells us what to do .
There is more to it than that .
It is a policy in its own right , and I am grateful to Parliament for supporting the Commission on this , because I think it is helpful , and indeed only right and proper , that Parliament should be able to exercise political control over policy issues .
I should now like to move on to the subject of public services and Article 90 , because I know that Parliament quite rightly sees this as a very sensitive issue .
You know what the Commission 's position is .
Our own experience and the document which we approved a few weeks ago would seem to indicate that Article 90 is being applied in a balanced way .
If this is the case , I do not see any real reason to change it , and I therefore share the concern expressed by some honourable Members during the debate that if we amend the article , the balance will be broken .
So although I am aware of how sensitive this issue is for Parliament and how opinions are divided both in the House and in the Commission , I would urge the House to support the Commission 's view , based on past experience , that Article 90 should not be amended , but instead - and I am addressing this remark to Mr Konrad in particular - that we should adopt an open-minded and positive attitude and include a reference in Article 3 which consolidates , as it were , the balanced approach which the Commission has adopted up to now .
Yes , Mr Konrad , I know that you are very concerned about Article 3 , but I am not , and nor is the Commission .
We think it would be a very good idea to include this in Article 3 . However , I would again urge Parliament to think carefully before deciding that Article 90 needs to be amended , because the Commission at least does not agree with this .
I would also point out that the Commission communication has not yet said what is to become of Article 90 , and the continuing IGC talks could always consider whether it should be made into some kind of charter .
As an idea , this is still open to discussion , and the Commission has not delivered an opinion on it .
But for the time being , let us think about Article 3 and perhaps consider what to do about the Commission communication , but leave Article 90 as it is .
I would also point out , by the way , that in its policy on telecommunications , say , or in other sectors such as the postal service , for which Mr Bangemann is mainly responsible since it involves a traditional Article A proposal , the Commission has , on mature reflection , decided against applying Article 90 , partly because Parliament urged us not to do so .
We complied with that request , and this is why we are now following the normal procedure .
At the same time , however , I would point out that our main concern in every sector , even when we are trying to introduce competition , is to ensure that universal services are guaranteed where necessary , and that consideration is also given to social issues .
This is why it is a balanced policy .
All of this has led me to conclude that the Commission communication and any reports on it by the various committees could warrant another major debate in Parliament , enabling us to reach further agreement on the issues involved .
Turning now to Mr Rapkay , I should like to congratulate him once again on producing an excellent report and for supporting the Commission 's position .
There can be no question about this , it is an objective statement of fact .
However , I have to tell you today - and the Council meeting is on Thursday next week - that our proposals concerning the thresholds , which Parliament supports , are unfortunately unlikely to secure the necessary majority , since many of the larger Member States are against them .
Most of the small or smaller Member States support the Commission , and if it were up to them , we should be able to reach agreement , but most of the larger countries are opposed .
I do not wish to go into the reasons for this , because they are somewhat contradictory , but I regret to say that the chances are very slim . However , I shall go along on Thursday and fight my corner with Parliament 's support , but it is extremely unlikely that the Council of Ministers will follow our lead .
The prospects are much better as regards the issue of when mergers are to be notified in various countries .
The Council appears to be much more willing to find a solution here , perhaps not exactly the one we have proposed , but at least something useful should come out of it .
We shall then refer it back to Parliament again , of course , as we shall do if there has to be a new proposal on thresholds .
We have a clear agreement on this which the Commission intends to keep to .
I hope I have left the House in no doubt on this point .
For the rest , I hope we can still achieve some results , and I shall give you an example of just how important it is that we should do so .
As you know , there is an important merger in the pipeline between BT and MCI .
We are currently still discussing whether this really comes under the scope of the merger regulation , since it all has to do with MCI 's turnover within the European Union and the two-thirds rule .
It seems likely that the Commission will have to look into this case after all , but I know from similar instances that it is not always obvious whether the merger regulation should be applied .
So you can see that something really needs to be done here , and you are quite right , Mr Rapkay , to say that we should make changes where we can . As a number of speakers mentioned , we have not proposed any changes to the two-thirds rule because we know there is not the remotest possibility of securing a majority in favour in the Council .
But I admit that it is something we are all going to have to think about in future and perhaps even introduce measures on .
Once again , Mr Rapkay , I should like to thank you for your report and Parliament for its support .
Moving on to Mr Kuckelkorn 's report , I should also like to congratulate him once again .
This was an initiative from Parliament which the Commission was grateful to take over , and we have done our best to try to convince the Council that it is absolutely vital for small and medium-sized firms and will help to combat unemployment .
Unfortunately , the Council made it clear again yesterday that however much we might be attracted to ELISE , there are a number of ministers who refuse to succumb to her charms , and it therefore seems that her chances are , sadly , very slim .
But Parliament supports the Commission , and Mr de Silguy and his colleagues have said that they will try to defend the proposal and salvage certain aspects of it at least .
It is just unfortunate that there is such opposition in the Council of Ministers .
Ladies and gentlemen , I do not have much more time , but there were a number of specific points raised that I should like to deal with .
Mr Janssen van Raay mentioned football , but since he is not here , I think I shall have to talk to him privately about it .
Mr Chanterie is also not here , otherwise we could have talked further about subsidies and relocation .
I shall have to have a word with him privately too .
Mr Donnelly raised the issue of the car distribution regime which , I have to agree , does not entirely fit in with the normal rules on competition .
You know that the current rules are much more flexible than they were previously and are limited to a shorter period , after which we can consider whether they are still necessary .
I cannot go into this in detail today , but you can see that while we are moving towards greater competition in this sector too , we still think there is good reason to keep the special rules on car and lorry distribution in place for the time being .
Mrs Riis-Jørgensen , I know that you have been campaigning for greater transparency in cases of state aid , and you know that at Parliament 's insistence we are now , I hope , to have a major debate next Thursday in the Council of Ministers , where the Commission and the Irish presidency , to whom I should like to pay tribute , have tabled a resolution on transparency , ways of enabling the Commission to reduce the huge increase in the number of cases of state aid , and so on .
We shall be considering the issues of greater transparency and security for competitors , and I hope that the Council will respond positively to this initiative from the Commission and Parliament , so that we can put forward specific proposals which Parliament will , of course , also have the chance to discuss .
Let us agree now that if the Commission thinks , on the basis of this debate in the Council , that there is a good chance of a favourable outcome , then we shall arrange to hold detailed talks here in Parliament and in the appropriate committee .
I shall end my comments there , although Mrs Randzio-Plath , who has also left the Chamber , did raise an interesting point about how far state aid can be provided in the form of reduced taxes and social security contributions .
I can assure her and other honourable Members that the Commission naturally also looks at this , and can also rule against state aid in this form if necessary .
Someone else brought up the subject of the textile sector in France : of course , the de minimis rule applies here , and we have to keep to it .
If the aid does not exceed the de minimis level , then there is no reason why the Commission should intervene , or why it should even be notified .
If it does exceed this level , even via social security , as was the case in the footwear sector in Italy , or with the Maribel operation in Belgium for exporters , or in the textile sector in France , then the Commission is required to intervene , because it is a case of state aid - in the form of reduced social security contributions or reduced taxes - causing distortion of competition .
This is also an area which comes under our responsibility .
I shall stop there , ladies and gentlemen .
I must apologize for taking up too much time , and I would not wish to prevent Commissioner Monti from replying to a number of relevant questions and points that have been put to him .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by thanking the rapporteurs and Mr Secchi in particular for his report on the single market , which I found to be of the highest quality and very useful to the Commission when it comes to further directing the process of constructing the single market .
The Commission welcomes the recognition given in the report to a fresh impetus , dating back to 1995 , and the reference to the main initiatives taken .
It is also very useful to have identified the gaps in the ' great deal ' that remains to be done if the single market is genuinely to function properly .
The study which the Commission has recently published on the impact of the single market is of great encouragement to us to continue to pursue the measures needed to bring that market genuinely into being , because it shows that where the single market has been achieved , we are actually seeing results .
The Commission study has also shown that , even in years that have been very difficult for the European economy , there has been a single market effect that has impacted on the Community 's gross domestic product - roughly 1.5 per cent per annum in increased production - and the creation of jobs - estimated at 900 , 000 units .
Furthermore , and this is something I wish to stress , it has been estimated that , because of the greater competition and openness brought about by the single market , inflation in the countries of Europe is one or one-and-a-half percentage points per annum lower than would otherwise be the case : that , then , clearly , gives Europe 's economy scope on the supply side .
Mr Donnelly and Mr von Wogau mentioned the need for greater coordination between policies and documentation on industry , competition and the single market .
Since the two colleagues who spoke before me did not make specific mention of that request , I wish to say that we have very much taken into account what was said last year , on this same occasion , in the House . It actually seems to us that there is substantial consistency between the three sectors in terms of the policy decisions taken daily .
What is more , those three aspects were taken into account in the impact analysis : for example , the study on the effects of the single market takes those three elements fully into account .
Finally , it seems to me that this joint debate also furnishes a welcome opportunity for further stressing the way in which the three complement each other .
The Secchi report identifies the ' great deal ' that remains to be done and I would say that we can summarize in three points the main gaps that have to be filled before we achieve a single market that meets our expectations .
The three points that we can consider to be the main shortcomings concern actual application , that is to say enforcement , taxation and citizens .
As far as actual application - enforcement - is concerned , and the Commission considers this to be its number one priority in regard to the common market , there are a number of things that can be done within the current framework and others which in fact require changes to the institutional framework itself .
We are , I believe , already doing what can be done within the current institutional framework .
In the area of the single market alone , we have this year already instituted 195 cases of infringement proceedings against Member States , and 11 cases have already been referred to the Court of Justice .
We have decided to improve the infringement procedures to make them swifter and more transparent , and the same applies to management of the infringement procedure within the Commission .
I should like to say in that connection to Mrs Peijs who made the long-standing request for a help desk , that I too consider that to be an important point in improving the infringement procedure .
I can say to you , Mrs Peijs , that this idea of yours that we have actually been speaking about is being given specific follow-up to the extent that - and I mention this because it may be of interest not just to Mrs Peijs but more generally - we are seeking to make available to citizens , to businesses and to professional organizations , an organized source of information on the procedures for the application of the single market rules .
It is my intention to put this idea into practice in a straightforward manner .
The main aspects are as follows : we are setting up with the Commission services a telephone line with an ad hoc number , initially this will not be a freephone number ; the people providing the service will be able to provide immediate information on how infringement proceedings are being processed by the Commission and on how it is possible to alert the Commission to possible breaches of single market rules ; furthermore , for more detailed information on a particular dossier , those providing the telephone service will direct interested parties to the appropriate administrative units .
The aim is clearly to introduce greater transparency , more information and greater simplicity .
If you will allow me , Mrs Peijs , I offer it to you as a Christmas gift because it will be in operation before Christmas ; later , certainly , than you and I should have liked , but it will , at any rate , very soon be operational .
Mr Watson mentioned a point that links up with enforcement : he regretted the fact that there was some difficulty , particularly for small and medium-sized businesses , in gaining access to justice .

I do not think that Mr Watson is wrong there : it is less easy for small and medium-sized businesses , or at least more costly for them , to enforce their rights in law .
The action we have taken to prevent this problem is based on three main approaches : firstly , to simplify and accelerate the administrative procedures governing infringements ; secondly , measures to train national judges so that they apply Community law more frequently and more accurately ; and , thirdly , the forthcoming adoption by the Commission of an appropriate programme , called the Schuman programme .
But as I said a few moments ago , I do not know whether the current institutional framework is sufficient to secure enforcement commensurate with the expectations of the single market .
It has been pointed out that in the area of competition and state aids , enforcement is extremely effective and , of course , I too take that view .
I am the first to admit that in the area of the single market it is less effective , even though I have described the measures that we are taking .
And why is this so ?
Because , while in the case of competition and state aids the Commission is alerted of any breach of the rules and is able to act before the damage has been done - I am to some extent simplifying matters here , but the subject is familiar to you - when it comes to the single market all that it is able to do is to prosecute such violations , by opening infringement proceedings and , finally , referring the matter to the Court of Justice - but all of that takes time .
I therefore appreciated the references in the Secchi report to the possibility that , in the context of the Intergovernmental Conference , ways of securing more rapid enforcement will be studied and compared .
In other words , we are doing all that we can - and we can certainly do better - but , in the current institutional framework , it is not , unfortunately , possible to achieve enforcement as effective as it is in the case of competition and state aids .
The second major gap underlined in the report , and also by a number of honourable Members who have spoken during the debate , concerns taxation .
I very much welcome the fact that the House is taking a robust line on the distortions affecting the single market as a result of inadequate fiscal harmonization .
Here too , as in the case of enforcement , there are a number of things that can be done under the current system and others that require adjustments .
Within the current system , we are making a considerable effort to persuade the finance ministers that it is in the interests of the Member States themselves that there should be better coordination .
I welcome the amendments tabled by Mr Secchi to his own report and can say that , yesterday , the Ecofin Council gave a positive reception to the Commission reports on the development of the taxation system , referred to in the Secchi amendment , and brought that document to the attention of the Dublin European Council with particular reference to issues of fiscal competition and the need to complete the internal market in fiscal terms .

Moving on finally to the third gap - which I shall mention more briefly but not because it is any less important , and it is something that it is appropriate to discuss in the European Parliament - namely , the fact that the single market is not close enough to citizens .
You know how important this issue is to me and to the House . We cannot expect citizens to lend their support to the continuing construction of Europe if have no clear picture of Europe or of the single market which , though they do not realize it , is working to their advantage .
The two main measures which the Commission , as you are aware , is taking , are : finally to secure the fourth - although it ought in fact to have been the first , as rightly criticized in the Secchi report - freedom of movement , that is to say the free movement of persons : a package of proposals to secure the dismantling of internal frontier controls within a security framework , and the Commission welcomes the fact that Parliament recently largely supported those proposals .
Secondly , making available to citizens appropriate information on what the single market can do for them : I thinking specifically here of the ' Citizens First ' information campaign - and in that connection I must thank the House for the support and encouragement it has given to that initiative . The system that will be set in place on 29 November of this year and that will be important in making Europe 's citizens aware of the rights that they have under the single market , how they can actually exercise those rights and where and how to protest when those rights are impeded .
I think that I can end there , although I realize - and apologize for this - that I have certainly not been able to deal with all the points in this very valuable report , covering a very important field .
I wish again to thank the rapporteur and all of those who have spoken , because what they have said provides the Commission with a genuine steer and valuable support .
These are all issues , moreover , on which cooperation with Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy but also with the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizen 's Rights and the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs has and will , I hope , enable us to make fairly rapid progress .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time to the Commission ( B4-1218 / 96 )
Mr President , on a point of order .
Could you explain the urgency of INTERNET , nickelcadmium batteries and Europartenariat in Wales which makes you take those three questions first ?
Mr Wijsenbeek , I cannot do so .
That is the prerogative of the presidency and it , in its wisdom , has decided that those are the only three matters of urgency .
As the author is not present , Question No 25 lapses .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I wonder whether I could take over Mr Collins ' question , because I have an interest in this matter ?
You cannot , I am afraid .
The only way you could have done so would have been if there had been a written application prior to starting Question Time .
I fully sympathize with your feelings and others who wanted to ask supplementaries on this very important matter .
But , since Mr Collins has not turned up , there is nothing we can do about it .
Question No 26 by Ivar Virgin ( H-0864 / 96 )
Subject : Nickel-cadmium batteries
Cadmium , which is found in nickel-cadmium batteries , is a highly toxic heavy metal that accumulates in the liver and kidneys and may cause lung cancer .
In accordance with the substitution principle , environmentally harmful products are to be replaced by existing environment-friendly alternatives .
Nickel-metal hydrid batteries are a type of battery already used in Sweden .
Is the Commission planning to take action to speed up the changeover from nickel-cadmium batteries to nickel-metal hydrid batteries ?
If so , will it propose that Member States avail themselves of economic instruments to ensure that such a changeover takes place ?
Mr President , thank you for this question about what the question itself described as a ' highly toxic heavy metal ' , and the health risk related to it .
There is an EC directive on batteries , namely directive 91 / 157 , which lays down a limit for the content of heavy metals in batteries .
As this pertinent question indicates , care needs to be taken with the use of heavy metals in batteries .
I can report that the Commission is giving consideration to the need to accelerate the directive because , like the questioner , we are aware of the problems this issue raises .
The inquiries being carried out are also looking into the question of promoting the use of nickel-metal hybrid batteries .
It is still too early for me to report on the findings of these inquiries , but I would stress that the Commission is aware of the problem which the honourable Member has raised .
With regard to economic resources I would say that Member States have a free hand in their use within the framework of the Treaty , and I would refer you to Articles 30 , 36 and 95 .
As I said at the beginning , the Commission fully shares the questioner 's concern , which is why we are engaged in inquiries into whether to make changes to the battery directive so that we can ensure that other Member States see a development along the lines of what the questioner has described as being the case in Sweden .
As things stand at the moment I am unable to say how we will achieve a limitation of the use of cadmium .
But I do take heart at the favourable results that are being achieved in Sweden .
Mr President , I should like to ask the Commissioner whether she regards the regulation of nickel-cadmium batteries as more important than the regulation of the Internet , in particular , control of child pornography which is currently accessible on the Internet .
Commissioner , do you want to answer that ?
I think that was an unfair way of Mr Truscott getting his first question across .
To be honest , I believe the President answered that question a moment ago when a question was raised concerning procedure .
As is fitting for a member of the Commission , I have answered the question which Parliament asked , and it is Parliament which decides what is ' urgent ' .
As the author is not present , Question No 27 lapses .
I am afraid the discipline of our Members is excruciating today .
Mrs Cresson , I give you my full apologies .
Mr President , the Commission is well aware of the importance of the public health problem which diabetes represents , particularly in an ageing population such as the population of Europe today .
It is also entirely aware of the formidable progress , for people suffering from this disease , that the introduction of the therapeutic use of insulin represented when it was discovered 75 years ago .
It is not unaware of the positive spin-offs of research into diabetes in several fields or of the interest presented by this research in understanding and treating other chronic diseases .
Research into diabetes thus benefits from a great deal of attention in research programmes in the Union .
One thread of the Biomed research programme , of the fourth framework programme , is devoted to it explicitly .
Within this framework , nine research projects have been launched which cover both the epidemiological aspects and clinical research .
Furthermore , the genetic aspects of diabetes are studied in the part of the programme dedicated to research into the human genome , and , as you know , research into the human genome has recently made some important developments , and this is one of the success stories of European research .
Because of both its importance and its interest , research into diabetes is set to continue as the subject of sustained attention in the fifth framework programme of research and technological development which we are currently in the process of getting under way .
But the fight against diabetes also involves prevention .
The prevention of diabetes by the adaptation of one 's lifestyle and diet in particular has been registered as one of the themes of the educational , training and health promotion activities which are carried out within the scope of the European Union 's public health policy .
Since the financial resources made available for this policy are fairly limited , action for prevention remains modest in comparison with requirements .
It would therefore be very useful if we could sensitise Member States to the importance of a more sustained effort in this area .
I would like to thank in every instance the honourable Members who have drawn the attention of the Commission to this problem and I will certainly take account of these concerns in the preparation for the fifth framework programme of research .
Thank you very much for the answer , Mrs Cresson .
It is pleasing to hear that you are aware of the problem of diabetes .
I must , however , also add that there is very little about this in the various programmes , particularly in the fourth framework programme .
Perhaps we should still concentrate upon the fifth framework programme , on which we are now fully occupied .
There is very little mention in it of diabetes and the budget allocations which are proposed are very small .
I would very much like to draw your attention to this , and for you to devote far more energy in promoting these questions , since diabetes demands so much .
If the Commission were to take this seriously , the costs of medical care could likewise be reduced in the future .
Mr Holm , you are absolutely right , except for the fact , as I have just said , that the fifth framework programme is only at the drawing board ; some great presentations have been given but , as you know , the matter will require some extremely in-depth work and - it should be remembered - decisions relating to the priorities of framework programmes are still made by the unanimous vote of the Member States .
Why are there 21 priorities in the fourth framework programme ?
As a result - probably one of the worse results - of this unanimous vote .
I hope therefore that the Intergovernmental Conference , which is currently under way , will result in a qualified majority vote and that , in the cases which appear to be most important for the large majority of Member States , we are thereby able to arrive at some sensible decisions .
On the subject of these large presentations for the fifth framework programme , we intend to stress elements relating to human health , prevention , risks to people whether they relate to environmental deterioration or diet , of which the news , currently , is unfortunately giving us a particularly burning example .
We would therefore like to hinge the fifth framework programme on matters affecting individuals , health , and citizens .
As regards diabetes , there is naturally not a great deal I can tell you today ; we are much too far upstream for me to be able to give you more precise indications .
But in any case it is an area which manifestly relates to health , to the demographic phenomenon of the ageing of the population , and also to prevention .
I dare to believe that you can be reassured by this .
We can never take the place of the politics of Member States since our budget only represents 4 % of the total sum dedicated to research by the Member States .
We can only encourage .
This encouragement is present in the field of research ; it is also present in the fields of education and prevention .
You can be assured that this concern will be given consideration .
Many of us in the European Union are very grateful for the work of the Canadians , Banting and Best , in discovering insulin some 75 years ago .
I would point out to Mrs Cresson that there are some 10 million known diabetics in the European Union but we believe there are 10 million others whose symptoms are not recognized .
If we catch them early and apply the appropriate health measures , we can make an enormous saving on the health care budgets of the fifteen Member States in which this currently accounts for 8 % .
That is a major reason for concentrating in the fifth framework programme on this area
Although I am pleased to hear the Commissioner 's words now , it is disappointing that the fourth framework programme did not identify diabetes as a major problem .
It has been declared by the World Health Organization as having the potential of a major epidemic because it is a disease of prosperity , unfortunately .
We must do everything we can .
Please ensure in the fifth framework programme that a way is found to help research into diabetes .
I must go back to your remark earlier , Mr President , on a point of order .
One of the reasons why there is absence here is that I , myself , for example , have had to come away from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy where one on my own reports is now being voted upon because I have prioritized diabetes over stage III of economic and monetary union .
It is quite mad for this Parliament to be having Parliamentary sessions on important questions - as now - at the same time as voting in committees .
It is a disgrace .
Mr Harrison , I hear your fairly strong views .
I will put the point to the presidency .
It seems to me that it is a question of organization so that we actually know what committees are doing when they meet during the Strasbourg week .
It is perhaps an argument for saying the committee meetings should not take place during Strasbourg week , but that is an aside from the Chair .
Yes , honorable Member , I have indeed been very well aware of the fact that you have chosen to come and give your views on this subject which is so important , and which concerns both public health and research .
Perhaps I should first give some information relating to the disease and its treatment and then to the Commission 's direct action .
You said quite rightly that 10 million of our fellow citizens suffer from diabetes .
The direct costs of diabetes are estimated today to be 8 % of health budgets in Europe .
I am only talking here about direct costs and not indirect costs which are also great .
You know that there are two sorts of diabetes : insulin-dependent diabetes and non-insulin dependent diabetes , which affect respectively children , adolescents , young adults , the middle-aged and the elderly .
I mentioned insulin earlier , which is used to treat insulin-dependent diabetes , but which , by definition , cannot be used in the other type .
There remains therefore much to be done in terms of research .
As far as the action of the Commission is concerned , I would simply like to say that projects of research into diabetes , carried out under Biomed II , have covered the various aspects of prevention , treatment and management of diabetes , including determination of genetic risk and factors related to the environment and the detection of patients at high risk of developing it .
I would also like to say that in March 1997 , a workshop on the European dimension of research into diabetes will be organised in Brussels , on the initiative of the European Association for the Study of Diabetes , in collaboration with the Commission and with its support .
The objective is the identification of strategies and priorities to be adopted in terms of research into diabetes on a European level . This figures naturally in the preparation of our twentieth framework programme .
As I said earlier , an important weapon against diabetes is prevention .
Very little has been done at European level with regard to this up to now .
However , diabetes has been signed up for the first time as one of the themes for training , education and health promotion activities in 1997 , carried out within the framework of the health policy of the Union .
So we are really topical .
Now , the total annual budget of the Union 's public health policy , as you know , is only 32 million Ecus , to be shared with activities relating to cancer , and to AIDS , which requires tremendous effort indeed in terms of prevention .
It can be expected , in the near future at any rate , that this effort towards prevention , for budgetary reasons , will still be relatively limited .
Indeed it will still have to come from this already limited purse of 32 million Ecus which we have to share with other preventative activities relating to other ailments which are equally important .
But I think that finally the skies are clearing in the area which is of concern to you to this extent ; its appearance among the Union 's promotional activities and the conference to be organised in 1997 are just the first steps for this important subject .
Question No 30 by Florus Wijsenbeek ( H-0755 / 96 )
Subject : State monopoly enjoyed by Switzerland 's Telecom PTT
Is the Commission aware that - just before the entry into force on 1 July 1996 of the new competition law , and pending a legislative initiative which will bring Swiss telecommunications legislation in line with that of the European Union - the Swiss Telecom PTT has taken part in the takeover of a major cable operator , despite a previous commitment to curb its expansion into the cable market ?
If so , does the Commission agree that by taking part in this market concentration the Swiss Telecom PTT has strengthened its monopoly position in voice telephony to an extent where it is virtually impossible for future telecommunications competitors to offer the same services ?
In view of the talks it is currently conducting with Switzerland , can the Commission say whether telecommunications will also be the subject of negotiations in any future agreement between the EU and Switzerland , given that this sector is not currently covered by the package of negotiations ?
In reply to this question from Mr Wijsenbeek , I would point out that Switzerland is naturally not bound by the provisions of the directive on cable television networks .
The Commission knows that the Swiss PTT proposed and signed a code of conduct with the Swiss authorities responsible for competition policy - the Verhaltenskodex Telekom : PTT-Kartelkommission - which requires the Swiss PTT to refrain from any actions likely to have an adverse effect on the position of potential competitors or to give it an unfair advantage in future competition situations .
The code stipulates that the PTT must seek prior authorization from the relevant authorities before acquiring or expanding operations in the cable networks sector , including cable television networks .
This issue has been raised by MPs in Switzerland , and the Commission has read about it in the press , but we have no official right to intervene .
It is entirely a matter for the Swiss authorities .
The Commission is continuing to do its best in the WTO negotiations on basic telecommunications to obtain an undertaking that the Swiss market will be completely open by January 1998 , including the voice telephony sector .
We expect to have reached agreement with our WTO partners by 15 February 1997 , and that in this context , Switzerland will agree to the full liberalization of its telecommunications services .
As far as bilateral negotiations are concerned , you know that the Council decided on 31 October 1994 and 14 March 1995 to enter into negotiations with Switzerland on six areas : the free movement of persons , agriculture , the mutual recognition of certificates of conformity , research , public contracts and transport . It also decided provisionally to rule out negotiations on other sectors such as telecommunications .
The negotiations on the six areas I mentioned are still in progress and we cannot yet tell how long they are likely to take , even though I myself am closely involved in them . I think it is likely that the six agreements could be concluded some time in the first three months of next year .
This is the timescale the Commission is working towards , at least , although we naturally also need to get the agreements through the Council of Ministers .
The Commission will decide on the basis of the current negotiations whether they should be continued in other sectors , but they have not yet gone far enough for us to tell whether this is the case .
If we think it is , then we shall have to submit a proposal to that effect to the Council .
I should like to thank Commissioner van den Broek for his very detailed answer .
I nevertheless have a supplementary question on the same lines as the one I originally asked : even if competition is to be allowed in those six sectors , it is clear that it has been ruled out here .
It is also clear that Switzerland has flouted the idea of free competition so flagrantly that this is bound to have repercussions not just for the current talks , but also for any continuation of the talks in other sectors .
The fact is that the Swiss always ask for free access to our market and are always generously given it , so I think the Commission is failing to fulfil its negotiating mandate if it does not bring up this kind of issue .
Could the Commissioner not raise these infringements of free competition now , in the current negotiations ?
I think there are two important points here .
Firstly , I think it is important to try to obtain undertakings from Switzerland on this issue through the current WTO negotiations .
As I said earlier , it is hoped that the situation will become clear by early 1998 .
Secondly , I do not know whether I am entirely right in thinking this , but when I consider the mandate which we were given for the six sectoral agreements we are currently discussing with Switzerland , I cannot really see how this issue could be included .
Nevertheless , I know that once the six-sector package has been concluded - and a balance must be found within each agreement and between all six - the Swiss are very interested in continuing talks on new sectors , and then we too might like to consider what pressing issues we should like to focus on .
I will at least examine , to be absolutely sure , whether the issue raised today could be included in the current talks , but I would not wish to give Mr Wijsenbeek any false hopes .
I know that broad agreement has now been reached , but there are still some rather delicate questions to be resolved on transport and freedom of movement .
I should nevertheless like to thank Mr Wijsenbeek for bringing this matter to our attention .
In spite of Mr Wijsenbeek 's question , would the Commissioner bear in mind in his discussions with Swiss Telecom that telecommunications now operate in a world global market , and could he therefore tell us the relative size of the new merged company in Switzerland vis-à-vis British Telecom and their new merged company following the £ 15bn merger they have made with MCI in the United States ?
I am sorry , but I do not have the figures to hand to be able to give you an answer .
But your general observation is correct : telecommunications is a sector which is showing a very marked trend towards globalization .
The honourable Member also knows that when it comes to mergers of telecommunications companies in the European Union , restrictions have to be applied , and these lie within the Commission 's powers under the code on mergers .
I thank the Commissioner for his reply , but I would also like to ask him if I can understand his reply as meaning that the Commission will put pressure on Switzerland and that in the coming negotiations a condition will be that Switzerland changes its present strengthened monopoly position within this area ?
I would not wish to cause any misunderstandings .
What I meant was that I do not see any scope for including this directly in the mandate we have for the current six-sector negotiations with Switzerland .
I told Mr Wijsenbeek that once these talks are concluded and agreement has been reached , I can well imagine that we shall start discussing possible new areas of cooperation and may well look at telecommunications .
But whether this is a priority sector is something the Council will have to decide .
However , I know that Sir Leon Brittan , who is the Commissioner responsible for everything to do with the WTO negotiations , is constantly trying to promote the further liberalization of the telecommunications market .
Question No 31 by Bertel Haarder ( H-0857 / 96 )
Subject : Bosnian and Croat refugees returning home
In the Folketing , the Danish Minister for Internal Affairs said in response to a question I had asked that Bosnians and Croats were queuing up to return home and were being delayed partly because of a lack of transport .
The chairman of the Danish Refugee Council was also told that people wishing to return to Bosnia and Croatia had to wait for entry papers to be issued and that travel for refugees by bus was difficult , partly because Croatia , Bosnia and Austria were obstructing overland transport operations .
The fact that some countries are forcing refugees to return home to former Yugoslavia and others cannot or will not help speed up the return of those who wish to is unacceptable .
It is especially odd that Austria appears to be preventing buses from getting through .
Will the Commission bring pressure to bear so that refugees from Bosnia and Croatia wishing to return to help rebuild their countries and homes are not held up and if necessary make EU aid dependent on the elimination of such hold-ups ?
I have to say that despite the gloomy reports mentioned by Mr Haarder , I do not think that Bosnian and Croat refugees trying to return home are facing particularly severe transport problems , or at least not at the moment .
You will note that I am being very cautious when I say this , since it is difficult to monitor the day-to-day situation .
However , I should like to make it clear to Mr Haarder that we are in contact with the Member States , with the EU 's High Representative Carl Bildt , and in particular the High Commissioner for Refugees , Mrs Ogata , who visited Brussels a few days ago , and we are examining very carefully how we can help to make things easier for the return of refugees .
The Commission has been working on this for some time through its rehabilitation and construction programmes , where the emphasis is placed on projects suggested to us by the High Commission for Refugees which are designed to make it easier for refugees to return home .
We have also been in regular contact with the German authorities , since we know that of all the Member States , Germany has faced the most severe problem of refugees from former Yugoslavia .
I would repeat that when freedom of movement or freedom of transit are under threat - and there have been no serious reports of this recently - then an appeal must be made to the country concerned , whether it be Bosnia , Croatia or even Serbia , and then to Ifor , which is responsible for ensuring that freedom of movement is restricted as little as possible .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for the most obliging answer he has given .
By way of a supplement I would like to ask him whether he agrees with me that it is quite unacceptable that countries receiving large amounts of aid from the European Union should refuse to take back their own citizens speedily and efficiently when these citizens wish to return home .
I would also ask him whether he agrees with me that it is even more unacceptable , if this is possible , that not only Bosnia and Croatia , but even an intermediary country , Austria , should be putting obstacles in the way of buses transporting refugees back to their old countries ?
Does he agree with me that this is wholly unreasonable , and that the European Union must exert pressure , which may also mean economic pressure , if required , to change this situation ?
We know that some countries are forcing refugees back .
That is not what I am talking about .
I am talking about refugees who , of their own volition , wish to return home , but are prevented from doing so by bureaucracy and an unhelpful approach in Bosnia and Croatia , and to a lesser extent also in Austria .
I entirely agree with Mr Haarder that it is quite unacceptable for countries to refuse to receive their own citizens wishing to return home .
It would also be contrary to the undertakings given by the parties to the Dayton peace accord , which specifically makes the granting of economic aid or aid for reconstruction conditional on the countries concerned taking back their refugees and helping to facilitate their return .
So we are entirely in agreement on this .
I am rather surprised at this report about Austria , and Mr Haarder 's question was the first I had heard of it .
I have no evidence at all to support this , and I would certainly not have thought that the Austrian authorities would do anything to prevent refugees from returning home .
It is also universally agreed within the Union as a whole that everything must be done to facilitate this process .
Could Commissioner van den Broek confirm that in effect what he is saying is that we are still in a position whereby within Bosnia there is actually no real freedom of movement , i.e. , we have still got de facto ethnic cleansing ?
Could he also say how he envisages the situation developing when Ifor comes to an end ?
That is the one force trying to keep the Dayton peace process on board .
To what extent is the Commission evaluating the success of the aid it has given to returnee refugees and how does it intend developing those programmes in future ?
I think I can say that there is genuine freedom of movement throughout most of BosniaHerzegovina , and I know that where it is in any way restricted , Ifor has instructions to approach the authorities about it and to establish a free passage by force , if necessary .
As far as I am aware , they have not been required to do so recently , and this is something that has only ever happened occasionally .
I would also certainly not blame restrictions on freedom of movement as the main reason why so few refugees have returned home hitherto .
We have had extensive talks with Mrs Ogata , the High Commissioner , on this subject .
The main problem is that many refugees do not want to return to their homes if a different ethnic group is now in power .
This is the case with many of the Bosnian refugees now living in Germany , who originally came from what is now the Republica Srpska and do not wish to go back there .
Another obstacle is the fact that housing is still in extremely short supply , and we must do all we can to ensure that priority is given to restoring and rebuilding ruined houses , so that refugees can move in .
There is also the problem that the whole question of ownership is often extremely unclear .
Everyone is living in someone else 's house , and trying to sort things out could make the whole situation extremely difficult .
What this all means is that the High Commission for Refugees has by no means been able to persuade the numbers to return that were originally planned .
I think that since the Dayton agreement , 200 000 of the 800 000 originally intended have actually gone back , at an optimistic estimate .
We are dealing with an extremely complex problem .
We are going to Paris on Thursday for further talks with Mrs Ogata , Carl Bildt and everyone else involved on the implementation of the Dayton agreement and the problem of the returning refugees , and we shall be looking at the issue again at a conference on Yugoslavia in London in December .
As you can see , we are giving this situation our fullest attention , but it is all extremely complicated .
Commissioner , I should firstly like to make a further comment . I go to quite a few places in Austria , and I am extremely surprised by the suggestion that the Austrian authorities have somehow been obstructing the return of the refugees .
At least , I have never heard anything about that in Austria itself .
My question to you , Commissioner , is this : do you not have the impression that , in the whole treatment of the refugee question , an unduly bureaucratic approach is hindering matters ?
There are large parts of Bosnia to which no one can be expected to return if they have no house there , because it is extremely cold .
There are other areas to which the refugees can happily go back , because it is warm .
The situation must therefore be judged differently from area to area , from community to community .
Are you not of the opinion that the authorities are regrettably adopting an unduly bureaucratic approach in this respect , which is hampering the whole operation ?
Mr von Habsburg will have realized that I entirely agree with him , but I have no information or evidence to suggest that Austria is not cooperating in helping refugees to return home .
As I said before , every Member State is very keen to enable them to return as soon as possible .
So this is something we all agree on .
Bureaucracy , I freely admit , will undoubtedly account for some of the problems , and the only question is how to prevent it .
Take Bosnia , for example , where the new organs of state are still being set up .
There has been a collective presidency since the elections , and there is still no government as such .
So the people we are talking to now are the transitional government , but we do not know who will be in charge tomorrow .
That is one point .
Secondly , if we look at Germany again , which has shown an extremely humanitarian attitude in accepting some 450 000 refugees , we need to ask the various regional governments exactly how many refugees are living there , where they come from , whether they are prepared to return and , if so , where to .
This information must then be linked up with operations in Bosnia to receive these people and to ensure that they have somewhere to live , not to mention jobs and so on .
I therefore agree with Mr von Habsburg that the very complexity of the situation tends to complicate the bureaucracy , rather than making it easier .
And this is true not only for the countries to which the refugees are to return , but also for the countries currently sheltering large numbers of them .
Question No 32 by Birgitta Ahlqvist ( H-0860 / 96 )
Subject : Recent events in Belarus
President Lukashenko of Belarus has sought to extend his constitutional powers , dissolve the present parliament and introduce authoritarian presidential rule .
He has announced a referendum on his proposal to be held on 7 November .
The Belarus parliament has responded by calling a rival referendum on 24 October .
The President of Russia has put heavy pressure on President Lukashenko to seek a compromise with his parliament on the country 's new constitution , but he has altered only one detail in his proposal .
Has the Commission made any representations against this attempt by the President of Belarus to shut out his country 's democratically elected parliament and set up authoritarian presidential rule ?
Will cooperation under the TACIS programme continue as if nothing has happened if President Lukashenko claims that the November referendum has given him a mandate to carry out his changes to the constitution ?
Thank you for the answer , Commissioner .
I have put this question before and today I have received more or less the same answer .
We have fought on behalf of the EU by pointing out the circumstances to the President of Belarus , but the President goes on as before , just the same .
In other words nothing very much is happening in this area .
I wonder , Commissioner , if the way forward would be to halt the TACIS programme , and in that way get the President to listen to the democratically elected parliament .
Or are there any other ways ?
Because , quite clearly , more vigorous measures are needed than simply talking to the President .
As I said before , I quite agree with Mrs Ahlqvist 's assessment of the situation .
We have once again reached a sort of crossroads : do we use the TACIS programme to bring pressure to bear , or do we try to use it to help bring about certain practical improvements ?
I think the thing to do now is to wait and see exactly what happens with the referendum and how we then view the political situation in Belarus , because this will very much determine whether we wish to have the kind of close cooperation that would result from an interim agreement , which is currently still pending .
As I said , Parliament has put off examining reports on the interim agreement two or three times now , for the same reasons why I am now suggesting that we should wait for the referendum , although we can at the same time send out appropriate political signals , via other countries too .
This is precisely what the presidency and the Commission are doing at the moment .
Question No 33 by Maj Theorin ( H-0861 / 96 )
Subject : Turkey
The EU 's customs union with Turkey is a customs union with a country where people are tortured , disappear whilst being escorted by the police and are victims of armed raids , where MPs remain in prison despite promises that they would be released and which continues to violate what the UN Security Council terms the unlawful partition of Cyprus .
Parliament approved the agreement on customs union after being promised that the human rights situation would improve .
It hoped for changes , but these have not materialized .
The murder of the two young Cypriots and the news that at least 11 people have died in Turkish prisons show that the EU really must use all available means to improve the situation .
Parliament somewhat belatedly responded with its resolution of 19 September calling on the Commission to discontinue all aid to Turkey under the MEDA programme , except , of course , for the portions thereof which promote democracy and human rights .
What will the Commission do within the framework of the MEDA programme to step up pressure on Turkey to fulfil its part of the agreement ?
There still has been no response to the declaration issued by the Council in June to the effect that Turkey must abide by certain principles .
For how long will the Commission be content with fine but empty promises ?
I am afraid that I can only tell Mrs Theorin what I told the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy and Parliament 's members of the EU-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee yesterday evening , mainly about the human rights situation there , which was discussed in detail in the report on the customs union which the Commission presented to Parliament in October .
What I said , in short , was that we all agree that the current human rights situation in Turkey is very worrying and , let us be honest , even worse in 1996 than it was in 1995 .
I also gave details of the changes we are trying to bring about in this area , and pointed out once again that because of the human rights situation , and because of Turkey 's position in the Aegean conflict with Greece and on the Cyprus question , most of the financial aid intended for it has now been suspended , which is why I feel that the MEDA programme at least , being a broader and more horizontal programme for the Mediterranean area as a whole , should continue to apply to Turkey .
I explained why I thought this and put forward further arguments in favour , but I also said that the Commission has taken due account of the resolution adopted by Parliament in September on the human rights situation in Turkey , and of the recommendations which have been made concerning how money should be allocated from the MEDA fund .
As I said yesterday evening , Parliament 's ideas on this may not be exactly the same as those of the Commission , but I would be happy to examine with the President of the House how the Commission can best consult Parliament about this whole issue before we implement the 1997 MEDA programme .
I hope that this brief answer will suffice , but as I said , the human rights report that we gave you last month as part of the report on the customs union contains further details of the Commission 's views on the situation in Turkey , why we feel it is important to normalize relations with Turkey as one of our partners , and how we think we can make progress in this direction .
Thank you for the answer .
It is encouraging to learn that we are now in agreement that human rights are not being respected in Turkey , and that we have woken up to the fact a little late in the day .
It is , of course , surprising - to say the least - that a real right-wing politician from Turkey has been able to mislead experienced politicians without bringing in any real changes or reliable guarantees on human rights , and that these experienced politicians , without waiting for the Turkish elections , agreed to a customs union .
It is quite clearly something of a double message if the European Parliament says one thing and the Commissioner still says that he wishes to continue with the MEDA programme and , at the same time , listen to Parliament .
For the instruments we have , i.e. the political , economic and legal instruments which the EU has at its disposal , should naturally be used to ensure that human rights are respected .
Is it not now time to stop waiting for more encouraging noises from Turkey and demonstrate that the limit has been reached by revoking the customs union with this country ?
My second question is : Would we have been just as keen to enter into a customs union if the Commissioner had known then what we know today about human rights ?
I know that it is difficult to talk about human rights and the economy in the same breath , but this is what Mrs Theorin did when she mentioned the customs union and whether it should continue .
I would point out to her that , since the customs union came into force , trade with Turkey has grown from some 20 billion dollars or ECU - the two are very much the same - to around 35 billion , and that there is a trade surplus of 8 to 10 billion in favour of the European Union .
So from the employment point of view , which is something that Parliament is concerned about , it would not be a good idea to abolish the customs union at one fell swoop , since for the time being at least , it is very much serving the Union 's interests .
It is just unfortunate that we have not yet been able to implement the accompanying measures that were intended to offset the negative effects for Turkey , including the three or four programmes which are currently blocked for reasons with which everyone is familiar .
I do not have time now to go through the whole of the very constructive exchange of views that we had yesterday evening in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , so I will leave it there if I may , although I am entirely at your disposal , should you wish to discuss this question further .
Would the Commissioner not agree that the Council , the Commission and those Members in this House who were foolish enough to vote for customs union , on the grounds that this would encourage Turkey to be more democratic , were pretty inept politically and tragically wrong ?
If I may give you a straight answer to this , I would repeat what I said yesterday evening , that although we all agree that the human rights situation in Turkey is very bad , we must not forget what the situation was in fact like in 1995 , when the customs union was approved by Parliament and certain amendments were demanded to the constitution and in particular to Article 8 , as a result of which some 150 prisoners of conscience were actually released .
So we cannot say that nothing at all has changed .
It is simply unfortunate that the situation is now deadlocked for a number of reasons which I described in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy yesterday evening , though these must not be seen as an excuse , and must certainly not discourage us from continuing to try to improve the situation in our relations with Turkey .
We are therefore working on this constantly and very intensively .
Question No 34 by Hans Lindqvist ( H-0872 / 96 )
Subject : Foreign and security policy
Sweden has been spared involvement in war for nearly 200 years .
With our non-aligned status and neutrality we have been in a position to create stability in northern Europe .
From the post-war period , Sweden and neutral Finland have provided a buffer between NATO and the Warsaw Pact , especially during the Cold War .
After the fall of the Berlin Wall the security policy map has been transformed .
A new Russia whose security policies are largely unknown , is facing NATO .
No-one yet knows what relationship there will be between the two powers .
The large majority of the Swedish people will defend our neutrality and reject the idea of joining future monetary alliances .
Will Sweden be able to control its own foreign and security policy in future ?
Are there are plans in EU quarters to restrict the right of veto on matters relating to foreign and security policy ?
When it joined the European Union , Sweden agreed to the provisions of the Treaty on European Union .
Title 5 of the Treaty concerns the common foreign and security policy , which covers all aspects of the Union 's security .
I distinctly remember that when the negotiations were concluded with all the applicant countries , including Norway at that point , it was declared that there was nothing in the constitutions of those countries to prevent them from implementing the provisions on the common foreign and security policy in the Maastricht Treaty .
I therefore presume that this also applies to Sweden .
You know that the common foreign and security policy is on the agenda for the Intergovernmental Conference , and that one of the important points to be discussed is how to improve the decision-making process , on which a number of proposals have been made .
We can already assume that when it comes to strictly military matters and the use of armed forces , decisions will not be taken by a qualified majority , but each Member State will be left to decide for itself .
In short , I do not think there is any chance that the outcome of the IGC will be that a country could be forced by a majority vote to take part in military operations .
Thank you for the answer .
This is an urgent matter for those of us who are relatively new Members , as the question of our being able to retain independence in foreign and security policies was the decisive factor for many who voted in the referendum .
I interpreted the very last part of the answer as meaning that Sweden must accept the agreement which it signed , which is self-evident , since we have no derogation , but also , on the basis of the answer , that it means in reality that more decisions are being slowly transferred from unanimous to qualified majority vote .
This also means that Sweden , if it wished to , could not prevent other states or a majority of EU countries , from making decisions in the defence and military security areas .
If I have understood it correctly , it could even mean that Sweden could perhaps be forced to participate in financing an action which the country would not support , and would not be able to prevent .
That is how I understand the answer and it thus means a major move from free alliances to participation in a joint military or European co-operation .
Let us agree on one thing : all these questions are to be discussed at the Intergovernmental Conference .
On the issue of foreign and security policy , there is certain to be a strong intergovernmental element , but I do not think it is the Commission 's place to anticipate the outcome of the discussions .
I will say that I was pleased to see that the Foreign Affairs Ministers of Sweden and Finland , two neutral countries in terms of security policy , have put forward proposals as to how they might be involved in things like the Petersburg tasks , for example .
These are duties such as peacekeeping missions , humanitarian aid and so on , which could be carried out under the leadership of the Western European Union .
So we can see that Sweden and Finland are thinking constructively about the role they can play in the field of security .
I find this extremely positive , though I would not wish in any way to pre-empt the discussions at the Intergovernmental Conference , where Sweden too has every right to express its opinion and take part in the decision-making .
Mr President , I have great respect for the Swedish people 's desire for freedom , but I should like to ask whether the fact that Sweden remained so free and independent in the post-war period as is described in the question is not connected with the fact that many NATO and European Union states contributed to preserving peace in the Western hemisphere in the face of communism , at great sacrifice .
Do you not take the view that peace and freedom will also only be preserved in future if all states are equally prepared to assume their share of the burden and do not , so to speak , shirk their responsibilities and leave the others to shoulder the burden alone ?
Thank you very much .
May I just say that Sweden has been free of military alliances and has remained neutral for 200 years !
It is not just a question of neutrality during the Second World War .
Seventy per cent of the Swedish people insist that this neutrality be preserved .
The Swedish and the Finnish foreign ministers have made it clear that we are prepared to participate in peace keeping operations , though not in anything to do with military intervention .
The distinction between peace keeping and the promotion of peace , or enforcing the peace , is very important and I believe that Commissioner van den Broek is very well aware of this .
Sweden does not take part in any active military operations whatsoever , and will not do so either before or after the government conference .
That is noted .
I call Mr Smith on a point of order .
Can you explain to me why , when Commissioners are designated 20 minutes each , Commissioner Van den Broek gets twice as long as any other Commissioner ?
I know he is very talented , but is he twice as good ?
The points made by the honourable Members in these two questions seem to be based on a misunderstanding .
The situation is as follows : the Commission view is that the derogations at issue may be kept in place only until 31 December 1996 , the deadline currently established .
Consequently , unless the Member States concerned take steps to abolish the restrictions in place , as of that date , 31.12.1996 , the Commission , as the guardian of the Treaties , will be compelled to bring infringement proceedings before the Court of Justice .
Furthermore , were the Commission not rapidly to take action of that nature , it is likely that the matter would be referred to the Court of Justice by the citizens of northern Europe who would consider that they were being penalized .
Having said that , in the light of the rights of travellers and the points made by the honourable Members in their questions , we are of the opinion that the Nordic countries need more time to adjust to the Community rules .
Consequently , the Commission is drawing up a proposal for a directive extending the deadline beyond 31 December 1996 in order to allow gradual liberalization of the current restrictions .
As you see , far from adopting a hard line towards the Nordic countries , the Commission is in fact doing all it can to help .
I thank the Commissioner for his answer .
The fact of the matter is that if we , in Sweden , are forced to give up our present quotas , we shall also be forced to lower our taxes on alcohol , which we know would lead to a large number of additional deaths from alcohol abuse .
We also know that it would lead to a significant loss of tax income .
There are thus very considerable human and financial resources at stake for us .
I have two questions for Commissioner Monti . The first question is : Have you made any attempt to estimate the possible benefits in financial terms which can result from us removing these restrictions , and have you compared them with the existing human and financial costs ?
The second question is : Can you give any details regarding the directive which you intend issuing with a proposal for a longer time limit ?
Does this mean that we will be able to retain the present restrictions or is it a matter of a gradual reduction of these restrictions , and - if so - over how long a period ?
On the first point , the Commission is fully aware of the very great importance attaching to this issue in social , health and financial terms .
That is the only reason why the Commission has and is making a great effort to reach a solution other than the - inevitable - natural solution , namely referring the matter to the Court of Justice .
I am not at this point in a position , Mr Wibe , to provide further details concerning the length of any extension .
I can only say that in the negotiations with the Swedish , Danish and Finnish authorities , the view I have put forward , as Commissioner , mentions the year 2002 .
Thank you Commissioner for the answer .
At present the alcohol question is being dealt with almost exclusively as a matter pertaining to the internal market .
At the same time we know that there is a clear and unambiguous connection between alcohol consumption and a number of illnesses such as liver disorders , stroke , certain forms of cancer , etc .
Article 36 of the Treaty deals with the internal market and derogations from the internal market .
It states , for example , that derogations are made where the question of " protecting the lives and health of humans and animals ' is involved .
I would like to ask two questions .
Is not the question of alcohol one of human health which , in all respects , affects people & # x02BC ; s lives and health ?
My second question is , in that case is not Article 36 applicable ?
The question of alcohol is , clearly , important in terms of public health and social issues as well as its financial implications for the national budget .
Moreover , you know full well that various instruments may supplement a coherent policy designed to pursue specific objectives in this field .
It is specifically in order to allow the Member States in question to use instruments that may require time and that are not incompatible with the requirements of the single market that the Commission has stated its willingness to consider an extension which , as I have said , is currently being negotiated with the authorities of the Nordic countries .
Thank you Mr President .
Two questions to Commissioner Monti : Does Commissioner Monti acknowledge that the attack which is now being made on the actual working of Swedish alcohol policy has its roots in the fact that alcohol consumption has fallen in several large EU countries and that the alcohol producers have an interest in gaining access to the low alcohol consumption market which Sweden represents ?
Has Commissioner Monti any proposal on who is to pay the costs of the consequences for health which will result from the Commission & # x02BC ; s attempts to break down the alcohol policy restrictions in Sweden ?
I really have nothing to add .
In my earlier answers I already explained just how very aware the Commission is of this problem and how it is therefore prepared - and has shown great flexibility in this connection - to consider extensions , provided that a definite and specific date is given .
As far as question of how the financial authorities of the countries concerned can make good financial resources that could run out when the current arrangements end , the honourable Member will understand that it is not for the Commission to make suggestions about that .
Thank you for allowing me the opportunity to speak Mr President .
My question , too , concerns the importation of alcohol .
Before the Swedish referendum on EU membership , the big question in the debate on the Treaty which had been concluded with the EU , was what this Treaty actually involved .
According to the description of this Treaty laid before the Swedish public , a unanimous decision by the Council of Ministers would be necessary to amend the import rules governing alcohol .
Sweden would thereby have a right of veto in respect of the question of alcohol imports .
Does the Commissioner share this understanding ?
I cannot talk about eventualities .
I have merely explained - and I do not , I think , need to repeat myself again - how very aware the Commission is of the problem , how we have and are being flexible in terms of the time it takes to identify solutions which reconcile the objectives of the governments in question , as regards health and social policy etc , with the rules of the single market which the Commission has a duty to protect .
Question No 40 by Simon Murphy ( H-0870 / 96 )
Subject : Guest Beer issue
Will the Commission comment on progress in the tripartite talks between DGXV , the Confederation des Brasseurs du Marché Commun , and the United Kingdom 's Department of Trade and Industry , to find a mutually acceptable compromise in the ' Guest Beer Law ' Case .
In this question , the honourable Member is asking the Commission to give an indication of progress made in the tripartite talks , set under way to find an acceptable solution to the question of the UK law of 1989 on ' Guest Beer ' ( draught beer from a specific brewer sold at a pub linked by contract to another brewer ) .
The Commission wishes first to state that it is well aware of the importance attaching to typical and traditional products , such as real ale , in relation to the internal market .
It is not therefore the intention of the Commission to take measures that in any way prejudice the manufacture of such products .
Far from it , the implementation of the principle of mutual recognition which , as you will be aware , is one of the cornerstones of the internal market and has been encouraged by the Commission over the past fifteen years , is helping to protect Europe 's typical products .
In this case , and in response to a request , the Commission brought an action for failure to act , seeking to have the discriminatory national provision changed , thereby fulfilling one of its fundamental responsibilities , namely to guarantee compliance with Community rules .
I would stress that the Commission is not objecting to the rules on guest beer as a whole but only the criteria adopted for the definition of guest beer , which currently have the effect of excluding similar beers from other Member States .
The Commission and the United Kingdom authorities are currently trying to find a solution to the problem that does not discriminate against the beers of other Member States .
At the tripartite meeting between the Commission services , the United Kingdom authorities and the Confederation of European Brewers , held in Brussels on 11 October 1996 , possible alternatives to the current definition of guest beer were discussed .
Attempts are being made to find a solution , with further contacts scheduled in the course of this month .
The Commission has set 1 December as the time-limit .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his reply .
Many of us in the House accept that he is trying to establish a workable compromise that everybody can live with , which actually respects the requirements of the British beer drinker , if you like , and at the same time single market law .
I would like to ask the Commissioner a specific question on the nature of beer production in the European Union at the moment .
Is he aware that over the last 12 months somewhere in the region of 7 , 000 hectolitres of draft Hoegaarden ' blanche ' beer which is brewed in Belgium by Interbrew , was actually imported into the United Kingdom and sold in British pubs under the guest beer law ?
In other words , this particular version of Hoegaarden ' blanche ' was a cask-conditioned ale .
If that is the case , surely there is not real need to actually change the guest beer laws in Britain just to make it even more clear to other brewers around the European Union exactly who can sell into the European market .
The aim of the negotiations aims is to find a definition of guest beer that would not in fact be discriminatory by identifying a particular definition like the cask-conditioned one , which is basically limited to a process which is essentially used in the UK .
The purpose , as I underlined , is not that of eliminating support for small breweries , but simply to devise a manner in which that could continue without any discriminatory element .
May I say that it is precisely this willingness to preserve the single market in that sector that led the Commission some time ago to intervene in a similar way in the case of two other Member States , interventions from which UK beer producers among others , benefited .
I am encouraged by that answer to the extent that I understand it .
I hope that what the Commission is working towards is a new definition of guest beers which will amount to the same thing and will ensure that real ale is still sold in British pubs as a guest beer .
Certainly if the guest beer provision is totally removed , the result will be less choice all round rather than greater opportunities for continental breweries to export to Britain .
The other point I would like to make is to ask the Commissioner whether he would accept that it is very important that we do not make a fetish of harmonization for its own sake and that we recognize that the European Union is not simply about the single market .
A lot of the questions being asked today on Scandinavian rules on alcohol , guest beers , duty-free , VAT and so on , suggest that if pursuing the single market is unpopular with voters in Europe , if it is going to turn people against the European Union , as would certainly be the case if the guest beer provision was totally removed , and if its effects are ultimately harmful , it really should not be pushed and the Commission should show a broad , flexible outlook on these things .
This question is so general that it could very well have been asked a couple of hours ago in the general debate on the single market .
I wish to say that certainly the Commission 's policy is not to make a fetish of harmonization .
We all know that frequently , perhaps unwilling , a protectionist element creeps in behind what apparently is protection of this or that regional situation .
Certainly , the single market , whose main drawback is simply that it has not as yet been implemented as we would like , unquestionably has the fundamental virtue of increasing consumer choice , and the consumer must , of course , also benefit in the case in question .
Question No 41 by Angela Billingham ( H-0882 / 96 )
Subject : Property letting in Spain
A law passed in Spain - Law of Tourism 7 / 1995 , which is due to be implemented in July 1997 - has the effect of forcing all owners of property within an apartment complex either not to let their property or to give the exclusive letting rights to a sole letting agency for the complex .
This deprives owners of the personal freedom to use their property when they wish and will result in severe financial hardship for many owners with financial commitments .
Does this piece of legislation not directly infringe upon personal and civic liberties ?
Is it not a complete violation of the freedom to provide services in the European Union ?
The Commission has undertaken a comprehensive analysis of Law of Tourism 7 / 1995 in terms of the right of establishment and to check on its compatibility with the freedom to provide services .
More particularly , consideration of the provisions on holiday lettings by an authorized tourist operator show that those provisions are not discriminatory and apply both to owners of Spanish nationality and to owners from other Member States .
The provisions were introduced with the intention of protecting tourists as users of services - and I am quoting Article 1 ( 2 ) of the Law - a concept equivalent to that of consumer protection and one that has been recognized by the Court of Justice as being a mandatory requirement in the general interest .
In the current situation , the accommodation and , if appropriate , the buildings themselves have , among other things , to meet certain requirements relating to health , cleanliness and safety .
Given the importance of lettings in the Canary Islands and even though the new measures adopted may prove inconvenient to owners , they appear appropriate to guarantee the achievement of the objective set and go not go beyond what is necessary .
However , in accordance with the provisions of the Law , the measures in question will not take effect until 20 July 1997 .
That means that it will not be possible to make a full assessment of the new system until that time .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for the reply he has given me but it does not reassure me at all .
Having listened to his answer to the previous question , I see direct similarities when we talk about looking at discriminatory practice .
I always think that any laws which are passed and are retrospective also open up all sorts of problems .
I have to say that whilst we are looking at the concerns of the tourists , I think that the owners have been somewhat unfairly treated .
They are saying , and rightly so I suspect , that the value of their property will be considerably diminished .
I think it is most unfortunate therefore that I am getting this negative response from the Commission because I do think that , as previous speakers have said , the image of the single market is very important , as is the way in which we work cooperatively with other Member States .
I suspect this is the sort of issue which is not limited to owners coming from the United Kingdom but to those from other countries too and we do not want it to be seen as yet another grievance .
I suspect that unless we do something that is in fact the case .
We have examined this question from a number of angles .
In particular we asked ourselves whether behind the protection of the tourist as user of services the main purpose of the law was to regulate any kind of letting in the Canary Islands and therefore to deprive owners of their rights , and our answer was essentially no .
The system introduced by the law applies only to tourist lettings , other kinds of lettings fall under the provisions of the Spanish Civil Code as specified by the law itself .
We could also ask the question whether the tourist is not protected at the expense of the property owners , an aspect Mrs Billingham introduced , with the property owner bearing all the burden of such protection .
In response to that question I would say that the law adopted by the Canarian Parliament does not try to protect the tourist only when he rents accommodation , but whenever he might be considered a user of tourist services .
Consequently many categories of service providers such as restaurants , travel agencies , sport clubs and transport enterprises also have to fulfil a certain number of requirements , including professional qualification , in order to be authorized to perform their activity .
The Commission is familiar with the problems encountered by Danish ski instructors in France during the 1995-1996 winter season .
A number of foreign ski instructors - German , British and Danish - were arrested by the French police for holding neither a French qualification nor a foreign qualification recognized as being equivalent by the French authorities for the exercise of that profession .
The Commission services take the view that the French legislation is incompatible with Article 59 of the Treaty laying down the freedom to provide services .
In accordance with the case-law of the Court of Justice , a Member State is not permitted to require of providers of services the same conditions required of persons established permanently in their territory .
In recent months , the Commission services have met frequently with the French authorities in an effort to resolve this problem .
The Commission recognizes that this is a real issue of public interest , namely the safety of all of those who use ski slopes .
It has , nonetheless , tried to reconcile this fundamental requirement with the rights guaranteed under the Treaty .
The French authorities have put forward draft proposals , to be adopted as soon as possible , which will allow ski instructors , who are citizens of other Member States , to provide services in France on the basis of a simple declaration that is renewable annually .
In exceptional cases , on grounds of public safety , the issue of a permit may be subject to further tests : firstly , where there is a substantial difference in the level of technical competence , a technical test similar to that required of French ski instructors will be required ; secondly , the candidate could have to undergo a test to establish whether he is familiar with the environmental conditions in which the sport takes place , that is the French weather information system , the emergency services and so on .
The French authorities have undertaken to process as rapidly as possible all applications made in connection with the new rules , in order to guarantee that the system is fully operational for the next season , by actually applying the new rules before they have been formally adopted .
They guarantee in particular that the tests I have mentioned will be held at frequent intervals and , at any rate , whenever necessary to meet demand .
The Commission takes the view that the adoption of those provisions will bring the French legislation into line with Article 59 . It will , of course , be monitoring closely the application of the provisions to ensure that the practice adopted by the French authorities is also in line with the Treaty .
I consider this to be a good example of a real solution to a problem , in response to Commission representations to the authorities of the country concerned .
The Commission services have been informed that similar problems exist in Italy ; we have not yet received specific complaints , however .
The same principles will , of course , apply , and the Commission services have asked the Italian authorities for further information on their legislation in this area .
Were it to emerge that Italian legislation is in breach of Community law , the Commission would take the necessary measures to put a stop to this .
Thank you , Commissioner Monti .
I would express how grateful I am that you have intervened in these matters which provide clear evidence of what is meant by the phrase ' citizens first ' .
I am aware that regulations are being formulated , but I see another problem .
This has to do with the tests which ski instructors are required to take .
I have been approached by many ski instructors who say that it is becoming physically impossible to live up to the rules , because a trade barrier is in effect being created by making the examinations too difficult .
Indeed one needs to be a world champion on the slalom courses in order to obtain a ski instructor 's permit .
This applies to Danish and British ski instructors , whereas a cooperative approach has developed between the so-called Alpine countries , including France , Austria and Italy which readily recognise one another 's examinations .
I would therefore be very grateful if you would conduct inquiries to determine whether what is taking place is in effect a trade barrier or an obstacle to a commercial activity , because those who we might refer to as the northern ski instructors are being made to meet unreasonable requirements , whereas similar requirements are not being expected of ski instructors from the Alpine countries .
I thank the honourable Member for her kind words .
As you know , this is an issue that I am monitoring closely , and indeed it is incumbent upon the Commission to do so .
It goes without saying that , as part of that monitoring process , which will not end just because we have obtained the desired result , the Commission will be keeping a close eye on the application of the new rules and , were it to come to light that they were being applied too restrictively , it would take the necessary action .
This is a matter that we shall continue to watch closely .
I thank the Commissioner for his reply .
I want to put the question on behalf of the British Association of Ski Instructors as this is also a question for them .
They are extremely concerned for the same reasons as my Danish colleague .
They feel the tests they are being put to are unfair .
I know you will look into this .
You have already mentioned the point I wanted to raise and you said you were in discussion with the French authorities and you are hoping to come to a resolution of this problem .
I believe you said next season . The point I want to make is that it is imperative we get this dealt with as soon as possible because the skiing season is almost upon us and we want to ensure that British and Danish ski instructors have the opportunity to teach in the Alps as from this season .
The Commission understands that skiing is very much a seasonal sport .
That is why we put the necessary pressure on the French authorities , within what is not an indefinite time-frame but one that takes proper account of the seasonal nature of this issue .
As I said , perhaps a little rapidly in my earlier answer , the French authorities have undertaken to process as rapidly as possible all of the applications submitted in connection with the new rules to ensure that the system is fully operational in time for the new season , by actually applying the new rules before they are formally adopted : this is an instance not of late application but quite simply of the preventive application of rules that have yet to take effect officially .
Question No 43 by Elly Plooij-van Gorsel ( H-0895 / 96 )
Subject : Cross-border business activities impeded by rules concerning cars
A Dutch businessman resident in the Netherlands with a business established in the Netherlands and in Germany can obtain a licence to use a car with German number plates ( permit no . 3 under the Dutch customs system ) .
This is important as a means of visiting German customers .
However , the vehicle cannot be used for commercial purposes in the Netherlands .
If , on his return from Germany to the Netherlands , the businessman decides to visit a customer in the Netherlands , he runs the risk of a fine .
As a result , an employer is forced to have two vehicles with different number plates in order to comply with the rules in the Netherlands .
It appears from contacts with the Commission that this is a problem in cross-border traffic in other Member States , too .
Similar complaints have been submitted to the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions on a number of occasions in the past .
Does the Commission feel that cross-border business activities are being impeded , and the Internal Market frustrated ?
What does it intend to do about this ?
The Commission is apprised of the difficulties that exist in some Member States in relation to the use of vehicles by individuals resident in border regions who have , for business reasons , frequently , to move between the territories of one or more Member States .
These difficulties frequently arise because , in accordance with the conditions laid down at the time the single market was established , the Member States retained the right to maintain or introduce taxes on goods and services , such as those on vehicles .
In point of fact , all but two of the Member States apply a vehicle registration tax , and those taxes are not covered by Community rules .
They may vary considerably , as is in fact happening , as regards their scope , the rate , the purpose and methods of application .
In addition , all fifteen Member States apply road taxes , again according to a wide variety of criteria and at very different tax rates .
Vehicles have usually to be registered in the Member State in which the owner resides .
Furthermore , the use in the Member State of residence of a vehicle registered in another Member State is usually prohibited .
It is therefore inevitable that there will be some problems in the case of workers resident in border regions , commercial travellers , for example .
This is one of the problems concerning the taxation of motor vehicles that are of particular concern to me because of their impact on the proper functioning of the internal market .
Honourable Members will already , I think , be aware that my services are making a general study of all aspects of vehicle taxation in Europe .
That is necessary because , on the one hand , every Member State applies a range of fiscal measures with different objectives and , on the other , because those measures often and inevitably have knock-on effects .
The type of problem raised by the honourable Member is one of the specific measures that I have asked to be considered as part of the study on vehicle taxation which , as you will be aware , is provided for in the Commission 's 1997 work programme .
Thank you for that answer , Mr Monti .
The problem I am talking about here does not concern workers in frontier areas or the cross-border transport of workers from one country to another .
It concerns an owner-manager of a firm in the Netherlands who recently bought a second firm in Germany , one of the owners of SMEs whom we in Europe are so keen to encourage , because they create jobs .
This man , who now has two companies , one in the Netherlands and one in Germany , is not allowed by the Dutch customs authorities to drive a car with a German number plate - which he uses to visit German clients - in the Netherlands , not even if he pays all the relevant taxes for it there .
It is simply not allowed .
It would be if he were an employee , but he is an employer , and that makes all the difference .
The Dutch customs authorities have special legislation for such cases which is a huge obstacle to cross-border business , and this is something that we in the European Union should be encouraging , not impeding .

I am grateful to the honourable Member for that explanation and for further clarifying the issue .
The problem is that the vehicle is registered in Germany where the level of tax is lower , whereas the Dutch authorities consider that the vehicle is being used in Holland and ought therefore to be taxed in Holland .
Freedom of use of the vehicle throughout Europe requires full harmonization of taxes , and that is difficult , given that this is not so in the case for other goods .
As we see , then , the cause of the problem is , in the final analysis , a matter of taxation .
Since the problem exists , I agree with you that it is a problem and an impediment to the effective operation of the internal market .
That is why we decided to undertake the study I mentioned a moment ago .
That concludes Question Time .
Questions not taken for lack of time will be answered in writing .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.27 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Return of cultural objects
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0309 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive amending the Annex to Council Directive 93 / 7 / EEC on the return of cultural objects unlawfully removed from the territory of a Member State ( C4-0379 / 96-95 / 0254 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Mr Escudero ) .
Mr President , the general principle of the free movement of goods within the Union was the subject of certain appropriate restrictions on art objects described by Member States as forming part of their national treasure and heritage .
A list of cultural objects was produced which , above a certain financial limit fixed for each one , required authorization in order to be exported or , in accordance with the directive we are examining , should be returned to the Member State if they had been unlawfully removed from it .
However this list proved controversial as far as some cultural objects were concerned - watercolours , pastels and gouache drawings - which in some countries were regarded as drawings , with a certain financial sum , and in others were regarded as paintings , with a different financial sum .
Therefore the solution that was agreed - and unanimously approved - was the establishment of an intermediate category for these objects which was slightly higher than that for drawings and a lot lower than that for paintings .
Approved by the European Parliament ( unanimously , during the first reading ) it was subsequently adopted by the Council , without any amendments to the substance of the proposal in its common position .
However the Council did make two amendments to the Commission proposal : one concerning the procedure and the other of a technical nature .
The first one concerned the fact that , in order to guarantee the simultaneous entry into force of this proposal and the other one amending the regulation on the exporting of cultural objects , since there are two interdependent texts - the regulation and the directive - with a joint annex , it was suggested that the six-month period laid down for the incorporation of the directive into national law should commence from the date of publication rather than the date of adoption .
The second amendment stated that a footnote in the annex - footnote 1- would apply to the new category 3 a which had been created for watercolours , gouache drawings and pastels .
In my view , Mr President , both the provision concerning the period for incorporating the directive into national law and the one concerning the footnote which , logically , had also to cover the new category 3 a , are extremely reasonable and contribute to the fair application of the law , the amendment of which was passed by this House .
Thus , from my position of almost absolute solitude in Parliament , I take the liberty of asking for the House 's support for these two proposals which would contribute to the standardization of what is laid down in the directive .
I hope that tomorrow you will have the company of the House during the vote .
Mr President , my dear colleagues , the Council 's Directive relating to the return of cultural objects arouses our enthusiasm and raises great hopes .
Very great hopes indeed , since every Member State will be able , if it wishes , to return cultural objects which were unlawfully removed from the territory of other Member States before 1993 .
At the end of the eighteenth century , Belgium experienced one of the darkest periods in its history .
During this period , my country was victim to a systematic pillage of works of art organised by revolutionary France .
Beginning in 1792 after the battle of Jemappes , and interrupted in 1793 , it continued worse than ever after the battle of Fleurus in 1794 .
The order was given by those in power in France to remove as much gold and silver as possible from Belgium .
Charles-Hilaire Laurent , a member of the Convention , on assignment there , wrote at the time to the Council for Protection of the Public : ' We will take care to remove everything from this country which might adorn it and make of it the most beautiful in the universe ' .
This decision was heeded .
Hundreds of priceless manuscripts and extremely rare and ancient books were stolen , the works of our great painters - Reubens , Jordans , Van Eyck - were taken away to Paris and , in March 1795 , an agency for commerce and extraction from Belgium was set up .
A French historian declared : ' Altarpieces in Belgian churches were removed without further ado , and sent to Paris , by simple right of conquest ' .
Already in 1792 Dumoriez was aware of this banditry , then only in its infancy .
In a letter addressed to La Fayette , he remarked : ' The pillage of the peoples of Europe is part of the Revolution ' .
In a notice intended for visitors to Caen 's art gallery , you can read today : ' In 1801 , Caen received a second delivery of paintings , which had been selected - lovely euphemism - by Napoleon during his campaigns ' .
In 1818 , the Allies laid claim to the canvasses which had come from their countries but , thanks to the wit - another euphemism - of the curator , no works of any importance were returned .
Mr President , my dear colleagues , in 1945 , conquered Germany returned the forty works of art to Belgium which had been stolen from us by the Nazis during the last world war .
I dare to hope that France , conquered in 1815 at Waterloo , will perform its act of contrition and return to Belgium all of the works removed by those diabolical revolutionaries .
Mr President , I cannot hope to be as brief as the rapporteur who quite rightly proposed that you approve the Council 's common position .
In fact , in line with the House 's opinion during the first reading , the common position approves the Commission proposal without any amendments of substance . I welcome this since the final adoption of this proposal , which is now possible , will eventually guarantee identical treatment for watercolours , pastels and gouache drawings throughout the Union in the context of the return of cultural objects which were unlawfully removed from the territory of a Member State .
Thank you , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Epidemiological surveillance
The next item is the report ( A4-0287 / 96 ) by Mr Cabrol , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision creating a network for the epidemiological surveillance and control of communicable diseases in the European Community ( COM ( 96 ) 0078 - C4-0189 / 96-96 / 0052 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , my dear colleagues , the hour has come for the proposal for a Parliament and Council Decision on epidemiological control and surveillance of communicable diseases in the European Union .
As my very honourable colleague pointed out , new diseases - like tuberculosis - are seeing a resurgence , while others are appearing which previously were not considered important , and Creutzfeldt-Jakob encephalopathy is an example of one of these .
Consequently , it is imperative that we insist upon the surveillance of communicable diseases .
European citizens need this surveillance for their own peace of mind , and so that they can feel secure they want the European Union to be able to recognise the various communicable diseases , to be able to sound the alarm if any danger appears and to be able to act when this danger materialises .
For this process of ' knowing ' , reliable data needs to be collected , gathered by competent informants and transmitted to informants who can assemble it .
For this reason , it seems to us essential that this network is of the highest standard , and that it converges upon a common centre where all of the data can be collected .
To be of any use , the data must be comparable and any definitions must also be the same in all Member States .
At the moment , it is a regrettable fact that some Member States do not have information networks which are as effective as those of certain other Member States .
It is not enough to rely on a few clinical observations , but rather , as I have already pointed out , certain bacteriological observations should be made wherever possible for the purposes of getting to know the various dangerous microbial clones .
Knowing is therefore the primary objective , but an alert has also to be issued , which necessarily involves the centralisation of these data by a single agency , enabling the development of these diseases to be monitored constantly .
I have called for an agency of this kind in various reports .
It must really be a European health observatory , with responsibility for picking up new dangers and new threats of danger when they appear , and capable of sending out alerts in good time .
Indeed , it is not enough just to have a whole series of data ; there must be a central body which can predict , which above all can suspect each new threat and warn all Member States about it .
Alerting is not enough , however .
The body which has collected , assembled and detected the threat must be able to ' act ' by inciting the Member States at least to fight the epidemic and , better still , by telling them how .
I know that this poses enormous problems in the context of the European Union , where subsidiarity remains essential , but when it concerns the health of European citizens , subsidiarity must give way to security , and it is absolutely essential that the central body we have described has the resources to activate , or even compel , if not convince Member States to take necessary measures .
If we have the means , which are essential , their financing has still to be guaranteed since , at present , I am very surprised to note that no finance whatsoever is allocated to this programme .
To conclude , I would like to say that if we currently would like to have the means for perfect surveillance of the development of communicable diseases , to be able to protect the population of Europe , we need the resources to build a European health observatory , which is effective in recognition , alert and in the protection of European citizens .
Mr President , first of all I would like to express my support for the comments by Professor Cabrol and congratulate him on his work .
We must not forget that this proposal for a decision complements another one we examined recently on general health surveillance , and this is how it should be seen .
We must also bear in mind other initiatives such as the European Centre for the epidemiological surveillance of AIDS which was set up in 1987 , and other similar initiatives .
In other words , the European Union has already taken quite important steps in this area .
The European Parliament has an essential obligation to support all of these Commission proposals since it must be acknowledged that the latter is producing them at short notice and in the spirit and letter of the Maastricht Treaty .
But we must also appeal to the Member States to reinforce , promote and supplement these actions as this is the only way of achieving the objectives laid down .
Moreover , as it is clear from the health situation in Europe that the prevalence of communicable diseases is increasing alarmingly , we in this House must condemn this unacceptable situation in a geographic , economic and social area such as Europe .
All the Member States ' prevention policies have obviously failed , therefore active measures must be taken .
It must be remembered - and this is something that I have condemned repeatedly - that governments in Europe are devoting an average of only 2.4 % to preventive medicine , an amount which is obviously insignificant given the challenges facing us , when there are practically no more borders at world level and therefore the possibilities of transmission are legion .
It is no longer possible to speak of the diseases of underdeveloped countries since any of us could contract these diseases at any time .
There is one point I would like to underline : the Commission 's approach , which I believe we should support . It proposes the coordination and improvement of existing systems rather than the creation of new ones ; simply the necessary coordination of systems .
I think that this is an essential idea which we must develop .
When speaking of compulsory health , Mr President , care must also be taken as regards the confidentiality of the data collated , which raises ethical and legal problems . We have discussed these on various occasions in this House .
In addition a firm appeal must be made to citizens , with a clear call to those suffering from or carrying certain communicable diseases to assume responsibility , since their personal behaviour and solidarity are essential factors in curbing and controlling the transmission of these diseases .
Mr President , it is not often that reports come before this Parliament on the subject of public health .
So , today I too welcome the presentation of this specific report , which as the previous speaker also said , is supplementary to another one , and I congratulate a medical functionary , Professor Cabrol , on his report .
I asked to speak , not in order to add anything substantial to what the report contains , but mainly to support Mr Cabrol 's proposal to create not a network , but a European Centre for the Monitoring of Communicable Diseases and at the same time implement an early warning system , as he himself said .
The Centre would have advantages not shared by the data network which the Commission and the Council want to propose .
It can make forecasts , it can carry out experimental investigations on whose basis directions could be issued to the Member States , not on how to deal with the problem once it has arisen , but how to prevent it arising at all , and above all , through its branches in the Member States , which must exist , it will be able to set alarm bells ringing earlier , a factor which makes it able to deal with problems more effectively .
Finally , I express my disquiet about what I heard from Mr Cabrol concerning funding for this great issue .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is more important for the European Parliament to find a way to get money from the Commission for this purpose , than to find the 50 MECU every year that we approved for the publicity campaign in favour of EMU .
The time has come to pay greater attention to Europe 's peoples , to human beings , and less to numbers .
Mr President , the BSE crisis has kept us in Europe busy for some months now , and continues to do so .
The Union 's inability to provide an adequate response to BSE has greatly alarmed us all , and is further proof that the Union lacks a clear policy on how to deal with infectious diseases .
Systems vary from country to country and are not coordinated and therefore not efficient .
But the citizens of Europe have a right to be alerted to dangers and to be reassured about them , and this is why it seems entirely logical to me to have a European network which can warn the various health care systems in good time and coordinate the measures taken .
Is it not strange that our governments should be using the subsidiarity principle as an excuse for refusing to cooperate in setting up an efficient European structure which would be able to warn all our health systems about outbreaks of infectious diseases and epidemics ?
I find it very worrying that the Council seems not to realize how important such a network would be and has not allocated funding to set it up .
Mr President , our group fully supports the Cabrol report , which substantially improves the proposal for the establishment of a network for the epidemiological surveillance and control of communicable diseases in Europe .
This initiative is significant for three very important reasons : first because - as has already been said - infectious diseases are on the increase in Europe , reflecting the fact ( which must not be forgotten ) that social conditions are worsening . With the economic policies being pursued , I fear that these will continue to worsen .
Therefore it is vital to have this instrument in order to take appropriate action .
Second because , perhaps as a result of the side-effects of our policies , infectious diseases are also increasing at an alarming rate in the countries of Eastern Europe , which , due to the relations which exist , poses an obvious threat to us .
Lastly , there is a third very important geographic area - Africa - where many infectious diseases are also increasing , for other reasons , at an alarming rate , which also makes these measures necessary .
However , I think it must be pointed out that it is not enough - as has already been said - to have a surveillance network to carry out the tasks mentioned . It will also be necessary to take measures , in addition to prevention and treatment , to eliminate the social conditions which trigger off these diseases .
It is therefore vital to move in this direction by giving full support to the Commission , to the Cabrol report and to whatever steps are taken by the Council .
Mr President , I think we must thank our colleague Christian Cabrol for the work he has done and of which , as he said , the hour has not only come but which , in practical terms , is rapidly set to become extremely urgent .
Today we must acknowledge this European initiative , which rides roughshod through delicacies , reticence , the rather shrivelled concerns and the subsidiarities to serve at last the cause of public health of all of our fellow European citizens .
He underlined the three most important objectives : firstly , the collection of information , giving particularly specific details with respect to the type , method and identical nature of the information required , then the establishment of an early warning system to departments responsible ; finally the coordination of reaction .
I am particularly pleased at what he said when , with a kind of clever gradation , he mentioned the fact that it would be necessary to suggest , then advise , then convince and , if necessary , compel .
I really should say that at present , every State in Europe , or almost , has its own network , its own system .
The amalgamation of these networks seems a logical next step .
I would , however , like to highlight two things .
The first is the existence and the particularly active nature of the European branch of the WHO .
It is naturally appropriate that we should work with the World Health Organisation , and in particular with its associate centres which , in Europe , are particularly active , and I think with respect to this that avoiding doubling up will also be a concern .
The second item concerns contamination , through diet with certain diseases of which Creuzfeldt-Jakob is an important example .
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy has shown us , in any case , the inadequacies of our current system .
Let us hope that this initiative is a first step in the direction of the progress we must make in the protection of our fellow citizens .
To tell the truth , it is in the direction of the constitution and activity of a large administration , which could perform the same functions as the Food and Drug Administration as it exists in the United States of America and which works wonders in the protection of American citizens , that we must be going .
While we await this constructive innovation , we must be glad about any initiative which strengthens the solidarity between the citizens of the Union , and more particularly about the initiative that Christian Cabrol is about to take .
Mr President , Professor Cabrol 's report , which everybody agrees is remarkable , proposes a network for epidemiological surveillance and control of communicable diseases .
This is an excellent initiative and a topical subject , when we are seeing the resurgence of old diseases , of bacteria which are becoming resistant to antibiotics , the emergence of new pathologies , AIDS and BSE .
So , if I have understood Professor Cabrol correctly , we must rebuild Atlanta , even if we already have epidemiological surveillance centres , and I am thinking of BSE and what Mrs Alterovitch is doing for example , in France .
So a European surveillance centre , a European observatory would be created .
Professor Cabrol , every time I see the word ' European ' , I do not draw my revolver , but I feel worried .
The Committee of Inquiry into BSE , moreover , showed that Europe really does have something to worry about .
First , you tell me that the primary mission of this observatory would be to ' know ' .
But when as part of the Committee on Agriculture , before the European Commission , I propose quite simply the classification of potential zoonoses , as the WHO and the International Epizootics Organisation does , who is it who objects simply to the term potential zoonosis , as against recognised zoonoses ?
The European Commission .
You say , ' early warning ' , but no European authority gave us an alert , and certainly not those clowns on the Standing Veterinary Committee , an example of whom we had at the committee of inquiry in the form of a Danish lady who irritated even the most pro-European .
You say ' act ' , but it was the Nation States , by the principle of subsidiarity , who gave permission for action in the BSE affair .
All that the Commission has done is to pursue the five German Länders who refused to eat or to accept British cattle .
I can see in this , Professor Cabrol , the surgeon who has got to the end of the road and who only treats the symptoms .
The real causes of all of these communicable diseases are immigration , drugs , under-development and ultraliberalism .
These are the things which have caused unemployment , which have created a landscape of poverty and caused the resurgence of tuberculosis .
It was the European establishment , by its blindness , which was the source of BSE , so that the most formidable of communicable diseases , the ideological prion which is the source of everything , is perhaps European spongiform encephalopathy , and of this we are your ' sentinel ' GPs , my dear colleague , Professor Cabrol .
Mr President , with his excellent explanation of the motives and his excellent intervention of a few minutes ago , Professor Cabrol supported with common sense and scientific rigour the amendments which the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection is proposing to this House .
He bases all of this on one question , which should be the only one used as a guideline by us , the representatives of citizens , in relation to public health : what are the needs of European citizens ?
It is hard to believe that there are still some Member States in the Council - fewer and fewer each time , from what I have heard , and only one in this case - which , via their governments , also representing citizens , are not asking the same question , or consider another question to be more important : what powers am I losing ?
Subsidiarity has turned into a moral alibi for those who do not believe in the historic development of the European Union and for those who resist the removal of our political borders .
The exceedingly cautious nature of Article 129 of the Treaty , concerning health , recommends certain actions which underpin the approach of the Member States .
If anything in the area of health requires a transnational approach , it is communicable diseases .
If anything has a Community dimension , it is epidemiological surveillance and the need to create a network and a European centre for this purpose .
If there is any rational , scientific need as regards Community legislation , it is for a regulation obliging Member States to harmonize their laws , provide mutual information and coordinate their activities in the field of communicable diseases .
Let us rely on the Council ( or all the Council members ) to look at it in this way .
Once again this House requests that it receive the Commission proposal positively and that it enrich it with the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Thank you , Mr Flynn .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Towards sustainability ( Community programme )
The next item is the report ( A4-0300 / 96 ) by Mrs Dybkjær , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision on the review of the European Community programme of policy and action in relation to the environment and sustainable development ' Towards sustainability ' ( COM ( 95 ) 0647 - C4-0147 / 96-96 / 0027 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , it is my pleasure , as rapporteur of the Committee on the Environment , to present this report with the corresponding amendments .
I must first take this opportunity of thanking all those who have participated , the president , the assistant rapporteurs , the rapporteurs from different committees , the assistants and the committee 's members for their constructive contributions to the process , both technically and practically .
The background to this work was that a decision had been taken , in conjunction with implementation of the fifth environmental action programme , to carry out a mid-term assessment in 1995 against the background of concrete analyses of developments since 1992 .
To this end the Commission produced a situation report which was then supplemented by a report from the Environment Agency .
This situation report is cautiously optimistic , and overall is quite lyrical , speaking of seeds , buds and flowers that need tending and watering .
The Commission 's concluding report , against the background of the situation report , is more straightforward .
It lacks the necessary changes of attitude and the will to take the giant step forward that is required in order to advance in the direction of sustainability .
The Environment Agency 's report says that the European Union is making progress in its campaign to reduce certain forms of environmental stress , but not in the sense of improving the general quality of the environment , and certainly not in the sense of ensuring a sustainable development .
In other words , if we are not careful , we will not be left with many seeds , buds and flowers that we can water , and it is not altogether clear that we will have a healthy water supply with which to water them .
The conclusion is that development eats ups improvements .
Changes are necessary to achieve the objectives .
It is against the background of the strong lead from the Commission , both now and earlier , that we must see the further treatment and discussion of the Commission 's recommendation , which is also the reason why people on all sides have criticized it in such strong terms on the grounds of its abstract nature , backed up in general terms by the director for DG XI who has referred to the Commission 's work as proposed ' guidelines ' , which is of course something quite different from a new assessment of the extent to which the fifth environmental programme 's objectives , in terms of sustainable development , can be achieved .
The recommendations provide no indication of what the situation will be like in the year 2000 .
There is no concrete relationship between actions and words .
In order to straighten out these matters , therefore , the committee has broadly agreed on 50 amendments in an attempt to improve the situation .
Since the Commissioner has publicly expressed criticism of the way in which the committee operates , betraying clear errors and misunderstandings , it is perhaps appropriate to make a statement on how the process has developed .
The committee first discussed whether it should send a recommendation back to the Commission with the words ' to be revised ' .
We abandoned this approach for two reasons : we had no confidence that we would produce better amendments and we did not wish to lose any time .
Against this background I , as rapporteur , put forward 100 amendments which were supplemented by a further 100 from the committee members .
When the final voting took place in the committee , around 100 of these amendments were adopted .
After achieving this success , as one might regard it , I was encouraged to reduce the number of amendments through further deliberation with the assistant rapporteurs from other groups .
Not because there was disagreement on the amendments , but because such a large number of amendments in a conciliation procedure might be regarded as too cumbersome .
This work was carried out and , as already mentioned , there is great unity amongst the groups concerning the 50 amendments which have now been given top priority .
In other words , it is not the case that the committee is turning its back on the amendments it made earlier , but that we recognize that if the original amendments were a poor starting point , it would be impossible to deal with such a large number of amendments .
And so back to our report .
The Commission 's recommendation of a new assessment is a retrograde step in terms of the original fifth environmental action programme .
The positive commitments have been completely watered down , and there is no trace of a binding time frame .
Therefore the main content of the amendments , proposed by a broad majority , is a concrete expression of the recommendation , and there is a reference in several places to a time frame of the end of 1997 .
The committee is well aware that 1997 is unrealistic ; at best the recommendation will take us through 1997 . But we have made it clear that time is of the essence , and without a tangible time frame and the setting of priorities , we do not have an earthly chance of achieving our goals .
Finally I would add the following .
The Commission must of course take the Member States with it .
As we are quite aware , it is often the Member States that oppose environmental recommendations , but we will get nowhere if the Commission does not impose its authority .
It is , and will remain , the Commission 's task , in this as in other areas , to be the driving force .
That is the purpose of the Commission .
If it fails in this task , it has no justification .
Rather than criticize the committee and its amendments , therefore , the Commissioner should be glad at the support for the environment which the European Parliament is giving in these amendments .
It should give the Commissioner a better basis for his activities in the Commission and with respect to the Council .
The European Parliament has thus come to realize that this is how other Commissioners see Parliament .
Mr President , the fifth environmental action programme emphasizes the importance of long-term energy strategies to ensure that environmental stress from energy supply and consumption is reduced to sustainable levels .
Greater efforts are required to achieve this , particularly taking into account the considerable and indeed , actual , growth in the transport sector .
Whereas energy consumption has been reduced in industry and other areas , it continues to increase in transport .
With respect to energy efficiency the committee considers that one of the European Union policy initiatives with a potential impact on the demand side is the SAVE programme .
Parliament has supported the SAVE II programme but the Council has failed to accept the importance of SAVE II for important energy efficiency measures in the energy sector .
If SAVE II is not adopted fully , then we will have adopted no energy policy in the European Union to combat global warming .
I need not emphasize the seriousness of this .
While most areas of environmental concern are addressed in the programme at some length , nuclear issues are only briefly touched upon despite the fact that vast tracts of land within and bordering the EU Member States have been contaminated by nuclear incidents or accidents of one variety or another .
From the point of view of sustainability , if Member States of the European Union are to continue with this technology , the industry as a whole needs to be evaluated to ensure that measures are taken within the programme that put the principle of sustainability at the centre of decision-making .
Any further contamination , such as another Chernobyl-type accident will create an environmental deficit and liability for future generations that will make sustainability an impossible goal to achieve .
I know that the Committee on the Environment has adopted amendments stating that nuclear power is intrinsically unsustainable .
The Energy Committee of the European Parliament refuses to endorse this position . Therefore we have a conflict within Parliament itself .
I suggest that we need to resolve this complex problem by means of a hearing involving the Commission , the Commissioner herself , and the committees with these differing views .
It is a very serious issue .
As draftsman of an opinion , I remain convinced that agricultural economic development and the improvement of the environment are compatible .
The future development of agriculture and the maintenance of rural populations will necessarily involve an improvement in the conditions of environmental insertion of agriculture into rural countryside and ecosystems .
Sustainable development , in agriculture , is a system of economic development which can be maintained , long term , without any noticeable impact on the environment .
For the last thirty years , significant improvements have been secured for the environment in areas such as the reduction in pesticides , chemical fertilisers and animal faeces .
But some problems remain , with the increasing artificialisation of methods of production in farming and changes in foodstuffs , with the effectiveness of agroenvironmental measures and the reform of the CAP , and with the aid available for policies relating to quality and alternative farming methods , such as organic farming , particularly in livestock farming , as demonstrated by the current crisis relating to BSE .
Sustainable development in agriculture should be translated into clear technical action and characterised by at least four criteria : the maintenance of or increase in the productive capacity of agricultural land ; the production of high quality organic foodstuffs which do not leave pollutant residues ; the use of renewable energy and materials such as wood ; the maintenance of biodiversity .
The amendments of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development which all led in this direction and which represent a very positive growth in awareness of the responsibilities of this sector towards the environment have not been retained , even though the European Commission has stressed its interest .


With 29 of my colleagues , I have therefore retabled the six amendments rejected by the Committee on the Environment , and these are : 103 , the improved integration of agriculture and the environment ; 104 , the introduction of a notion of agricultural intrants much broader than that of pesticides ; 105 , the encouragement of all forms of sustainable agriculture , particularly at the level of research ; 106 , the implementation of a consumer information policy ; 107 , the promotion of agricultural intrants which are least harmful , and renewable energy sources and materials such as wood to ensure sustainable prospects for products of European forests ; and lastly , 108 , the definition and development of a European forestry strategy which is based on the multifunctional role of the forest .

All of these amendments lead in the direction of sustainable development in agriculture .

My dear , colleagues , I would like you to understand that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development demonstrates hereby its sense of responsibility towards the environment .
By voting for these amendments , you will be encouraging this attitude .
Mr President , ' Towards sustainability ' is both the title of the programme and its objective .
The scrutiny which the House has to perform today is certainly no easy task , since the rapporteur , Mrs Dybkjær , has transformed the Commission 's rather insubstantial communication into an extensive report .
The report is of course an extensive one not least because of the numerous amendments , and my group supports the negotiated withdrawal of some of these , so that the programme which we adopt can serve its intended purpose : a revision , a process of taking stock , providing an overview of the extent to which the objectives are realistic and have been achieved , and of what still needs to be done to reach the goal of sustainable environmental development in the Union .
We know that we are a long way from achieving these objectives , as the European Environment Agency has confirmed . Not only will major efforts be required , but also a very specific timetable , which must be practicable and verifiable .
I should like to comment on three areas which are of particular concern to me . First of all , it is especially important , in my opinion , for us to pay heed to the international commitments and agreements entered into by the European Union in the field of sustainable development .
I am not only thinking here of the Rio follow-up process , Agenda 21 , a European strategy for biodiversity and measures to reduce CO2 emissions ; what is even more important , in my view , is our participation in the Environment for Europe process , since it involves countries which have applied for admission to our Community , and towards which we already have certain responsibilities .
I also feel it is very important that the Community 's environmental standards should be raised to the level of those in the three new Member States , so as to introduce better environmental standards throughout the Community , for the benefit of all our citizens .
It is also extremely necessary and important to examine the extent to which existing Community policies ensure sustainable development .
A good deal has already been said on this point , but a brief list would include the policies on chemicals , energy , waste management , transport , tourism and above all , of course , agriculture .
We have tabled amendments dealing in greater detail with how the budget can be adapted to take more account of environmental concerns , and what is to be made of ' green accounting ' .
Most important of all , without a doubt , is the protection of human health , because only if this is protected will we have a future at all .
Finally , forward-looking Community policies which respect the environment and create jobs must be promoted , because only by setting ambitious environmental objectives for the future will we be able to develop our economy in a way that secures a future for Europe .
Mr President , the fifth environmental action programme is a very important route map for Europe towards sustainability .
We in the EPP congratulate Mrs Dybkjær on her energy in producing such a report and on her willingness to withdraw quite large chunks of it when we all got together to weed it out .
I think that Mrs Dybkjær has got the right approach in being very critical of the Commission 's original proposal and in using her amendments to sharpen up the approach of the European Commission to the problems that lie in front of us .
I think also that she is right to set down targets for dates by which the Commission should bring forward draft legislation .
No harm was ever done by aspiring to certain targets .
A lot of harm is done if we do not set ourselves such targets .
In particular , the amendments which we support in the European People 's Party are , as I have said , the sharpening-up of the approach particularly to the reform of the common agricultural policy , the promotion of clean energies , the requirement for the Commission to look at the environmental impact of its own proposals and programmes , the proposal for public procurement procedures to incorporate environmental considerations , stricter monitoring and reporting requirements and a more focused role for the European Environment Agency .
I would like also to draw attention to the amendments put by Mr Trakatellis for the incorporation of health considerations into environmental policy discussions .
Finally , I would like to invite Mrs Bjerregaard not to be shy .
I understand that she has had certain things to say about the Environment Committee in the Danish press .
I do not know why she confines herself to the Danish press when she can , in fact , be perfectly blunt speaking to us here tonight who are , after all , members of the Environment Committee .
Do not be shy , Mrs Bjerregaard .
If you have criticisms to make of the Environment Committee you should make them here and not in the Danish press .
We therefore look forward to you tearing up your speech which has no doubt been written with very great care by a number of people , and saying what you really think .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Let me begin by congratulating the rapporteur on the excellent job she has done .
This intermediate report on the review of the Community programme of policy and action in relation to the environment and sustainable development , is designed both to assess and to identify those obstacles that could stand in the way of its application and to put forward possible corrective measures for the period 1997-200 .
The key expression is ' sustainable development ' which means making changes in current development , production and behavioural models in order gradually to steer human activity and development towards sustainable , that is acceptable , forms that will enable us to live in an environment that is in a healthy state and , at the same time , guarantee a proper level of social well-being and public health for all .
The aim is certainly an ambitious one and its achievement depends on the coordination and consistency of the political strategies that are to be put into effect , as well as the effective integration of the environmental aspect into all other policies in order to limit , as far as possible , the inexorable pressures that contribute to the depletion of natural resources , the deterioration of the environment and , consequently , impoverishment of the quality of life .
In those terms , the Community programme currently in force is the main text that identifies the action to be taken in five sectors which , because of their characteristics , affect the environment directly or indirectly and , at any rate , have a major environmental impact .
Those sectors are : industry , energy , transport , agriculture and tourism .
We are for the first time faced with a new approach in which an overall view is taken to the environment , development and socio-economic activity .
It is important that all of this should be endorsed within the European Institutions .
We cannot , however , support measures designed to exert the kind of fiscal pressure that it is difficult to cope with and the imposition of excessively rigid time-limits which excessively penalize not just industry but also those operating in those sectors .
Finally , this review provides an exceptional opportunity to improve the quality of the state of the Community 's environment , and approving the guidelines will therefore certainly be important and definitely useful for all the Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are surely all agreed that the Union 's sustainable development measures have so far been inadequate .
This is also apparent from the Commission 's report .
The citizens of the EU Member States expect concrete evidence that the European Union is genuinely acting in the interests of their safety and their future .
I hope that the fifth environmental programme can be implemented and its undertakings put into practice quickly , and that no pointless prestige issues , for example concerning timetables , will be allowed to arise among the Union institutions .
We must not endanger the preparation of the next new environmental programme .
From a northern European perspective I would have liked the problems of the Baltic region to be stressed more .
I do not believe that the Baltic can be compared to the Mediterranean .
Nearly all the countries around the Baltic are either current Member States or - in a number of cases - have at least applied for membership .
I hope the Community will devote more attention than at present to the environmental problems of the Baltic and will step up its action in the region .
This also means greater financial effort .
In addition , the new Member States ought to be able to retain more stringent environmental standards and adopt new regulations to improve the state of the environment .
Mr President , Commissioner , your punishment appears to be that you have to stay here on Tuesday nights with the members of the Committee on the Environment .
First of all , I would like to say that I am speaking on behalf of my colleague , Maruja Sornosa , who had to leave .
We must congratulate the rapporteur on her work , and say that we also agree with her criticism of the proposal .
We agree with the criticism and we also agree with the lack of precision as regards the measures to be taken and with the lack of binding decisions and responsibilities .
Around 200 amendments were tabled by the Committee on the Environment .
Yesterday , at the meeting of the Committee on the Environment we found out that , as there were a lot of amendments , the political groups - I do not know whether it was all of them - decided to reduce the number of amendments .
In any case , we hope that it is decided to maintain the ones that are really significant for this report .
The aim of these 200 amendments was to change the direction of the proposal for a decision because , in our view , it is necessary to return to the initial objectives of the Fifth Action Programme .
This debate and the principles underlying the Fifth Action Programme are very important , and if we do not ensure the rational management and rational distribution of resources , we will not be able to achieve the original objectives of the Fifth programme .
Particularly if it is borne in mind that Community law - and we will see this later on with Mr Lannoye 's report - is sometimes not complied with .
Mr President , last year , according to the FAO , seven million children died of hunger .
In a report from the World Watch Institute prior to the UN summit meeting tomorrow in Rome on the world & # x02BC ; s disastrous foodstuffs situation , it was demonstrated that one of the many reasons for world hunger is the excessive use of chemical agents .
Another reason is the greenhouse effect which can affect arable land .
How , then , is one of the world & # x02BC ; s richest regions , the EU , contributing towards the fight against this sort of threat ?
According to the EU & # x02BC ; s own modest objectives in the fifth programme of measures for the environment , the use of chemical agents should be reduced to zero in subsoil water by the year 2005 and carbon dioxide emissions be stabilised at the 1990 level by the year 2000 .
But now the EU & # x02BC ; s own environment office has shown that these two objectives will not be met by means of the present policies .
By the year 2000 chemical agents will continue to exceed the limit value in 65 % of the subsoil water in the EU , and the emission of carbon dioxide will be 5-10 % higher than in 1990 .
These are only two examples of how the EU & # x02BC ; s policies do not lead to the fulfilment of even one of the EU & # x02BC ; s own low environmental targets in the fifth programme of measures for the environment .
This relevant also in the case of acid rain , nitrates in the subsoil water , noise , alternative sources of energy and much more .
In brief : the EU & # x02BC ; s environmental policies are , by the EU & # x02BC ; s own calculations , in tatters .
What , then , does the highest authority , the Commissioner , do ?
She does practically nothing .
The Commission & # x02BC ; s assessment of the fifth programme of measures for the environment is devoid of content .
Now , at the prompting of the Greens , the Environmental Committee has , instead , done the work which Ritt Bjerregaard should have done .
This leads inevitably to a sensitive question .
If Ritt Bjerregaard is not doing her job , is she needed ?
It is necessary to be a bit personal here ...
And let me say this in Danish also in order to demonstrate that I am not just speaking as spokesman for the Greens , but also as one who feels close ties with Denmark .
It is just that we are disappointed , very disappointed .
We believed that a strong personality from a country which leads in environmental matters could have placed the environment and sustainable development high on the Commission 's agenda .
Instead we have come to realize that it has been placed at the bottom .
Unfortunately you have acted too much as a participant in the Danish power and media struggles and too little as spokesperson for the environment and for global solidarity against the powerful lobbyists acting on behalf of the politics of growth and exploitation , both in and outside the Commission .
If you are not prepared today to accept our amendments and those of the Environment Committee and wish to change your tactics , we must ask that you leave this position and that Denmark sends us one of its many good environmental politicians as a new environmental Commissioner .
Mr President , in Danish we have a saying to the effect that the road to hell is paved with good intentions .
The Commission intends to develop better procedures , frameworks and forms of action , and to improve the instruments it has to offer , but we now have only two months until 1997 .
What results can the Commission hope to achieve if it is only now starting to develop these various areas ?
The Commission will pay greater attention to harmful factors , to the development of concepts and greater incentives , but here too we must ask : with what results ?
The European Environmental Agency has concluded that if efforts are not stepped up , the effects on the environment will continue to exceed the human safety standards .
This shows that our consumption of materials and energy is rising sharply .
At the same time rapidly increasing car ownership and tourism are subjecting the environment to progressively more intense effects .
These developments are regarded as catastrophic in terms of the management of waste and the volume of nitrates in the ground water .
Forecasts indicate that the volume of public waste will rise by as much as 30 % by the year 2000 and this is far in excess of the target .
The growing nitrate and pesticide concentrations in the ground water are expected to exceed the target by over 75 % in the EU 's agricultural areas .
There is a real need for revision of the programme set to handle this if the targets are to be met even approximately .
Was it not in fact this that the Commission was meant to tackle ?
In conclusion , then , I would like to thank Lone Dybkjær for her report .
Mr President , I am extremely puzzled - like Mrs González - to see that the rapporteur had to submit no fewer than 90 amendments , and the corresponding committee another 100 , to bring the text proposed by the Commission for the revision of the Fifth Action Programme on sustainable development - in relation to which I had the honour of being the original rapporteur - into line with the resolution adopted by this House on 18 November 1992 , and with paragraph 2 of Article 130r of the Treaty on European Union .
Despite the fact that the rapporteur apparently reached agreement with the group coordinators subsequently , as she acknowledged , in order to reduce such an astronomical number of amendments , it is obvious that the text submitted by the Commission has not been amended , but rather rewritten to produce a new sixth action programme .
In my view , Mr President , and as pointed out by the rapporteur , the Commission had the obligation of at least submitting to Parliament an adequate text , given the importance of the review of the Fifth Programme , containing objectives , instruments and specific timetables to assess , apply and achieve the objectives of sustainable development and the principle of integration contained in the original action programme which is still valid .
This did not happen , as is crystal clear from the huge number of amendments .
As we are pushed for time , I will conclude with the following question : does the Commission sincerely believe that the text it proposed will serve to speed up the implementation of the Fifth Programme and improve the quality of the Union 's environment , or will we have to wait , as usual , for a new sixth action programme ?
Mr President , the Fifth Action Programme for the Environment was different from its predecessors , because it envisaged a review .
The idea of the review was and is to adapt the objectives and means as they are outlined today after the programme is approved , in order to improve its efficacy .
Among other inadequacies of the Commission 's proposal , the most blatant in my opinion is the lack of an explicit link between the protection of man 's health and environmental hazards .
To achieve that aim in relation to sustainable development , the health factor must be seriously taken into account in every sector of Community policy and action , sectors such as agriculture , transport , energy , industry , tourism and others .
Great attention should also be given to the gathering and processing of data that reflect the situation of the human population 's health and diseases in relation to the state of the environment .
Maximum acceptable limits for dangerous substances and pollutants in air , water , soil and foods should be constantly reviewed and adapted in line with the scientific information available at the time .
And there should also be an integrated approach to the factors that influence the accidents caused by means of transport , especially those that result in loss of life or cause disablement and entail prolonged treatment , accidents that have major economic and social consequences .
The European Union must develop activities aimed at the systematic cultivation and communication of the new environmental awareness , so that European society can participate fully in managing the environment and change its consumer behaviour .
Finally , Mr President , the future Sixth Action Programme for the Environment , when it is worked out , must explicitly provide for the protection of health from environmental hazards .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I shall not speak Danish like Mr Gahrton , but I would like to congratulate Lone Dybkjær on a very good report .
I must say that I support the criticism of the Commissioner & # x02BC ; s supervision of the fifth programme of measures of the environment .
The proposal which Ritt Bjerregaard has put forward represents , in fact , a retrograde step and contains , disastrously , no concrete political undertakings in respect of Europe & # x02BC ; s environment .
An important objective behind the supervision of the environmental legislation in the EU should be that the new Member States , i.e. Sweden , Finland and Austria , should be able to retain their high environmental standards and that the EU & # x02BC ; s environmental legislation be intensified so that the highest level of environmental protection can be achieved by 1999 .
Another important Swedish requirement is to integrate the environmental aspects of the EU & # x02BC ; s agricultural policy .
Objectives and resources in the agricultural policy must accord with the direction of the environmental policy , for us to be able to achieve results and press on towards sustainable development .
The reform of the EU & # x02BC ; s agricultural policy which is planned must , therefore , have a clear environmental profile .
This may be achieved , for example , by agricultural subsidies being changed from one concentrating on production , to one giving priority to the environment .
In this way a better environment will be created while , at the same time , participation in a world market is made easier .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Environment Committee and Lone Dybkjær on a very good report with much concrete political content .
A major problem with the EU & # x02BC ; s and the Commission & # x02BC ; s environmental policy at present is that it is rich in fine words , but when it comes to action , it is are often too small and often comes too late .
There are some points which I would really like to bring out and focus on in the report , including the following :
The vital need to move agricultural policy to an environmentally friendly direction ; we should not lose the golden opportunity to do this now that agricultural policy has still to undergo fundamental change prior to the extension eastwards.-The need for the European Union to really fulfil its promises regarding greater environmental standards which it gave to the new Member States in the course of membership negotiations.-Criticism of the Euratom Treaty and its objective of promoting civil nuclear power use and of the imbalance in the division of resources in energy research.-The necessity of changing the regulations regarding public purchasing so that real attention is paid to the environment.-The need to focus on environmental issues in the World Trade Organisation.There are here a number of positive proposals which similarly emphasise the great weaknesses in the EU & # x02BC ; s environmental policy today and that is why this is such a good report .
Mr President , regrettably the principle of ' sustainable development ' is becoming devoid of meaning .
The original idea was that the carrying capacity of the environment should be taken into account in all human activity , so as to ensure that the present generations do not compromise the ability of future generations to meet their needs .
We are still far from having attained this ambitious objective .
The revision of the Commission 's action programme for sustainable development which is now under consideration does not eliminate the shortcomings .
The rapporteur criticizes the Commission 's action programme inter alia because it does not contain sufficient deadlines or objectives for improving the state of the environment .
Another major problem is that no measures have yet been taken to bring the EU 's environmental standards up to the level of the three newest Member States .
In the spring or summer of this year , this issue was thoroughly debated in Parliament , and the resolution adopted to wind up the debate once again called on the Commission to redeem the promises made to the new Member States during the accession negotiations .
I should now like to know what measures the Commission has so far taken in this regard .
Environmental issues are not sufficiently dealt with in the Commission 's annual programmes of work or the Presidencies ' statements of priorities either .
This being the case , environmental concerns inevitably take a back seat .
The impact of pollution and the careless depletion of natural resources does not stop at the borders .
Serious instances of the almost total destruction of the natural environment by pollution are to be found in the immediate vicinity of EU territory , to the north , east and south .
The Kola region in northern Russia is one example .
Environmental issues should be emphasized more than at present in cooperation programmes between the EU and third countries .
Here there is , above all , an issue of shared responsibility for the health and safety of our citizens and our future citizens .
Mr President , after listening to all my colleagues , I think that the reaction to this new Commission proposal is one of general dissatisfaction by all the Members of this House .
Perhaps this is because we had examined the Fifth Programme very carefully and Parliament had produced a very firm , solid resolution laying down objectives which are still valid - in relation to which we must be grateful to Mrs Díez de Rivera for the magnificent job she did at that time .
As regards examining these new measures , I think that we should have laid down very few objectives and have required the fulfilment of these more clearly . I would be content with 7 or 8 of the proposals contained in this review ( this is something that we have constantly repeated ) , which should have been turned into questions : what has the European Commission done so far in order to consolidate the internalization of external costs of all products ?
What has it done to promote the use of more environmentally-friendly modes of transport ?
What has it done to encourage the development of renewable energy sources such as solar energy ?
What has it actually done to apply a policy which integrates and is aimed at the final life cycle of products ?
What has it actually done - and this issue has been on the agenda for some time - to ensure that responsibilities are assumed in relation to the environment ?
We could go on in this way , paraphrasing the proposals made in this text .
I do not think that one hundred amendments are necessary - four or five proposals would be enough for me provided that the Commission undertook to implement these within a reasonable period of time .
Mr President , the report from Lone Dybkjær provides a valuable addendum to the Commission & # x02BC ; s proposal .
I shall concentrate upon the aspects which concern the question of climate .
I am convinced that this is a decisive factor with regard to the environment .
This is thus an appropriate opportunity to point the EU at a goal after the year 2000 .
The Toronto conference & # x02BC ; s proposals in 1987 have had a major political influence .
At that time there was a call for a 20 % reduction in carbon dioxide emissions by the industrial nations by the year 2005 , compared with 1987 .
It is this objective which most closely accords with the PPE Group & # x02BC ; s proposal for a reduction of 20 % by the year 2010 , since the start year was moved forward to 1990 in accordance with the decision of the Rio meeting .
This , in my view , is a tough target , but it should be possible to achieve it .
A majority of the committee voted , however , for an even tougher objective , with -20 % up to the year 2005 , and -30 % by the year 2010 .
I consider this to be an unrealistic proposal .
It is interesting that the same majority wishes to phase out nuclear power at a rapid pace .
This makes the objective even more unrealistic .
An aggressive environmental policy should be to retain nuclear power as long as it meets the high safety requirements and to concentrate upon energy savings , bio-fuels etc . , so as to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels and thereby reduce the emission of carbon dioxide .
It is also time to acknowledge that our nuclear power in the EU has saved many people & # x02BC ; s lives .
If , on the basis of the Commission & # x02BC ; s external report , we make an assessment of nuclear power 1985-1994 and compare it with coal condensate power , we come the conclusion that nuclear power has saved 20 000 human lives and , in addition , has protected us from major environmental damage to our natural surroundings .
We can , on the other hand , make considerable efforts to phase out nuclear power in Eastern and Central Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since changes within our group make this the last partsession at which I am able to take the floor as a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , I should like to use the opportunity of today 's debate on the EU programme ' Towards sustainability ' to raise for one last time something which is a pressing concern of the Austrian people .
When the European Union was enlarged in 1995 , an assurance was written into the Treaty of Accession to the effect that the legal provisions in the Community would be reviewed and , where necessary , brought up to the standards of the three new Member States .
This matter has now been with us for over two years here in the House , and I think it is high time for the Commissioner 's promises in this area to be kept .
We are waiting for these standards to be raised , and I thank the Commissioner once again for having promised to do all in her power to ensure that the standards are complied with .
Mr President , I am glad that Parliament is today debating the Commission 's proposal of 24 January 1996 regarding adjustment of the fifth environmental action programme .
This is in fact the first time Parliament has had the opportunity to debate an EU plan of action for the environment under the procedures for joint decision-making .
I have been personally gratified by the fact that in this way it has been possible for Parliament to be more actively involved , and because in the area of the environment Parliament is a good partner when it comes to improving the environment , and I will come back to this point .
I hope that the results of today 's debate will make it possible for the Council to debate the Commission 's proposal regarding its next meeting of 9-10 December 1996 , and that the decision-making procedures can be concluded by June 1997 when the UN General Assembly holds its meeting to follow up on the Rio Conference .
The rapporteur , Mrs Lone Dybkjær , has put a great deal of work into this report which is now submitted to Parliament , and there have been many exhaustive and useful debates in the Environment Committee , in the Agriculture Committee , in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , and in the Transport and Tourism Committee .
All in all the report , as it has now been submitted , contains 53 amendments , to which a further 13 amendments have now been added .
The Commission can accept 14 of these amendments in full , in part or in principal .
For institutional reasons , or because the amendments significantly affect the area of application of the Commission 's proposal , 39 of the amendments cannot be accepted .
For the sake of good order I will name these : Nos 1 , 4-7 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 17 , 20 , 27 , 35 , 37 , 40 , 44 , 45 , 47 , 48 , 50 , 56 , 57 , 59 , 66 , 76 , 81 , 82 , 85-87 , 89 , 91-93 , 97-99 , 100-102 .
Of the 13 new amendments 6 can be accepted in full , namely Nos 104 , 105 , 106 , 107 , 108 and 109 .
The rest we are unable to accept .
I would like to make some comments on the amendments in their entirety .
In various amendments the Commission has requested that amendments be tabled before a certain date and with an indication of their content .
Parliament knows that , for institutional reasons , I am unable to accept the possibility of the text containing provisions on what the Commission ought to do and by when .
An action programme is not a detailed work programme for the Commission .
What we are dealing with is a mid-term report , and a joint effort should ensure that we achieve an improved environmental standard in Europe .
The proposal is designed so that it contributes to ensuring a more effective realization of the current Fifth Action Programme by the year 2000 .
The proposal is , as it was in the past , based on the report on the environmental situation from the European Environment Agency and , as has been stressed , it is alarming .
The proposal lays down priorities which are becoming , or indeed already are , geared towards particular provisions .
Some are already included in the action programme for 1996 , and others are planned for 1997 .
I have certainly not taken the view that assessment of the Fifth Action Programme should stand in the way of concrete initiatives .
This is what there has been debate about in the Danish press , where I have responded to the rapporteur 's criticism of the proposal , as I also do here this evening , and I am sorry to have to tell Mr Gahrton that I do not unfortunately believe it will be possible for many Commissioners to subscribe to all the proposals that have been put forward by the Green Group .
I hope we will get a professional debate of each proposal , for which the Green Group will have its rapporteur later in the evening , and in which area I feel there has been excellent cooperation .
The proposal clearly cannot cover arrangements for which the Member States or other partners involved in the programme are supposed to provide .
The programme 's success depends to a very significant degree on each party taking its own share of the responsibility .
I would remind you that the fifth programme runs until the year 2000 , and that it consists of a whole series of objectives with details on how the parties can take initiatives at all levels in order to achieve these goals .
These objectives , as several have already made clear , and as others may well point out in the future , have not yet been achieved .
However Parliament 's and the Council 's resolutions do in fact contain provisions for revision of the programme .
In no sense is there the intention of revising the programme overall .
Nor is it appropriate at this stage to start preparing the seventh programme , as mentioned by Mrs Díez de Rivera in her remarks , and thereby set new objectives or new terms .
It is clearly this which has given rise to disunity between the Commission and Parliament .
The text is a political response to the conclusions in both the report on implementation and the environment report from the European Environment Agency .
It has been a very comprehensive hearing procedure and the aim is to give a new impetus through Community arrangements .
Therefore the Commission has proposed some high priority key areas in which Community involvement must be accelerated over the next two years in order to implement the programme more effectively , and here I am in strong agreement with Parliament .
This has to do with a better integration of environmental considerations in the most important - including the economic - areas of action .
Many have discussed agriculture , which we too have discussed on other occasions .
It involves a wide range of political instruments , compared with the traditional instructions and control methods .
It has to do with additional and better enforced legislation , and in this connection I would refer to the communication issued by the Commission a few weeks ago .
And finally it also involves expanding our commitment with the aim of increasing the Community 's leading role in international affairs , which is what Mrs Graentiz in particular has mentioned .
We also have in Europe a special responsibility and personal interest with regard to environmental problems in Central and Eastern Europe , in the Middle East region and in the Baltic states , which is why the proposal contains priority arrangements for these areas .
Mr President , in submitting the proposal we have been debating today , the Commission has taken the view that it is the Community 's responsibility to move forward setting a good example and to play a leading role both internally and internationally , and that is therefore necessary for all parties to demonstrate a greater political commitment and to make a greater contribution in order to achieve the overall strategy and objectives of the fifth programme .
This is the great challenge that each of us faces .
Moreover , this commitment must be implemented speedily if we are to carry out the fifth programme .
I am confident that Parliament will adopt the necessary provisions to ensure that this is the case .
Even if we are not agreed on the working out of the programme , we do agree that more needs to be done , and that concrete action is absolutely essential . The rest of today 's agenda demonstrates that such action is already well under way .
Mr President , Commissioner Bjerregaard said that she would explain why she had blamed the Environment Committee in the Danish press .
I have not heard her explanation .
What did she say in the Danish press , and what did she accuse Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection of doing ?
Yes , I certainly can . In summary I made it clear that I had been engaged in debate with the rapporteur and in particular with regard to her criticism of the Fifth Action Programme in question .
As has become apparent from this evening 's debate , I have a different view about what we need to do with such a revision .
I have therefore repeated the arguments I also expounded in the Danish press .
Mr President , the enumeration of the numbers of the amendments which could be accepted or not accepted , went tremendously quickly .
I must therefore ask about Nos 4 , 5 and 14 .
Am I to understand that these are not accepted ?
So I have correctly understood - they are not accepted .
Then we are still faced with the " threat ' which we referred to earlier .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
NGOs in environmental protection
The next item is the report ( A4-0258 / 96 ) by Mr Rübig , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Decision on a Community action programme promoting non-governmental organizations primarily active in the field of environmental protection ( COM ( 95 ) 0573 - C4-0104 / 96-95 / 0336 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , non-governmental organizations which are active in the field of environmental protection can no longer be ignored in the debate on environment policy .
At a time when subsidiarity and deregulation are being emphasized , it cannot be assumed that the regulatory framework governing environmental matters will grow further .
Given that fiscal and economic measures are often unpopular , the need for widespread awareness campaigns cannot be overstated , and NGOs play an important role in this context .
Environmental organizations operating at European level are often a source of timely warnings and practical proposals , which are then taken up and acted upon by political parties and governments .
One could give as an example the random sampling of drinking water by non-governmental organizations , which identified a new policymaking need .
Today , however , we are seeing not only voluntary , altruistic organizations : profit-making bodies exist in the environmental sector , as in others .
They operate like marketing or advertising agencies , using venture systems , and carry out political campaigns for private and governmental organizations , or for firms .
The aim of this programme is to provide financial support for environmental organizations which are directed towards the public good , are non-profit making and , above all , independent of party politics .
It is quite possible for NGOs to be politically motivated ; however , the key criterion here is goals relating specifically to the environment .
We wish to subsidize not political parties , but non-governmental organizations which are devoted exclusively to this objective .
Financial support for independent associations is also important , however , since NGOs operate in an entirely different way from commercial organizations .
The Committee on Budgets has also come out strongly in favour of financial support and has provided for a total of ECU 8.65 million in 1997 , probably with some ECU 2.5 m for this programme once again .
It is estimated that these resources would cover general measures to increase awareness of environmental issues , various European organizations which are active in the field of the environment and that of animal welfare , and the establishment of data bases and special information and documentation centres , as well as television recordings and CD-ROMs .
The granting of public funds must be subject to strict conditions to prevent any misuse .
These fundamental criteria , which the Commission has until now presented in the annex , must in Parliament 's view be moved to the programme itself , since in fact they constitute the legal basis for the allocation of resources .
Parliament deems it particularly important to achieve a sound cost-benefit ratio , a lasting multiplier effect and effective and balanced cooperation , especially across borders .
Umbrella organizations at European level should receive particular support , and cooperation between such bodies should be facilitated .
Support should above all be given to innovative activities such as the information diskettes that I have already mentioned , which could be used more widely .
The strengthening of civil society and participatory development in NGOs are desirable .
However , the assistance should amount to only 60 % of operational and administrative expenditure .
Moreover , I believe that NGOs must themselves seek to ensure that their activities are on a sound financial footing .
This is necessary if in future they are to work independently of the Commission and other influences at EU level .
Non-governmental organizations which have been the subject of a conviction within the Union during the past two years should not be eligible for funding .
It goes without saying that the European umbrella organizations must abide by the rules of democracy , and no problems have arisen in this respect in recent years .
These bodies cannot and certainly do not wish to be put on a par with organizations which act irresponsibly and intentionally break the law .
Our wish is to equip the Europe of the future with rational and environmentally sustainable policies .
Mr President , this report does not have any budgetary implications for any of the major areas within the Community , except for one of the most important .
It concerns the opportunities for voluntary organisations & # x02BC ; to participate in co-European environmental work , and to vote for the European environmental perspective where national and purely commercial interests otherwise threaten to dominate .
Without our environmental organisations the environmental work in Europe would not have got where it has today .
They are important shapers of opinion and a significant factor in enabling the work to proceed .
An environmental issue often begins its life by being picked up by the environmental organisations and then , much later on in the proceedings , implemented by means of legislative proposals or other decrees .
The environmental organisations may be regarded as acting as blow lamps on us politicians .
For all the areas within the Community where we make resources available , it is important to have clear frameworks and rules to determine how the measures are to be employed .
Slack procedures without any follow-up or inspection only foster suspicion and ambiguity .
This is also true of the contributions to environmental organisations .
At the same time it is important that we do not hamstring the organisations so much that they lose their impetus .
In this proposal to the report I believe that the rapporteur has been successful in bringing together these two objectives .
In order for us to address the environmental problems we have in Europe , cross-border co-operation is necessary .
Clearly , nations themselves must bear a significant responsibility , but no nation can solve the environmental problems by itself .
Co-operation is the key to a successful environmental policy .
Parliament has also recently proposed , in the first debate on the 1997 budget , a higher grant to environmental organisations than that proposed by the Council of Ministers .
This is an expression of our desire to strengthen coEuropean environmental work .
At present the budget has not yet been finally adopted ; it will be subject to a second debate and the Council will very soon have its say .
But I hope that even the Council of Ministers is prepared to devote effort towards our voluntary organisations , our environmental organisations receiving the support which is needed so that we can enjoy a useful pan-European environmental co-operation next year as well .
Mr President , first of all I would like to support the Commission 's initial proposals and , of course , the amendments put forward by the rapporteur , Mr Rübig , in his report .
I think that this debate on the funding of non-governmental organizations specialized in the environment is a good time to acknowledge the work they have achieved , particularly in the past 30 years .
What in those years were demands by minority groups have now become the programmes of governments , which we are currently implementing .
We have to agree with the Commission that this aid is necessary from both a financial and an environmental point of view , and therefore we must support it .
The non-governmental organizations have also proved to be a very important instrument in ensuring the fulfilment of Community legislation at national and regional levels .
Having said that , it must also be remembered that funding is not everything and that there are other measures that these organizations have been awaiting for some time , such as increased access to information and easier access to the courts . This would also help boost resources which will always be scarce .
On another level , it must also be remembered that these organizations essentially have a Community dimension , but increasingly more is being expected as regards funding at national , regional and local levels , therefore it is necessary to apply subsidiarity since it is not possible at Community level to obtain all the funds necessary for the entire movement .
It must be remembered once again that movements of this type play a very important role at local level and also need to receive financial support .
In any case , the Community financing should basically concern coordination and the promotion of this general coordination .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , Mr Rübig has portrayed NGOs in a way that , in my opinion , does not always correspond to reality .
Mr Rübig , please listen !
This is important !
( PT ) Mr President , as I was saying , Mr Rübig has portrayed non-governmental organisations in a way that does not always correspond to the idea I have and which I have generally heard expressed .
They are not always independent in party political terms , although the Council and Commission document refers to environmental justification , high independence and motivation .
Obviously , I fully agree that they exist as an important contribution to educating people and , in particular , educating the younger section of the population but I do not think that work by NGOs alone is going to protect the environment .
Also , as to the claim that they are not profit-making organisations , that was not always the case of those NGOs which I have witnessed .
In many cases , I have known of major environmental protests being quietened down by granting projects to environmental bureaux .
However , the idea which Mr Rübig has conveyed in his opinion , a more pragmatic idea in terms of a cost-efficiency assessment of non-governmental organisations is welcome for our group .
On the other hand , I should also like to raise another question : who mandates non-governmental organisations to represent them ?
Who is it who gives them the political strength and the authority to give their opinion on cases as important as the environment ?
What scientific preparation do they have in the fields of chemistry , physics , botany and zoology ?
For what reason , before money is handed over , do we not carry out a genuine assessment of the value of NGOs ' contribution to the environment for them to take decisions about the future of our children ?
Mr President , perhaps I could ask the previous rapporteur - even if the previous rapporteur is not paying attention - what training and experience the lobbyists , whom the NGOs are often up against , have .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for the good work he has done and then thank the NGOs for the contribution they make in a different context .
I regard the NGOs as absolutely necessary in view of the fact that , as a general rule , we who are involved in parliamentary work are greatly affected by one-sided lobbying , e.g. from industrial interests .
This work cannot of course be carried out on a voluntary basis .
There are no industrial concerns to back up and finance the work , and it is therefore necessary that the rest of us make provision so that the NGOs can also carry out their work .
We must not do this on behalf of the NGOs .
We must simply do so on our own account and for the sake of democracy .
Mr President , I wish to commend the rapporteur 's work and also the Commission 's .
It is something we should be voting for tomorrow .
It has been very clear in recent years that NGOs have played an important role in the development of environment policy and on many occasions have raised awareness of environmental problems amongst the general public and decision-makers to the point where legislative action has been taken to cure those problems .
Recognition of that role is implicit in the provision of this finance from the Community budget to assist the work and fund those projects .
This fund is a modest one in comparison to many other items of the Community budget and therefore must be spent carefully and with the full knowledge that it is public money and must not be misused .
It is a welcome feature of many of the projects which are funded by this budget line that they are funded additionally in many cases or complemented by voluntary work and voluntary contributions made to the NGOs by many of their supporters .
It seems to me that we must try to continue to enlarge this budget line and encourage its use by others .
There are many others , not just the existing green organizations which are accessing this funding now , which could in future usefully benefit from the source of funding of this kind , to bring environmental issues to the attention not simply of legislators in Brussels but also within the regions and within the localities of Europe and to address more local issues and ensure that justice is done through the courts .
We must bear that in mind when we come back to review this budget line in future and it is something we should continue to press for .
Mr President , I would start by thanking the Environment Committee , but also the Budget Committee and their rapporteurs , and in particular Mr Rübig , for the significant work they have contributed to our consideration of the Commission 's proposal .
Let me emphasize that it is my aim that a clear and stable basis be created for the Commission 's support of the valuable work being performed by European NGOs .
There are countless examples of the way in which NGOs have contributed to keeping environmental issues of central importance on the political agenda .
And the way in which they have raised people 's awareness of these matters and created the necessary pressure and encouragement so that decision-makers arrive at a forward-looking policy .
The NGOs also keep a watchful on the EU 's and the Commission 's policies .
In certain cases we are not , perhaps , over enthusiastic about this , but we know that in a working democracy this is the role of NGOs .
This is why the Commission places a high value on their contribution to environmental policy and , as we have seen , Parliament also shares this view .
As we know , the purpose of the proposal is to create a legal basis for existing practice .
This has to do with financial support for NGOs pursuant to instructions which have operated satisfactorily since 1988 .
First and foremost the proposal must be seen as an indication of the how important the Commission regards it to commit itself to supporting these organizations .
It is therefore of great importance that the text be as clear as possible , and that the provisions can be implemented in a way which acknowledges these organizations ' interests to best advantage .
It is in this spirit that the Commission has considered Parliament 's amendments .
The Commission is able to accept 13 of the amendments in full , in part or in principle .
Amendments Nos 1 and 5 clarify the text , which is also the case with regard to the requirement of transparency and openness in Amendment No 3 and with most of the definition of what an NGO is in the second part of Amendment No 6 .
Certain elements of Amendments Nos 8 and 18 also contribute towards clarifying the text , but for practical reasons the Commission cannot approve that part of Amendment No 18 which is aimed at changing the time frame for the Commission 's report , nor that part which lays down a legal basis for a future proposal .
The Commission is able to subscribe to certain of the principles behind Amendment No 7 , the purpose of which is to clarify the text , and the principles behind Amendments Nos 2 and 14 which have to do with recognition of the NGOs ' revenue in the form of provisions .
However , there is a need for a certain amount of rewording .
We are also able to accept Amendment No 23 which lays down a limit of 60 % as that percentage of the NGOs ' budget which may be financed by the Community .
There are , however , a number of amendments which the Commission is unable to accept because they do not improve the proposal and would in fact in certain cases have the effect of creating confusion or problems with implementation , which would be harmful for the NGOs .
For example , an attempt is made in Amendments Nos 4 and 13 , in the first part of Amendment No 6 and in the second part of Amendment No 8 to provide a more detailed definition of the umbrella organizations .
But this type of organization is already covered by the definition in Article 1 of the Commission 's proposal , the latter being deliberately worded in such broad terms that it can encompass any new NGOs .
Further definitions are therefore superfluous .
The main part of Amendment No 3 and Nos 9 , 10 , 17 and 21 would limit the Commission 's flexibility with regard to allocating funds each year in a way which is most advantageous to the NGOs .
Amendments Nos 11 , 16 and the first part of Nos 14 and 25 would be impossible to implement in practice .
Amendment No 15 is superfluous since , under the funding regulations , which are in operation , all NGOs in receipt of funds are required to keep proper accounts , irrespective of the size of assistance they receive .
According to Amendment No 12 , up to 100 % funding may be provided , but this is neither an advantage for individual NGOs , since they would then be totally dependent on the Commission 's financial assistance , nor is it an advantage for NGOs in general , since it would mean that fewer organizations were able to share in the limited resources .
Amendments Nos 19 and 20 are also unacceptable , since they would mean that less money was available for cooperative activities , and these are of great importance for the European NGOs .
With regard to Amendment No 22 , we can accept this in principle , but with a certain amount of rewording .
We can give further consideration to the maximum duration of the period of assistance , which was stated as three years in the original proposal .
This would be in accordance with the Commission 's policy of strengthening its partnership with the most dynamic and representative of the NGOs .
Finally , I would once again express my thanks to Parliament for its sterling work , evidence of which we have already seen in this proposal .
I have confidence in saying that all of us here recognize the NGOs as highly valued partners in the political decision-making process , and am therefore sure that together we will arrive at a proposal which will be of the best possible use to the NGOs , and thus to the environment .
Thank you , Mrs Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Effects of certain projects on the environment
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0343 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Directive amending Directive 85 / 337 / EEC on the assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment ( C4-0371 / 96-94 / 0078 ( SYN ) ) ( rapporteur : Mr Lannoye ) .
Mr President , it was in 1985 that the directive on environmental impact assessments was adopted by the Council .
That was more than ten years ago , and over this period of time many things have changed .
Indeed , since the Single Act and the Maastricht Treaty , environmental policy has taken on a new dimension - on paper at least .
The Espoo Convention , which deals with impact assessments on crossborder projects , was , moreover , signed by all Member States of the European Union in 1991 , but sadly , it has not been ratified .
Lastly , and perhaps most importantly , inadequacies of the directive of 1985 have been revealed in practice .
Indeed , if you speak to our colleagues from the Committee on Petitions , and in particular to its President , you will know that it is on the basis of this directive that the greatest number of petitions have landed before our Parliament .
All of this , obviously , justified and still does justify broadly the fact that this directive should be amended and improved .
What did the Council do after the first reading in Parliament and the Commission 's proposal ?
The Council did , I must be fair , partly improve the 1985 directive .
But I mean only partly .
I am going to start with the pat on the back , because as far as the consultation procedure for cross-border projects is concerned - arising from the Espoo Convention , therefore as it applies to the European Union - the proposal can be considered overall to be satisfactory .
Second positive point : the list of projects subject to obligatory impact assessments - the list in Annex 1 - has lengthened considerably , which is a good thing , but immediately I would like to add one reservation .
It contains some very grave lacunae , particularly regarding intensive livestock farming , in the adoption of thresholds which are much too high , even higher than those in the IPPC Directive , which is ridiculous !
And with respect to high voltage electrical power lines , a threshold voltage of 225 kV was chosen , which is completely incomprehensible , or perhaps completely comprehensible , given that the largest proportion of projects are at 220 kV .
Finally , there were exclusions for undertakings manufacturing lubricants , and installations for the production of hydrocarbons at sea were not taken into account either .
So we have a whole series of shortcomings .
Regarding Annex II on non-obligatory impact assessments , we have seen the Council withdraw from the Commission 's proposal .
We can only condemn this .
In the name of subsidiarity , we shift the responsibility back on to Member States for deciding whether or not an impact assessment should be carried out on special protection areas , since it is these same Member States who will be defining the criteria .
Another gross lacuna is that all amendments adopted on the first reading by Parliament which were aimed at increasing information for and consultation of citizens concerned have been rejected .
This is rather staggering when we are talking about participation and democracy .
When Parliament proposes completely realistic concrete measures , they are rejected .
Finally , to my last comment , the zero option .
This concerns the possibility that a project is not carried out because the need for it can be met in other ways .
This zero option does not appear clearly within the Council 's plan .
Consequently , we have a collection of things which have led the Committee on the Environment to propose a series of amendments .
These appear , to my mind , perfectly realistic and a serious improvement to the Council 's proposal , and even the Commission 's initial proposal .
We might as well make a thorough job of improving the text , while we are at it .
I will never understand , and I think that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection could never understand why , when you have a really effective tool , you do not use it to the full .
We are talking here about an environmental policy tool which really is essential and which , at the moment , is only half way there : we are adopting a tool which has some excellent qualities , but which does not go far enough .
Here , I am addressing my colleagues in other groups : or else we continue to reaffirm ambitious objectives for the environment and when new projects come up , as is the case here , we must arm ourselves with an effective tool so that these projects are compatible with objectives in the future .
The purpose of the impact assessment is the selection of projects which have a minimal impact on the environment .
I believe , therefore , that we have enormous possibilities here .
If we obtain a majority of 314 votes tomorrow and if the Commission really does want to support us on most of the amendments , I think we will have made a great step forward for a good environmental policy .
I would like to hear our Commissioner on the subject so that we know the position of the Commission .
It could determine the vote of some of our colleagues tomorrow at noon .
Mr President , for about the last twenty years , European politics have made a priority of environmental integration in their common policies .
Among the technical tools of this policy , measures for prevention and integration of the environment , at the planning stage of projects , constitute an unescapable act for our industrialised countries , in which changes to ecosystems and the countryside have been deeper and more rapid , over forty years since the Treaty of Rome , than over the entire course of previous periods .
Increasing demands from citizens with respect to the environment and the very great competitive imbalances caused by enormous differences between Member States , incite us , as parliamentarians , to very high standards , which are already met in many countries , in many Member States , including France , and the latest entrants , Austria , Finland and Sweden .
In the context of environmental impact or incidence assessments , a particular vigilance should be applied to the definition of the various projects concerning town planning , industry and infrastructure , as well as agriculture and leisure , as shown by the report on the imperfect application of the 1985 directive .
These should have been evaluated by comparable and technically fair procedures .
The draft amendment of this directive intervenes in this respect , in Annex I , to make this procedure obligatory for projects or substantial modifications to activities which have escaped it up to now , thereby causing inter-European relocations and competitive imbalances .
This measure goes in the right direction towards the coordination of procedures at European level and we support the rapporteur , Mr Lannoye , for his excellent background work .
However , as it concerns agriculture , and taking account of the ' nitrates ' directive already in existence which limits the quantity of nitrogen of animal origin used in manure spreading to 170 kilos per hectare per year , I have been led , along with twenty-nine other colleagues , to present a compromise amendment for intensive livestock farms .
In an attempt at simplification , Amendment No 26 to Annex I recommends 200 LSU for intensive land-based livestock farms , and 10 tonnes per year for fish farms , as a trigger threshold for an environmental impact assessment .
A limit on size for new farms is a simple and easily administered criterion for administrative authorities .
Once again the hour of midnight approaches and once again the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has its debate .
One day we will go beyond midnight and all we will find on the steps will be glass slippers , all our chauffeurs ' cars will have turned into mice , because the Cinderella of the debate is the Environment Committee 's subject .
I think that is a great pity .
This was raised as an issue of concern last week in the Environment Committee and I had considerable correspondence with Mr Vinci before that .
Can I please request some variation .
Somebody has to be last on Tuesday night but it does not always have to be the Environment Committee .
These subjects that we debate are of tremendous importance to European citizens .
I congratulate Mr Lannoye on his excellent report and would like to exchange words across the Chamber with both the PPE and the Liberals so that we can build some form of coalition .
I am impressed with the way in which the PPE seems to have moved from its rather negative position in the Environment Committee debate into accepting some of the principal amendments which we think are important .
I do not think , however , the PPE has gone far enough and I would particularly ask it to look at Amendment No 7 , which on my information it still looks set to reject .
This relates to the definition of the word ' project ' .
The reason why we in the PSE think this is so important is because if we define the word ' project ' satisfactorily we can avoid a situation where a series of small projects are set out to avoid the definition of a main one .
In the United Kingdom , for example , we have had a number of examples of ways in which bypasses around relatively small towns could be said to be linked together to make a motorway by stealth .
Similarly with the opencast mining referred to in Annex 2 , I can envisage a situation where a series of opencast mines would fall below the required limit but taken as a whole would have a tremendous effect upon the local environment .
Can I therefore ask the PPE to look at that Amendment No 7 in the light of what I have said , and to take into account that possibility .
Can I also draw the attention of Parliament to Amendment No 23 .
I would ask the PPE to look at it very carefully because we are talking about roads and that amendment , approved by the Environment Committee , attempted to take account of the possibility of a large road , 10 kilometres or more in continuous length .
Clearly the same argument about the link passes applies .
Can I also congratulate the PPE because on Amendment No 38 there seems to have been some movement .
The concept of the zero option now appears to have been accepted and I hope therefore that with the support of the Liberals , the PSE and the Greens that a principle will be vindicated in tomorrow 's vote .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unlike the rapporteur , I think the common position considerably improves the Commission 's proposal , and this applies - with my apologies , Mrs Bjerregaard - both to the new versions of Annexes I and II and to Annexes III and IV , specifying the project selection criteria .
I do nevertheless still have some serious criticisms .
However good the intentions , legislation will not work in practice unless certain conditions are met .
One of these conditions is systematic coordination with the other directives in the environment sector which cover the same subject-matter , for example the IPPC directive , the Seveso directive and the eco-audit , since transposition is considerably complicated by this lack of coordination .
It must also be said that nearly all the new amendments would make it even more difficult to carry out environmental impact assessments in the Member States .
Both the developers and the authorities examining their applications would have to cope with further complications and delays , without any benefit to the environment .
On the contrary , most of these amendments would detract from the quality of the environmental impact assessment itself , and hence environmental protection as a whole .
However , I would endorse what Mr White said : I too find it a sorry state of affairs that the House always discusses on a Tuesday evening the important legislative business where Parliament has real decision-making powers , and that the press reports do not appear until two days later , causing everything to fall flat .
The President , who has responsibility here , cannot do anything about this time-lag , but it is up to our group to rally round and ensure that environmental issues are discussed at times when there are people sitting and listening in the public gallery , because the environment is something which really is of interest to many of our citizens , who appreciate that it can only be regulated by joint action .
Mr President , I too would like to start by thanking the rapporteur for the hard work he has put into this subject , but I must at the same time point out that what we are dealing with here is a proposal which , in my opinion , requires us to discuss the subsidiarity issue in a slightly different way than we have so far .
I would have to agree with the rapporteur that we need a series of amendments , but on the other hand I must also say that as soon as one goes into a great deal of detail , which is what the rapporteur has done here , and draws up detailed provisions stipulating how citizens and the public authorities are supposed to relate to one another , one finds oneself discussing the management of a system , and it is precisely in this area of systems that we have to recognize that we have very different traditions in our respective countries .
With regard to the Danish tradition , for instance , the amendments to this proposal are far too detailed .
We have excellent experience in Denmark when it comes to man 's effect on the environment , and even if I have expressed some criticism of the system that has been set up in Denmark , it is still the case that we have had a great deal of experience .
Some of these proposals will not therefore have any direct relevance in a Danish context .
By way of example , I would pick out Amendment No 14 in which the rapporteur refers to the experience looked for in the various experts who are to have responsibility for environmental assessments .
I feel this should be up to the individual countries to determine for themselves .
That is why I feel that in this area the rapporteur has gone into rather too much detail and is perhaps seeing things too much from a French administrative tradition , and not enough from what would be an appropriate perspective for a Scandinavian , or at least a Danish , tradition .
Mr President , we agree fully with Mr Lannoye 's proposal and with the amendments he has proposed and which were approved by a majority of the members of the Committee on the Environment .
We also agree with the need to revise Directive 85 / 337 , whose shortcomings and problems became clear when it was implemented .
With regard to the amendments , we will simply refer to a few which we consider to be the most important : we agree that exceptions should be limited , since such exceptions are causing real disasters in some countries .
The importance of defining common criteria for special zones , the scope and , above all , the information and consultation of citizens , must be underlined .
We know that this is complicated because the Directive on information for citizens ( Directive 91 / 33 ) has not even been incorporated into national law in some Member States , for instance mine .
Yet it is very difficult to enable citizens to find out about things and to get involved , and we know that it is not possible to preserve the environment if the citizens are not involved , and if they are not aware of the wealth which this would entail .
Unlike Mrs Dybkjær , I do believe that the amendment concerning rigorous environmental impact assessments is very important .
I remember two or three years ago a study by the Commission itself showed that probably only 20 % of environmental impact assessments were rigorous and that in some cases - this happens in my country , in accordance with the cultural differences Mrs Dybkjær spoke of - the companies themselves commission the teams which are going to carry out these assessments .
This obviously cannot continue , and we will support these and any other amendments which Mr Lannoye proposes in the Committee on the Environment .
But there is another problem concerning the measures that must be taken in relation to the blatant infringement by many countries of Directive 85 / 337 and others , and of Community environmental legislation in general .
Mr President , you are well aware - since you have been the rapporteur on several occasions on the annual report concerning compliance with Community law - that Community law on the environment is repeatedly infringed by the various Member States .
There is thus a lot of work to be done , and we will support Mr Lannoye 's report .
Mr President , I have just a few brief points to make about this recommendation .
The Member States of the Union have very different views on environmental impact assessments .
Some countries say the more , the better ; others , including my own country of the Netherlands , say they should only be carried out where projects are expected to have serious damaging effects on nature and the environment .
I support the latter view .
It is better to have a single good assessment for each major project , rather than thousands of reports on smaller projects which merely blunt their impact .
The Council has produced a common position with which we are fairly happy , on the whole .
The annex on compulsory assessments has rightly been extended , and Annex II , which sets out the thresholds for determining whether an assessment is necessary , is still framed broadly enough .
All in all , therefore , it is an improvement on the 1985 directive , which led to considerable differences in implementation .
I would just comment on one amendment , No 26 , which would effectively make assessments compulsory for the entire farming industry in the Netherlands .
I cannot support this .
The Commission text is better on this point , in that it proposes assessments only for the intensive rearing of livestock or poultry above a certain number .
In my view , this covers all cases likely to have an environmental impact .
Finally , I should like to ask the Commissioner whether it is realistic to keep 31 December 1997 as the deadline for implementing this directive , given the scale of the changes that will have to be made to legislation in the Member States ?
Mr President , under Article 130r ( 2 ) of the Treaty , ' Community policy on the environment shall be based on the precautionary principle and on the principles that preventive action should be taken , that environmental damage should as a priority be rectified at source ... ' .
The means of achieving this is the environmental impact assessment .
Today we have the second reading of the report by Mr Lannoye on this subject , for which I would thank him .
Perhaps I could say straight away that , unlike Mrs Dybkjær , I think the simplifications proposed here by Mr Lannoye are very important and appropriate .
We cannot have an internal market on the one hand and , on the other , test the impact of projects on the environment in different ways in different Member States .
The environmental impact assessment is the key to sustainable economic development , enabling us to avoid misguided investment , the high cost of environmental damage or irreparable destruction , and I think that cooperation between the authorities , developers and public opinion is what is needed here .
That is why I particularly welcome the amendment in which Mr Lannoye dwells on public consultation .
In the town where I live , an environmental impact assessment was carried out on an experimental basis by joint agreement along exactly these lines . The result was a procedure which made it possible to omit one stage from the normal process , thereby substantially reducing the firm 's costs and removing the need for it to dispose of highly toxic waste .
What is more , no objections were lodged after the first procedure , and it was possible to bring forward the date originally set by the firm for the start of construction , because the administrative procedure was completed several months earlier than expected .
Public consultation was not a drawback ; it accelerated the proceedings .
This is what must be borne in mind , I feel : sustainable development can only be achieved by working together with the public in a spirit of openness and transparency .
Whenever the public is given incomplete information , it leads to nothing but protests and delays , and that is precisely what we wish to avoid !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I sometimes wonder how it is that sensible , or at least justifiable initiatives like this one - the amendment of the environmental impact directive - can be devalued in this way by formalities such as unduly short deadlines for transposition .
When Parliament approved a measure on integrated pollution prevention and control last May , we took the view that a transposition period of three years was necessary and appropriate .
The directive now before us , on the other hand , will not be published until next March , in the normal course of events , and provides for transposition by 31 December 1997 .
In other words , only nine months will remain for transposition within the Member States .
Experience of transposing previous legislation on the environmental impact assessment has shown that a much longer period is required to incorporate such a procedure into national law .
We do not wish to see half-baked measures being introduced , and we have an opportunity to ensure that the matter is handled properly .
I would therefore call for a two-year transposition period , as provided for by Amendment No 42 , since otherwise the matter will not be handled properly , leading of course to many problems for all concerned in the various ministries and enterprises .
Once again , therefore , I recommend a transposition period of two years .
Mr President , I think that we are all agreed that what we need is more consistent application of the 1985 directive across the European Union .
Like Mrs Dybkjær , I believe that the common position gives us this consistency .
I do not see any point in the amendments which Mr Lannoye is tabling .
I think Mr Lannoye has his own agenda .
His agenda is , in fact , not driven by what he finds , to a large extent , in this report which is a report from the Commission dated 1993 on how this directive is being implemented .
I cannot understand how Mrs Barthet-Mayer , who , I think is still with us at least in body if not in spirit and mind , can say that France has a good record on implementing the environmental impact assessment statement .
I draw her attention to page 27 of this report in 1993 where it says , regarding the provision of information to the public from an environmental impact assessment , that in France the stage at which this occurs is sometimes after the execution of the project .
That is certainly something which should be addressed and , I believe , is addressed by the amendments which the Commission is tabling .
I particularly have to draw the attention of Mr White , who seems to be rather too privy to the discussions on the EPP , to the fact that we shall be opposing Amendment No 26 .
We do not thing this deals properly or sensibly with agriculture .
It would be extremely damaging and it would not produce a sensible text .
We shall definitely be opposing Amendment No 26 which I very much hope will then be defeated .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Environment Committee and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Lannoye , for its contribution and for the attention it has given to the consideration of this proposal .
The Commission is pleased that we are now very close to a final decision on this important piece of legislation in the area of the environment .
The directive on environmental impact assessment is a fundamental tool for protecting the environment .
The Commission 's aim in revising the 1985 directive is to achieve a clearer and more effective EIA system .
It must not be a complicated or over bureaucratic procedure .
It is clear that we will not support any initiative which would only serve to weaken the directive .
There are some amendments which the Commission cannot accept for technical reasons , but also because they would alter methods that have already been chosen .
It would take far too long to discuss each of the amendments in detail , and for this reason I will state our opinion of the amendments and single out certain ones for further comment .
The Commission is able to accept the following amendments in full , in part or in principle : Nos 1 , 32 , 35 and 39 can be accepted in full ; Nos 5 , 7 , 15 , 26 , 30 , 37 , 42 and 43 in principle ; and Nos 12 , 16 , 38 and 41 in part , which means that we are unable to accept the remainder of the amendments .
Some amendments namely Nos 3 , 6 and 8 , relate to environmental assessments of programmes in the proposal .
The Commission fully agrees with the environmental assessment of certain plans and programmes and is therefore working on the so-called SEA - strategic environmental assessment - directive in this area .
This new environment tool will be discussed by the Commission tomorrow , I hope , so the Commission has not been able to accept all the amendments relating to this area .
Amendment No 9 relates to removal of the exception from projects which are aimed at national responsibility .
In terms of the environment there is thus no reason for maintaining the exception with respect to national responsibility .
One can well understand Parliament 's concerns , therefore , with regard to environmental assessment , but national responsibility is currently outside the Community 's area of competence , and for this reason the exception must remain in the directive .
I also have some comments to make on Amendments Nos 12 , 37 , 13 , 17 and 18 , but unless I am asked to address these specifically , I will skip these in view of the late hour .
Amendment No 42 alters the implementation date from 31 December 1997 to ' within 2 years of its notification ' .
Determination of the implementation date depends on when the amended directive is accepted by the Council .
Since this is not likely to occur before the beginning of 1997 , the current date of 31 December 1997 seems to be too early for proper implementation .
On the other hand , two years from the date of notification would mean the beginning of 1999 , which is too long a period of time .
One year after notification would seem a reasonable period for satisfactory implementation of the amended directive .
Therefore this amendment can be accepted in principle .
This brings me to Amendments Nos 21 to 31 , and 39 to 41 , which add new projects to Annex 1 of the directive .
I support the principle of developing Annex 1 .
For the time being , in order to avoid unnecessary assessments , we must ensure that Annex 1 only contains those projects which may have a significant environmental impact .
Another important requirement with regard to this is that the descriptions must be sufficiently clear in themselves for determining which projects come under the annex .
Amendment No 26 and the first part of Amendment No 41 concern intensive animal husbandry and several speakers have addressed this topic .
These amendments may be accepted in principle , since it is important for the environment that not only poultry and pigs are included , as stated in the joint statement , but also that other types of intensive animal husbandry , which could have a significant impact on the environment , i.e. due to the concentrations and the overall manure production involved , should be included .
But the higher threshold set for animal units in Amendment No 41 is to be preferred in order to cover those cases which always involve a significant impact on the environment .
Nevertheless a threshold other than that included in Amendment No 26 relating to production of over 170 nitrates per hectare , must be added , since this is in accordance with the nitrate directive .
The Commission is able to accept Amendments Nos 30 and 39 .
Amendment No 40 introduces projects financed by the Community funds in Annex 1 and cannot be accepted because the source of finance does not have any effect on the environmental impact of a project .
Environmental impact is dependent on the nature of the project , its size and its location , in addition to which the structural solidarity fund provisions ensure compliance with the Community 's legislation on the environment , and this also applies to the EIA directive .
By way of conclusion I can say that the debate has been long and it has been difficult .
The common position has resulted in significant improvements of the procedure .
The amendments that have been accepted will further improve this proposal .
I will be happy to provide any further information that is required concerning specific amendments , but I believe we can congratulate ourselves that this proposal further improves the protection of both humans and the environment that public and private projects must provide .
Thank you , Mrs Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Waste management
The next item is the report ( A4-0364 / 96 ) by Mrs Jensen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the communication from the Commission on the review of the Community strategy for waste management and the draft Council resolution on waste policy ( COM ( 96 ) 0399 - C4-0453 / 96 ) .
Mr President , people do not produce waste for the sake of producing waste .
People generate waste as a link in a production process which has some other purpose .
Waste is often the source of problems for the environment and problems in the working environment .
Waste means loss , and must be reduced as much as possible in order that pollution is kept to a minimum .
All attempts to standardise waste , by turning it into ordinary products which the authorities do not need to monitor , overlook the fact that waste is the left-over product of some other production process .
In many quarters attempts are being made to undermine the possibility of close ties between those concerned with the environment and those dealing with waste .
Like other Members of the European Parliament , I have received voting information from the industry .
Information which attempts to tell those here who have been duly elected how they should vote on the matter of waste strategy .
I find this extremely embarrassing .
It must be hoped that it is so embarrassing that for that reason alone Members here present will not be swayed by these attempts to manipulate us .
If only we had an open debating system so that all affected , not just the richest , could have their say , so that we knew who the Commission was in contact with , before a proposal was tabled .
In its communication the Commission itself attempts to raise the question as to how much the principle of proximity applies .
The Environment Committee in the European Parliament is not an accessory of waste tourism .
We have been out for a walk on the West German waste mountains in what was formerly East Germany and we have received reports about the sending of dangerous waste to developing lands who have to pay for development aid by providing storage space for dangerous waste .
We would point out that there have been EU rulings which make it clear that the authorities can prevent the transportation of waste intended for an alternative use or for disposal if the transport involved is not in accordance with their plans for waste management , and these authorities , according to the rulings , are any region , commune or other form of local unit , which are required to make appropriate arrangements for the purpose of facilitating the receipt , processing and disposal of their own waste .
The local authorities ' role in waste planning is quite central .
The Commission only states that the regional and local authorities can play a role , but we have some good examples of effective cooperation between the authorities and companies in the area of waste processing , which , in the cases of Copenhagen , has meant a very significant reduction in construction waste and has also resulted in planned disposal tips being unused .
However the opposite also exists , i.e. Member States which fail to ensure that waste processing plans be introduced and fail to inform the EU of their waste processing plans , plans about which Member States assumed mutual commitments in resolutions adopted in the 1970s .
The Environment Committee recommends that processing programmes be drawn up in the area of waste .
I can well understand why such proposals should be put forward when a communication of the type we are dealing with is not supposed to come from Parliament , even if we have joint decision-making competence , or at least some influence over the actual waste proposal .
An influence which the Commission has often endorsed by going along with our proposal to a significant extent .
But many people are asking what such a communication is , and whether it is binding ?
I can only answer : Good question . You can refer to it if you like it , and you can ignore it if you do not .
And so I have some questions to put to the Commission .
These have to do with voluntary agreements .
The Commission has said in the committee that it is not the Commission itself which has suddenly become favourably disposed towards voluntary agreements , but one must recognize that the Commission 's communication refers to voluntary agreements .
I would therefore like to know whether the Commission agrees that voluntary agreements may work in a regional or national context where there is an arbitration system to deal with disputes , but they can hardly work at a European level where it is not possible to ensure proper cover , implementation or legal settlements .
Then we have manufacturer liability .
The Commission refers to both manufacturer responsibility and to the principle that the polluter must pay the bill .
This is an essential element of the environment debate .
The only question to be answered is how this is to be understood .
There can be many links in the production chain , so it is an oversimplification to talk in terms of introducing straightforward penalty provisions .
Would it not be more fruitful to start from the perspective of the manufacturers ' joint financial responsibility for waste processing .
What financial incentives is the Commission considering in this connection ?
Should it not cost the same to dispose of waste at tips throughout the EU ?
Waste converted to goods .
I agree that waste may contain hidden materials that can be used to produce secondary raw materials .
But I do not believe we can expect this to happen extensively unless we introduce overall waste planning locally and regionally .
It would be a mistake to allow waste that is not intended ultimately for disposal to be left out of the waste planning programme .
And is it still not the case that waste is quite a special product ?
I would also like to ask the Commission about its plans for dangerous waste , sorting at source , green taxes and inspection of Member States ' waste plans .
Mr President , I rise not only to give my group 's view on this but also my personal welcome to the Commission 's waste management strategy review and to the way in which it has been reinforced and developed by the rapporteur 's amendments .
As the author of Parliament 's response to the Commission 's previous waste management strategy I see here a careful development of waste management strategy emphasizing in many ways many of the methods we saw five years ago and helping them to be developed further .
One new element which I welcome very much is the renewed emphasis on the need to ensure that waste management strategy assists and is built around the principle of sustainable development .
In particular , it is important that we look at the hierarchy , that we accept that the hierarchy of steps is one that can be further developed .
It is one that can be further emphasized to ensure that we do the correct things with the waste that is inevitably generated by society and which inevitably must be made safe so that the environment is protected .
There is a continuing role for incineration within the waste management hierarchy , but its role needs to be constantly reviewed .
In particular , there are certain elements of the way in which cement kilns are used for waste disposal , particularly hazardous waste disposal , that need to be examined .
Although composting has been a Cinderella activity in the past , we need to give further assistance to that and encourage its development at local and regional level .
The new waste management strategy recognizes the role of local and regional authorities in facilitating , developing and implementing a real waste management strategy for Europe .
Their participation , their positive actions are essential if we are to realize an effective waste management strategy .
They help us in many ways to reinforce the proximity principle and ensure there is no possibility of waste tourism .
Finally , there is one issue that cannot be overlooked .
I refer to the continued pressure to reduce toxic and other hazardous waste in the waste stream .
Some of those substances , for example PVC , might be better dealt with by priority waste stream projects that could emphasize recycling as the main strategy .
But if we are to have a real and genuine waste management strategy we must take toxics out of the waste stream .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by stressing the great complexity and importance of waste management .
It is a complex issue , because only at a relatively late stage was it realized , in the light of rulings by the European Court of Justice , that the position of waste in terms of the free movement of goods is something of an exceptional one , and that clarity is still lacking in this area .
And it is an important area too , because the whole issue of waste management requires a fundamental solution , which will have a major impact on our quality of life in the future .
In principle , I would echo the rapporteur 's criticism of the European Union 's lack of a clear strategy , but with the following distinction : we in the European Parliament cannot on the one hand - like a Tibetan prayer-wheel - continually demand subsidiarity and deregulation , whilst calling on the other for the Community to have overall responsibility for waste policy .
I would draw your attention to the Austrian system , whereby the Länder and the local authorities are responsible for waste disposal .
We have our own law on waste management and various waste management plans .
So when the Commission is criticized for acting indecisively , this could stem from the fact that , in many cases , it is simply too remote from the real problems to be able to take swift and effective action .
Nevertheless , I am in favour of all attempts to review and build on the Community 's existing waste policy in the context of the action programme .
I am therefore also in favour of the resolution , particularly in the light of the sensible amendments proposed by members of my group .
Our objective must be firstly to prevent waste , to recycle as much as possible , and only then to store or dispose of the remainder in a proper fashion .
Mr President , we have just been talking about the revision of the Fifth Action Programme on the Environment , but the current action programme contains an extremely important section on waste management .
The Liberal Group supports the strategy adopted : first prevention , then reuse , then recycling and finally , as a last resort , the safe disposal of waste by incineration or dumping .
I sometimes think we could be more flexible in applying this order of precedence , since it may well be that technical environmental assessments indicate that it is better for the environment in some cases to depart from the order of the list .
That is my first point .
Secondly , to reduce waste , a tax on raw materials and other economic instruments will have to be introduced .
Agreements between industry and the authorities could also have a role to play here .
If we are to reduce the amount of dangerous substances such as chlorine and heavy metals in waste , industry needs to use them less in its production processes .
That is why we have tabled these two amendments , and we hope that our colleagues who are sitting here so tired and bleary-eyed will support them tomorrow .
Mr President , there was a time when we were concerned only with waste disposal , but the study of the flows and life-cycle of waste made us understand , first of all , that we needed to look at managing the whole of the cycle - from production to disposal - and it has now made us realize that we need to go further , to look at preventing waste production , by cutting down on the volume of what becomes waste - packaging , for example , and preventing the use of all products once destined to enter the waste chain .
That means getting rid of many substances in current use which subsequently turn into toxic and dangerous waste .
That means changing our approach to the whole cycle of goods ' production in an effort to prevent the creation of waste and thus obtain materials that are useable or recyclable .
To do that we need to model ourselves on what happens in nature .
In the natural environment , the variety and volume of what is produced is far greater than in industrial production , but nothing is rejected to become rubbish .
It all becomes part of complex cycles which , as a result of the action of an energy source outside the system , solar energy , restores raw materials so that the complex and varied forms of flora and fauna continue to be produced .
I made those initial points to explain that we need to review the Community strategy for waste management , and the Commission communication in this field is therefore timely .
However , the communication contains very little in the way of practical and functional information to remedy the problems considered , as explained by the rapporteur , Mrs Jensen .
The rapporteur and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection have tried to remedy those limitations in the Commission communication .
We Greens support many of the proposals and welcome the fact that many of our amendments have been accepted by the Environment Committee .
We must , however , point out that paragraph 4a was better worded in the rapporteur 's original text and that some of our amendments have been rejected even though they were consistent with earlier decisions of the European Parliament and the Commission .
That applies , for instance , to the amendment on the need first to sort waste and only thereafter dump or incinerate it ; the same applies to the sorting of organic waste .
I have listed a few examples simply in order to inform the House that we shall be tabling a number of amendments to improve on the text .
I would first of all like to thank the Environment Committee , and its rapporteur , Mrs Kirsten Jensen , in particular for the work they have carried out with regard to the Commission 's communication on a revision of the Community 's strategy for waste management .
This contribution has made it possible for our debate to take place today .
The European Parliament 's work has proceeded at a rapid pace , but this has not , in my view , had any effect on its quality , as today 's debate has also demonstrated .
The Commission 's revision of the waste strategy is first and foremost a reaction to the European Parliament 's and the Council 's demand that the Commission produce a revision of the waste strategy for 1989 .
From the European Parliament 's side this came as late as its resolution of 22 April 1994 .
The Commission has therefore proposed this strategy for waste management .
It is not our intention to produce an action programme in the area of waste .
There are several reasons for this .
The first of these might be called the more formal reason , namely that the European Parliament specifically asked the Commission to produce a revision of its waste strategy of 1989 .
But the primary reason is that it could hardly hold up the whole of the legislative work .
Indeed it is our hope this year in the Commission to produce a proposal on end-of-life vehicles at the same time as working on other proposals in the area of waste for 1997 .
The EU 's waste legislation had its beginnings 20 years ago and is now due for a much needed revision , as many have pointed out .
We have therefore begun by revising the basic legislation on waste , dangerous waste and the movement of waste .
Within the frameworks of this legislation we are adapting waste management to new requirements and further development , and this means that there is in fact a very great degree of concordance between the proposal which Parliament has put forward and the proposal being worked on by the Commission .
This revision of the strategy holds to the general philosophy and basic principles adopted in 1989 , but also highlights a number of areas that will require particular attention in the future , just as the rapporteur , Kirsten Jensen , has emphasized in her excellent report .
Mrs Kirsten Jensen also raised a number of concrete questions which at the present time I am unable to answer at all comprehensively .
I will have to make do with addressing a couple of these questions by saying that we must come back to a debate on voluntary agreements .
I agree with Mrs Kirsten Jensen that there is a difference between what is possible at a Community level and what is possible at a national level , and I would add that when we tackle the question of voluntary agreements , it is because we believe there is a need for some firmer rules of procedure than those that we have today .
With regard to the question of manufacturer responsibility contrasted with economic responsibility , I would make the following comment .
I believe we can have a good debate on end-of-life vehicles since to a great extent this will become a discussion of the ways in which , through environmental legislation , we can affect production , which in many respects will be an appropriate solution .
We are therefore continuing our work by building up a hierarchy of principles .
Even if this hierarchy is generally accepted , the Member States have quite different perspectives on the way they should be implemented in practice .
Companies are in favour of flexibility so that to a certain extent they are able to determine the best way of dealing with their waste , and this applies in particular to the re-use and adaptation of waste .
This is one of the controversial themes in the area of waste management .
The reclaiming of materials must always be preferred to the gaining of energy , and this is closely related to the fact that the reclaiming of materials reduces the volume of waste , in addition to saving raw materials and energy .
One of the real environmental problems that faces us is the fact that the financial costs of re-using waste often result in companies investing in the gaining of energy instead of in the reclaiming of materials .
This will not do , and fortunately public opinion is uneasy about combustion plants .
No one is particularly keen to have a combustion plant as a neighbour .
The final disposal of waste at waste tips is the least advantageous solution , since it is both seen and noticed , apart from its impact on the environment .
It is therefore essential that the disposal of waste takes place in as environmentally friendly a way as possible .
At the end of all this the Commission will shortly produce a new proposal on waste tips .
Another disputed point in the revision of the strategy , which was highlighted in the report , is manufacturer responsibility , and I shall not be going into any further detail on this .
I have already touched on this in response to Mrs Kirsten Jensen .
The important thing here is that the manufacturer must be responsible , and unfortunately none of the proposals as they are framed , supports this point of view .
Product design is also a central factor in waste management , since a change in the intrinsic characteristics of products , their design and the production process , can have the effect of making those products easier to manage as waste .
Ensuring that products have due regard for the environment contributes to making both consumption and production more viable , and will also have the effect of preventing and reducing waste .
A life cycle analysis of products must therefore be carried out as an integral part of product management , as has been emphasized in Parliament 's statement .
One more area in which conflict can arise is the complete implementation of a physical proximity principle in conjunction with the internal market .
Such conflicts should result in the right balance being struck and in the best solution for the environment .
Here too the manufacturer 's role will be important and with it the manufacturer responsibility .
The environment must be given the absolute first priority .
In our drawing up of the EU 's waste strategy we must make use of the many tools and instruments available to us , as Mr Eisma mentioned in particular .
In addition to legislation , there is particular value in taking advantage of economic and fiscal instruments .
These points were also emphasized in the report .
As I mentioned at the beginning of my comments , I am very pleased with the report and the proposal under discussion , since the proposals will contribute to the further development of the waste policy .
This is a worthy and very constructive contribution , and one which will help the Commission on its way to the necessary legislation .
Thank you , Mrs Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Thank you , and special thanks to the interpreters .
( The sitting was closed at 12.08 a.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I am sorry the Minutes oblige me once again to refer to the handbag incident because , Mr De Vries , I appreciate your impatience , but if you read the Minutes they are wrong .
They say that the victim complained to me , but the complaint was lodged with the President of Parliament , Mr Hänsch .
I deliberately did not name names - hence the lack of clarity - because I did not want to be on record in the Minutes as having named names ; hence the slight confusion .
But the Minutes are wrong .
They say that a complaint was made to him - that is to say to me .
That is not true .
Once again , I hope that President Hänsch will invite the ladies concerned to meet with him to resolve the matter amicably .
I am thus asking for the Minutes to be tidied up to say that the complaint was lodged with President Hänsch and not of course with me .
It is true that I was rapporteur for this contentious matter , and I am prepared to expand on it further outside this sitting , but I would prefer the matter to be resolved amicably , with President Hänsch exercising his considerable authority .
Thank you , that has been noted .
Madam President , I would like the President to make urgent representations to the government in Rangoon in the light of Parliament 's strongly worded resolution .
There are very convincing rumours coming from Burma that 2 , 000 of the thugs who beat up the car that Aung San Suu Kyi was in last weekend are planning to storm her compound and the house where she lives this weekend .
I would urge the President to make representations immediately to the government in Rangoon to protest against such an action taking place .
We shall pass that on to the President , but we are still at the stage of approving the Minutes .
Madam President , I was present during yesterday 's sitting , but that does not appear in the Minutes .
Could they be corrected , please ?
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
I just wanted to ask you this .
On Monday our specially chartered train from Brussels , with more than 200 MEPs and staff on board , arrived half an hour late because the train staff were in dispute about whether or not the train ought to have a restaurant car attached on a public holiday .
The upshot was that we arrived here from Brussels on this special train very much delayed , thirsty , and far too late .
Will you write to the Belgian railways to ensure that there is no recurrence of this , because otherwise I very much fear that people will go back to their cars rather than taking the train .
Mr Eisma , I must ask you to take that up in writing with the Bureau , because it has nothing to do with the Rules of Procedure .
Madam President , I think one has to take a rounded view of life .
Further to what Mr Eisma said , I took the train from Brussels on Monday .
It was indeed half an hour late , most regrettably , but I had an excellent meal in the restaurant car .
No problem of any kind , I ate very well and was very well looked after .
Ladies and gentlemen , please , we have a very full agenda and a complicated voting time ahead of us , and we must not waste any time !
World Trade
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports and oral question :
A4-0320 / 96 by Mr Kittelmann , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) ; -A4-0321 / 96 by Mr Kittelmann , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the report of the Group of Experts on competition policy in the new trade order : strengthening international cooperation and rules ( COM ( 95 ) 0359 - C4-0352 / 95 ) ; -A4-0319 / 96 by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on trade and environment ( COM ( 96 ) 0054 - C4-0158 / 96 ) ; -A4-0327 / 96 by Mr Moniz , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and Committee of the Regions , on the impact of international developments on the Community 's textile and clothing sector ( COM ( 95 ) 0447 - C4-0460 / 95 ) ; -B4-1216 / 96-0-0168 / 96 by Mr Sonneveld and others , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , to the Commission , on the European Union application of the WTO agreements limiting export refunds for various agricultural products .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , each of the reports on which we are now holding a joint debate is important in itself and could well have been debated individually .
I am glad to have the opportunity of providing a brief introduction to two of these reports .
Ahead of us lies the ministerial meeting of the WTO States in Singapore , which will be concerned with the first review of a historic event - the GATT Conference .
Our task , as the European Parliament , will be to advise and assist the Commission and the Council with the analysis of successes achieved to date and the direction to be followed by the WTO in the future .
In the present situation , everyone can clearly see how exceptionally important it is for this meeting to be successful .
Anyone witnessing what is happening in Africa at present and seeing how helpless we are to do anything about it , anyone seeing how trade disputes are increasing even between western industrialized nations and how problems are becoming more acute in many regions of Asia and in India , anyone reading the ILO report on the hundreds of millions of children forced into what in some cases amounts to slave labour - anyone seeing these things will recognize that the WTO is becoming more and more important in acting to resolve conflicts and in giving people throughout the world the feeling that there are such things as legal frameworks and systems which are worth fighting for .
This is the great responsibility to be borne by the WTO States .
The task of the conference is to review achievements to date and plan a prudent course of future action .
We need to be clear about one thing , and this applies to us in this House as well : any attempt to overburden the meeting with new topics will not solve any problems but make them more difficult , however much we may regret this in individual cases .
But that must not be allowed to prevent us from forming expectations about the future and putting forward constructive , sensible proposals .
My report is not solely concerned with looking towards the future , where new topics such as the environment and social clause and rules governing investment and competition are looming on the horizon .
Rather , the report focuses mainly on the everyday work of the World Trade Organization , which is primarily concerned with implementing the results achieved by the WTO in the course of previous negotiations .
If we think back over the course of the Uruguay Round , there were - as well as many other problems - two areas in which it was particularly difficult to reach a consensus .
One was agricultural trade , where the battle lines ran right through the encampments of the industrialized nations , and especially between the European Union and the United States .
The other was the trade in textile products , which was a focal point of the negotiations for a long time and in which the interests of the industrialized nations clashed with those of the developing countries .
Many arguments were thrashed out in the course of the extensive negotiations on the services sector , where talks about financial services , maritime transport and telecommunications will unquestionably have to be re-opened .
There is a danger that the potentially controversial subject of telecommunications will become the central focus of debate and reporting .
I regret the fact that the USA and the European Union have long been on a collision course in this area , and I would like to tell Sir Leon Brittan that , as has often been said here , he has the unconditional support of the European Parliament in the stance he has adopted .
The overall impression is that there are many areas in which the USA seems more interested in confrontation than consensus at the WTO , and we hope that Singapore will show that the USA can find time to pause for reflection .
A few final points on my first report .
All the trading partners are agreed that the new uniform WTO conciliation procedure is a crucial institutional improvement to the multilateral trade system .
Just how necessary that procedure is can be seen today in , among other things , our action against America 's Helms-Burton and D 'Amato Laws .
Our standpoint is unchanged , and I take this opportunity to state it once again : as far as we are concerned , that legislation is contrary to international law and we exhort the European Union , and especially the Commission , to continue pursuing this matter with energy and firmness .
Following the American presidential elections , we cannot indulge in the illusion that things will be any simpler for President Clinton with a Republican-dominated Congress on the one hand and a Democrat president on the other .
I also believe it is right for the European Parliament to make contact with the United States Congress on this matter and set up a round of talks at which we can exchange ideas regarding our respective notions of liberalized world trade .
A new order in trade policy is important .
There will be three or four focal topics : the prevention and reduction of distortions of competition , the achievement of initial results in the trade and environment sector , improving market access for the developing countries , and a work programme for the foreseeable future .
As far as the new order in the competition sector is concerned , the objective is to set up a working group at the meeting which , from 1997 onwards , will have a mandate to work out a multilateral framework of competition conditions .
We will also find that bilateral agreements between corporations and large companies are having an increasing effect on competition , and that solutions will have to be found at international level to regulate such agreements .
A prerequisite for a new competition order is that all WTO Member States should be obliged to accept comprehensive national competition rules , and to implement them .
In order to create a common platform for cooperation between the national competition authorities , minimum standards of competition control and their general validity are very important .
We are going to have to get used to the idea that , with large organizational forms and ever-growing regions , it is not always possible to achieve the maximum - we are going to have to settle for , and work towards , an approach initially based on minimum standards .
It is also a matter of the greatest regret , and I take this opportunity to emphasize it again , that it is still impossible for Taiwan to be a member of the WTO .
We simply cannot accept for much longer a situation in which the People 's Republic of China , which for good reason cannot yet become a WTO member , bars access to the WTO for an important industrialized country like Taiwan . Or , to put it another way , it is unacceptable that the moral cowardice of the world 's leading countries towards China should allow this kind of unequal treatment .
It would be a very welcome development if the People 's Republic of China , and especially Russia , were able to become WTO members as soon as possible .
In the case of Russia , the economic aid we are providing is the right approach .
China still has to make very great efforts of its own in order to meet the conditions .
I should also point out that , with a view to the future powers of the WTO , we must always ensure that the European Union adopts a policy of speaking there with a single voice , and Parliament is in favour of that single voice being represented by the Commission and not by the echo of a multi-part chorus .
External economic relations are a field in which we can and must present a united front .
With regard to the problems we are having with the strengthening of international co-operation and competitiveness , let me say this final word about my other report : we want the global activities of enterprises increasingly to have a legal framework comparable with the WTO .
Here again we welcome Sir Leon 's initiative in taking action , and I hope it will be possible for the first steps to be taken in Singapore towards setting up a working group at the WTO for this purpose .
There will not be the same conflicts with the Third World in this instance that there are in other comparable frameworks , because interests in this area coincide with those of the Third World and , as far as I can ascertain , industry too has a keen interest in ensuring our joint success in this area .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , four years ago - at the Environment Summit in Rio - the world 's political leaders , with Germany 's Chancellor Kohl playing a prominent part , promised that they would finally take action and no longer shut their eyes to global dangers such as the hole in the ozone layer , the greenhouse effect and climatic change .
Two years ago , when the WTO was founded in Geneva , only the preamble still contained any reference to sustainable development .
At the point where the WTO Statute moves on to specifics it is solely concerned with imposing free trade and growth ideology .
Now , at the ministerial meeting in Singapore , the WTO Committee on Trade and the Environment is to present its first report .
Unfortunately , there is nothing whatever to suggest at present that the growth of world trade is really taking place on a sustainable basis - in other words , an environmentally compatible and socially balanced basis .
Worse still , even the call for a viable world economic structure is being heard increasingly rarely in public .
Two weeks ago , for example , the Council , headed by Helmut Kohl , resolved not to set up a WTO working group for social standards in Singapore .
If the European Governments show a similar level of commitment to environmental protection , there is reason to fear that Singapore may be an ecological Waterloo .
Today , most European governments believe in free trade the way children believe in Father Christmas .
They voluntarily relinquish their democratic rights and leave the economy at the mercy of the big transnational corporations .
They portray globalization as an inevitability , making no mention of their own leading part in setting up the WTO .
The creation of the WTO wasted a great opportunity to lay down social and ecological rules for world trade .
Now it has become all the more difficult to reform and extend the WTO , but in any case the Council is probably not yet prepared to do so .
We in the European Parliament must today call upon the Commission and Member States of the Union to take action at last and fight in our interests in Singapore .
The Green Group in the European Parliament this week called upon the Environment Commissioner , Mrs Bjerregaard , to do her homework or resign .
In virtually all problem areas , the Commission will fail to achieve its own reduction targets by the year 2000 .
So the Commission falls far short of serving as a role model in environmental matters .
As far as its role within the WTO is concerned , it has at least - I am delighted to say - published a comprehensive paper on trade and the environment .
Even though we cannot agree with a number of the Commission 's assessments and proposals , the document did show that the Commission 's heart , and especially that of Sir Leon Brittan 's Directorate-General , is in the right place .
Unfortunately , even the Commission 's proposals have been received with great reluctance by the Council .
So the obstacles to a socially and ecologically acceptable form of world trade are being created not only in Brussels but , even more so , in the capital cities of the Member States .
This makes it all the more important that we in the European Parliament should make a comprehensive ecological reform of the WTO a priority of the Singapore meeting .
My report , which was adopted unanimously by the Committee on External Economical Affairs , contains , for example , a call for environmental experts to be involved in WTO panel proceedings .
Article 20 of the GATT must be extensively revised to enable more pressure to be brought to bear in favour of ecological production .
In calling for bans on imports , our aim is not to obstruct imports from the Third World but to provide additional aid to the developing countries through new financial resources , technology transfer and additional quotas and the easing of customs duties for all products of fair trade .
Import bans , though , should be a last line of defence .
Global environmental protection can be achieved only by a multilateral procedure , and we therefore call for all multilateral environmental agreements to be preserved unconditionally .
As we have seen from the example of the recent exports of toxic wastes , stricter monitoring of these agreements is a matter of urgency .
We are entirely in favour of the use and further development of instruments of selfregulation , a code of conduct for transnational concerns or an ecolabel .
Of course , an ecolabel only achieves anything if it is regarded as a reward , a prize for top-quality ecological products , and is independently supervised .
The main purpose of reforming the WTO along social and ecological lines is to subject it to democratic control .
Transparency and the involvement of NGOs , unions and consumer associations have hitherto been totally inadequate or , indeed , non-existent .
Should the WTO prove incapable of reform , should it become no more receptive of social and ecological interests , consideration must be given to creating a new structure for world trade within the framework of the UN . The EU is the world 's greatest trading power .
It must throw its full weight into the scales to ensure that such a reform is successfully carried through .
There are a few sharp operators in this House , though , who still believe that world trade takes precedence over the environment .
To them I say , anyone who destroys the environment will finish up with nothing left to trade in !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at a time when the European Union is contemplating a reform of its institutions with the objective of combating unemployment more efficiently and promoting its social and economic cohesion , considered as a fundamental task of the European Union and part and parcel of the Community 's targets , the Commission 's position , set out in a recent communication concerning the incidence of international developments in the EU textile and clothing sector , fails to conceal a biased and mercantilism vision , a standpoint which could lead to the irreparable downfall of such an important sector of activities with dramatic consequences for millions of workers , inevitably the target of vehement protests and criticism on the part of both sides of industry and everyone who knows what the reality is and who can identify with the difficulties and concerns of the European textiles and clothing industry .
Therefore , I think it is wise to look again at the positions taken by the Commission and carry out a further-reaching analysis of the sector , putting forward more solid and positive proposals , articulated in a genuine plan of action , not limited to references to reductions in production , increased imports and losses of jobs and which the future developments will inevitably confirm the same horrific trend .
But , on the contrary , we should once and for all recognise that the sector represents 2.3 million employees in over 100 000 companies and 8 % of employment in the EU , as well as its real potential , in particular its competitive capacity which would make a significant contribution to the effort to continue sustainable development in the current context of internationalisation and globalization .
Reference is made in this respect to the fact that the gradual integration of the textile and clothing industry into the central system of the disciplines of the World Trade Organisation and the impact of new free trade agreements with the countries of central and eastern Europe , the Customs Union with Turkey and bilateral agreements with Pakistan , India and China will substantially alter the framework for action in the Community textiles industry and this will force it to make a new effort to restructure itself , in order to face up - with guarantees of success - to international competition .
The agreement about trade in textile products and clothing has now struck a balance between members ' rights and obligations .
The European Union accepted the gradual elimination of the restrictions of the multi-fibre agreement on the express condition that they should take place in this sector against the background of harmonisation and the equalisation of international competition competitions : in other words , international trade in textile products should be governed by the tougher rules and disciplines of the system of the World Trade Organisation .
On the contrary , the opening up of textile markets to third countries , whether we are dealing with commercial and industrialised partners or - especially - certain developing countries , has not advanced in the way that we wanted .
From this point of view , the GATT ' 94 Textile Agreement should also be translated into new market opportunities for Community undertakings , in particular concerning textile and clothing products of high quality .
On the eve of the Ministerial Conference in Singapore , it is vital that the European Union should take a firm common stand vis-à-vis the application of the agreement on liberalising the textile sector .
We absolutely must stick to the original timetable of liberalisation and integration , with the objective that the Community 's textile industry can conclude , in conditions of certainty , the process which has now been started , i.e. that of restructuring and adapting to new international conditions , minimising the resulting social and regional costs , facing up with guarantees of success to increased external competition which will be concentrated in the application of the final phase , scheduled for the year 2005 .
It is also vital that the European Union should subordinate the progress of integration to the respect of rules and disciplines preventing dumping , fraud and smuggling , and the opening up of third countries ' markets , in particular establishing those products which must be included in the second and third phase of integration in the WTO system , while making sure that the process of adaption does not lead to the imposition of restrictions on Community exports .
On the other hand , the European Union must take the necessary initiative so that Singapore starts a serious dialogue about the link between the respect of a code of minimal social standards and international trade . Unless social principles are scrupulously respected , such as the ILO Convention on work by minors , forced labour and trade union freedoms or requirements concerning the protection of the environment , we will be dealing a very harsh blow and helping considerably to distort competition .
We will admit that in the textile industry , too , the globalisation of economies is not a bad thing in itself but at the same time it is vital to have political regulation at the right level in order to correct distortions and negative effects , a task which at this stage in the process means that the WTO must also operate as efficiently as possible .
We must , finally , make sure that the economic and social idea of Europe is not lost in the process of liberalisation or in the creation of an environment which puts the citizens in second place .
Madam President , we are concentrating in this part of the debate on our experience of more than a year 's implementation of the GATT Agreement on farm products .
We have listened to those required to work with it , the people in the industry itself .
Many of them are disappointed .
The sharpest criticisms have come from the dairy farmers and those who process animal products such as eggs and poultry .
All of them products with a relatively high value added .
Exports of these are very important to domestic price levels in the primary sector .
The marked decline in EU cheese exports is one of the main reasons for the low price paid for milk in the Community .
It is now apparent that the agreed regime of discipline over export refunds in the dairy sector is having very negative effects .
There is thus every reason to use this restrictive system as best we can .
In order to make optimum use of these limited export opportunities we thus need to manage export refunds carefully , not bureaucratically , but in a creative manner .
The Commission 's role in the management committee 's procedures is of capital importance here .
Is it the stated ambition of the Commission , and of Commissioners Brittan and Fischler , to make it possible via the agreed regime to foster healthy dairy exports to the growing world market on as big a scale as possible ?
The experience of this first year would seem to indicate the opposite .
As far as our obligation to abolish refunds is concerned , in monetary terms we have done in one year what we might have done over six years .
In budgetary terms that may look good , but as an instrument for guaranteeing fair agricultural incomes it was a failure .
The restricting of volumes is the biggest stumbling block .
I am not sure the Commission is not giving too low a priority to subsidized exports .
We have an agreed regime for six years .
This cannot be jeopardized just because the Commissioner is already looking ahead to the next round of negotiations .
If we are to believe the press reports , Commissioner Brittan has already made public , somewhat prematurely , his wish for agricultural subsidies to be scrapped altogether , thereby totally ignoring the objectives of the Treaty of Rome and specifically Article 39 .
There is no question of our having to discuss further concessions over agriculture .
What we need to discuss is the sensible meeting of commitments entered into a year or so ago and which still have a full five years to run .
Within that context the EU has to make its position on world markets as strong as possible .
A conscious choice was made in favour of gradual and partial abolition , to prevent an abrupt departure from carefully constructed export positions .
But the policy pursued to date seems to have played totally into the hands of the speculators .
And this means a serious threat to the EU 's sound reputation as a careful and reliable supplier of quality food products .
That is probably exactly what our competitors had hoped for .
Was the EU not far too naive in agreeing to the non-aggregated volume restrictions under the Blair House Agreement ?
And should we not recognize that the new US farm bill is a highly expansionist move offering a safety net subtly designed to stimulate exports and protect American producers on world markets whenever there is an acute need to do so ?
Promoting exports means governments and industry seizing their opportunities .
The joint motion for a resolution asks the Commission to produce a sectoral analysis by June 1997 of the problems which operators in the various agricultural sectors are experiencing as a result of implementing GATT .
Will the Commission do that ?
The issue is how to ensure a healthy development of world trade in farm products given that governments must and doubtless will be forced , for some time to come , to address the question of the social and economic health of the agricultural sector .
It would appear that the authors of the Commission strategy on the world challenge to international trade are oblivious to these tensions .
This 22-page document contains just 7 rules on agriculture .
The limited scale of the attention given to agriculture would seem fully to reflect Commissioner Brittan 's wish , again if press repots are to be believed , that agriculture should be treated as an economic sector just like any other .
Does the Agriculture Commissioner share that view or has the Commission communication on the EU 's export strategy escaped his notice ?
Perhaps in the long term , say over six years , we should perforce switch to a totally separate system of support .
But even if we did , for a period of six years , everyone who currently has a responsibility for implementing the trading rules would still have a duty to ensure that the exports which would be a matter of course under the new situation are not destroyed under the present situation .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , whenever we think back to the Uruguay Round , it always seems that agriculture was the stumbling block , the problem child of the whole negotiations .
We know , too , that industrial interests in the EU found it tiresome that so much time had to be spent talking about agricultural policy .
Unless the European Union can succeed this time - starting in Singapore - in establishing clear criteria for all sectors of the economy with a view to the negotiations that start in 1999 , then we shall be the losers in the next round .
The idea of using subsidized exports as a weapon to battle against our trading partners for shares of the world market makes no appeal at all to me - nor must it make any to agricultural policy makers .
If we do that , we will lose , and we should force the others not to do it either .
This applies specifically , and especially , to agriculture .
I am in favour of exports , we all are , including exports of agricultural products - but not at the expense of the environment and mankind , not if it involves neglecting social and ecological criteria as has happened in the past .
If we go on like that , the next round of world trade talks and Singapore itself will be a disaster for the EU and for the entire world .
We in the EU should have the courage to compel the others to change course , including the Americans and those who take the American line .
Unless we can achieve that , we would be better off staying at home .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the textile industry can be reduced to a handful of key phrases and points , even though one minute is very short even for that .
Those points are the environmental and social decisions and preparations for Singapore , the subject of child labour , the effects of textile working on the environment , and on employees too , and the subject of globalization .
They also include ground rules for future international policy , in order to define what ecological and social standards mean to Europe and to others too - in other words , whether they are going to remain in free fall , in Europe and elsewhere , or whether those international standards will finally be enshrined at Singapore , and within Europe too , as ground rules to support a free internal market .
This is a political orientation of the WTO , and a question of quite crucial importance for the future .
The united front displayed by the political groups on these essential points is another demonstration of the fact that opinions across the political spectrum all point to the safeguarding of social and ecological standards in the textile industry .
Madam President , I am replacing Irene Crepaz , who was the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , but who left Parliament at the last Austrian elections .
I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Kittelmann warmly on the production of an excellent report .
His resolution begins by stating that world trade must help raise living standards , ensure full employment and increase prosperity rather than lead to ruinous competition for jobs .
That is absolutely right , it is central to the position adopted by the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment .
The European Union will play a significant role in Singapore either in defending the introduction of social and environmental standards into multilateral trade arrangements or in ensuring that the ILO is given prominence in efforts to standardize social requirements .
Paragraph 72 of Mr Kittelmann 's report sums up the position that is central to both the Social Affairs and Environment Committees .
We do indeed condemn distortions of competition caused by social and environmental dumping and we call for such dumping to be curbed by the introduction of environmental and social clauses by way of an amendment to Article 20 of the World Trade Organization regulations .
That is absolutely essential .
We believe that core labour standards derived from ILO Conventions need to be included at that point in Article 20 of the WTO regulations .
Those core labour standards would be : freedom of association and collective bargaining , elimination of exploitative forms of child labour , the prohibition of forced labour and non-discrimination in employment .
We believe they are the absolute minimum we should be seeking to incorporate into WTO arrangements at this time .
Of course , we have support from a number of European Union governments for this position but , regrettably , a number of others continue to oppose this position .
Not surprisingly perhaps , given its position on social policy within the European Union , the British Government appears among those who oppose this proposal .
For those who say that it is not possible , I would urge them to look back at the OECD study , which was commissioned in 1984 to look into trade , employment and internationally recognized labour standards .
This was the report that was considered by our ministers back in May this year .
It concludes that the economic effects of core labour standards - those I read out - are likely to be small and that real benefits would accrue to developing countries without any likely negative effect on foreign direct investment .
In other words , tremendous advantages are to be gained for all by incorporating such core labour standards in Article 20 of the WTO arrangements .
I hope that Sir Leon Brittan and the EU delegation will do everything possible to ensure that these social , core labour standards and environmental standards are indeed incorporated .
Madam President , I should like to use the minute at my disposal to refer briefly to the international rules of competition .
I believe that at the Conference of the World Trade Organization in December 1996 , some progress will have to be made in that direction .
That is essential , especially in the context of the globalization of the economy .
Governments all over the world are reducing excise duties , with the result that non-customs barriers are assuming substantial importance as obstacles to world trade , and the rules of competition are among those obstacles , especially the non-harmonization of those rules .
The World Trade Organization must progress towards the creation of a multipartite framework for international rules of cooperation and competition policy , taking account of experiences stemming from recent bipartite agreements such as the agreement between the European Union and the United States .
I would like to add that the European Commission must also try to reinforce existing bipartite agreements and extend them to the other major trading powers , always bearing in mind the legitimate interests of companies in relation to confidentiality and the protection of trade secrets .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the forthcoming world trade conference in Singapore must not become focused on implementation and review - it must tackle the new areas that we in this European Parliament rightly formulated immediately after the Uruguay Round .
There is no doubt that free world trade has increased - the growth rates from 1994 to 1995 and again from 1995 to 1996 in the World Trade Organization 's reports underline this .
At the same time , there is equally no doubt that we are a long way from a fair world trade system - we have dumping situations , not just price dumping by enterprises but genuine dumping conditions as far as terms of trade are concerned , too .
So the time has come .
In Singapore , we must nail our colours to the mast and introduce rules to cover this subject of trade and the environment - in other words , environmentally compatible trade has to become a reality .
The working group , too , must be re-instituted to enable it to achieve concrete results .
What will be particularly important , though , at this meeting will be the setting-up of a working group on fundamental social rights and minimum standards in the trade sector .
That working group will not just have to process and analyse the problems that exist - taking its cue , of course , from the internationally valid ILO Conventions on child labour , the prohibition of forced labour and the fundamental freedoms of association . It will also have to discuss possible sanctions in the context of trade and - much more important - a system of positive action , a system of positive incentives , to ensure that these minimum standards , both environmental and social , can be enforced .
This is not a matter of protectionism from the standpoint of the industrialized countries - it is an attempt to achieve humane production and trading conditions in every country in the world , because after all the GATT - and the WTO , too - came into existence in order to improve living standards , ensure full employment and a steady growth of real incomes , increase effective demand , develop the full utilization of the world 's resources and expand the production and exchange of goods .
We must stand by these objectives of the GATT and WTO - it is in Europe 's interests to do so .
But there are other things , too , to bear in mind .
Free world trade has not just brought the globalization of markets , transport and communications , resulting in considerable problems of security that ultimately will have to be dealt with as another new topic . It has also resulted in an ever-increasing number of transnational enterprises dividing up the world between them , as it were , with territorial and price cartels , deals , oligopolistic and monopolistic positions .
This has to be stopped .
We need an international competitive order .
Bilateral agreements like those between the European Union and the USA are helpful , certainly , but they do not solve the problem because the problem is concerned not only with information but also with strategic lines of action .
We must , therefore , prevent the formation of cartels and introduce merger control , a kind of antitrust law , at international level , too ; we must adopt a model based on the European single market which , after all , has not confined itself to free trade , open frontiers and free market access but has also introduced rules governing freedom of competition and thus something resembling a governmental administrative policy .
This must be regained at international level , as a matter of urgency , to avoid the situation I have described where the hundred biggest transnational companies , who today have their hands on more than one-third of the world 's prosperity , are able to dictate terms .
At the WTO Conference , one call that has been made by the European Parliament will be even more important than in the past : we need not just parliamentary involvement in every sector , what we need even more is for the EU to speak with a single voice if it wants to bring about fair world trade .
To this extent , the revision of the Treaty and the exclusive right of the European Commission to head the negotiations at the 1996 Intergovernmental Conference are designed to get the trading policy of the European Union , the world 's biggest trading entity , back into shape .
Madam President , production is becoming globalized and so is the textile industry .
The need to adapt in a time of globalization undoubtedly presents problems for the textile industry .
The textile sector in the European Union can only adapt to the new rules of world trade if it truly restructures and becomes more innovative .
Firms which do not restructure , innovate and adapt will suffer as a result of liberalization .
That must not cause the industry to break the rules on quotas and anti-dumping measures .
That often leads to unfounded accusations .
That is not right .
Policy on quotas and anti-dumping and the implementing of that policy presents problems for importers and for trade in general .
Globalization can only work properly if trade is able to work properly .
Goods remain stuck in port because they cannot be cleared .
I have already crossed swords with Sir Leon Brittan about the way in which antidumping policy is managed and the way in which the quotas are managed .
Quotas are not being managed well .
That is not the fault of the Commission alone , but also of the fact that quotas are an abomination and are just impossible to manage well .
But I deeply deplore the fact that this is highly damaging to importers .
I think we have produced a well balanced opinion on the textile sector in our Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , thanks to Mr Moniz 's excellent report .
It calls for measures to achieve a liberalized market using the phased approach required by the GATT / WTO Agreement .
It gives plenty of emphasis to the need for multilateral agreements in this regard .
My group has sought in a number of amendments to stress the globalization of trade rather more , since on closer examination this point did not seem to have come over quite so clearly .

Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as the WTO Conference in Singapore approaches , Mr Kittelmann 's excellent report combines a great many recommendations to governments , familiar items that are still unresolved and bold new proposals such as those for rules governing competition on a multilateral basis and environmentally compatible trade .
But the greatest political expectation , it seems to me , is a signal on what form Europe 's society should take in the next century , something for which the globalization of trade challenges us to plan .
It seems to me that American society has replied to this challenge in the recent presidential elections : there is no escaping globalization , and it is not a threat to the acquired prosperity of the wealthy countries , as the reactionary right would have it ; to the contrary , every individual must make demands upon himself to safeguard his future ; the State is the guarantor of individual freedoms , not an intrusive power .
Conversely , the march through Rome last Saturday of a million moderates , most of them middle class , bears witness to a concern which Europe 's leaders have hitherto done nothing to meet .
As Barbara Spinelli has said in an editorial in the Turin paper ' La Stampa ' , entitled ' The middle class at a loss ' , Europe 's citizens are confused about the future , rebelling against the tax for Europe , not because they have suddenly become antiEuropean but because they know that they are being asked to pay the price of worldwide competition and they want a development plan , they want to preserve the experience of a century which has tried to strike a balance between solidarity and individual freedom .
Europe is calling on its leaders to produce a plan of society which reconciles full employment with high standards of social protection .
We expect the Singapore Conference to provide an opportunity for some serious thinking that must not be missed .
Madam President , I must emphasize here the importance of this report by Mr Kittelmann , who has successfully combined a wide variety of issues into one homogeneous vision .
The Singapore Conference will indeed deal with all aspects of our economic life and international economic relations and not just the supposedly ' traditional ' issues .
The conclusions from Singapore will thus be crucial for the preservation of a multilateral system of free trade and for current or future negotiations .
In institutional terms the issues to be debated in Singapore fall partly within the exclusive powers of the Union and partly within the powers we share with Member States .
This creates a difficulty in that the Treaty , now that the old Article 116 has been scrapped , no longer places them under any obligation to coordinate their policy in those areas in which they retain their competence .
In the context of the common foreign and security policy Member States are , however , obliged to coordinate their positions and present a collective position in international organizations and at international conferences .
The European Parliament too must be adequately consulted and informed by the Council under Article J.7 of the Maastricht Treaty .
This is especially important when we remember that the Singapore conclusions will not be formal agreements but texts containing a political undertaking . These do not require the European Parliament to be formally consulted by the Council , nor is the Luns-Westerterp procedure applicable to them .
Our Amendment No 27 should be seen against this background .
Its aim , naturally , is not to challenge the powers of the Union in the area of common trade policy but to remind Member States of their obligations , namely their obligations vis à vis the European Parliament , even in those Areas where Member States still retain their powers .
This amendment of ours thus seeks quite simply to establish and emphasize the right of the European Parliament to be informed .
With an eye to the IGC these institutional issues clearly point up the need for the Union to be equipped with an efficient and coherent foreign policy .
This calls for clearer power-sharing and institutional mechanisms which will enable the European Union to speak with one voice and act more forcefully on the world stage .
It is my privilege , Madam President , to head Parliament 's delegation to the World Trade Organization and I shall do my very best to ensure , when Union positions are determined , that the views of our institution are taken into account .
Madam President , I doubt whether anyone in this House would dispute the need for internationally recognized rules governing trade .
The WTO is a good thing - the very principle behind its foundation is a good thing .
Having said that , the principles underlying the functioning of the WTO are something else .
Because we need only look at the text of the agreement to see what the priorities are : first and foremost , increasing the production of and trade in goods and services .
That is an absolute priority , over and above any other consideration .
So the objective of sustainable development is secondary , the Rio Conference has been forgotten .
No more mention is made of social rights and individual rights than it is of environmental protection .
In the absence of similarly global institutions vested with real supranational power , like the WTO , I think that nothing much will change .
After all , what do we find in those WTO agreements other what has just been said today ?
Well , there is an Article 16 which says that every State shall ensure that its laws , regulations and administrative procedures conform to its obligations as set out in the agreements .
Where does that lead us ?
It leads us , logically , to the dismantling of all social and environmental legislation in the so-called developed countries .
We are seeing this already in the European Union .
A whole body of internal European Union legislation is at risk .
I can reel it off for you : leghold traps , the agreement on BST , hormones in meat , chocolate , bananas and now , lastly , the legislation on new foods in the course of preparation .
All this is being threatened with reversal by the WTO agreement which we unfortunately , as I see it , accepted two years ago .
So I welcome the specific proposals made in the various reports before us today , but I do not hold out any great hopes of Singapore , especially after listening to Sir Leon Brittan yesterday .
I detect no political will for change .
I may be wrong , I hope I am .
We shall see , after Singapore , whether I am wrong or not , but I must frankly say that I doubt it .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this report is based largely on the absolute omnipotence of free trade .
Nothing else really counts .
I believe we are seeing an alarming and increasing globalization , a growth in transnational companies and increasingly extensive concentrations of business and industry .
This report starts from the conviction that the whole question of the World Trade Organization is regarded far too much , exclusively , in relation to increasing globalization .
Only secondary importance is given in the report to matters such as the place and involvement of developing countries , which will all be at varying stages of development .
And too little attention is paid to additional standards which cannot be divorced from ' sustainable growth ' , namely environmental standards , social , international standards , bans on child labour , forced labour , equality of the sexes , freedom of expression .
These things too must form part of our discussions in the World Trade Organization .
But we are not totally in agreement on these ourselves .
Even within the European Union we are divided .
Major international companies are in fact colonizing the international organizations , without even a hint of democratic accountability .
So we are faced here with a crucial choice between two world models .
Either we choose to give absolute priority to more streamlining , more productivity , more flexibility , more operational relocations , or we make a choice in favour of other fundamental values which Europe should and could apply in the new world dimension .
These include the appreciation that the resources available to mankind are finite .
The idea that we must develop and expand social and economic models which are geared to the future .
GATT and the WTO have chosen the old model , one which even goes against earlier commitments and agreements such as those of Rio .
The final text of the World Trade Organization 's text has 22 000 pages of appendices .
It was a question of take it or leave it .
Let me give you an example of just one part of it .
The phytosanitary rules in the agriculture dossier , here we are obliged to follow the codex alimentarius which is entirely controlled by industrial giants such as Cargil , Nestlé , Unilever , Coca Cola - some of the 100 giants which have full control of the world 's food supply chains .
So much for democracy !
I find no echo of this in the Kittelmann report .
There is a lot more which needs to be discussed .
I hope this will provide the starting point for a broad social debate which may go as far as getting our social and ecological responsibilities incorporated in the agreements currently being hammered out .
Madam President , our group , including its agricultural members , has not wasted any time on preliminary opposition to the WTO .
This is the way the world is going , and agriculture cannot allow itself the luxury of being at odds with the world .
After a year 's application , in any case , it should be said that it has not been the disaster foreseen in some quarters , even for the agricultural sector ; but there is no doubt that , as other Members have said , there have been problems .
Mr Sonneveld has referred to certain sectors of agriculture , and I would point out that there are others , those concerned with Mediterranean products , which were already less well protected under the CAP , which have had more problems in implementing the GATT agreements , and which in some cases have amounted to nothing less than the complete reform of these common market organizations .
The problems have arisen when the European Union has handled these agreements somewhat defensively , adopting a somewhat deferential tone .
Well , I was in Cork , at the conference organized by the European Commission on the future of rural policy .
It was very interesting , but I believe that the real test will be to revise market policy in the agricultural sector in a way which really highlights environmental issues and rural policy .
From this standpoint , the new negotiations to begin in 1999 - not far away now - with the challenge of decoupling aid from production will be the real test , the real test too for the reform of the European Union 's market policy .
The Americans have already done it with their Farm Bill and , most of all , they are proposing to us an aggressive strategy in the exporting of unsubsidized agro-food products .
I believe we must , one way or another , take these experiences to heart .
The FAO Summit opens in Rome about now , and this too should be an opportunity for thinking about a reform of the reform of the CAP , but , be that as it may , I think we should take immediate advantage of the opportunities offered to us by the WTO in areas such as crop protection and regulations governing the origin of agro-food products .
Madam President , I am very pleased to be taking part in this joint debate on three inter-related REX Committee topics : ecosociology from our colleague , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , the textile sector from Mr Moniz and , of course , the World Trade Organization from Mr Kittelmann , which is the report I will be referring to principally .
I feel that Mr Kittelmann 's report outlines a number of advantages , despite a divergence of opinion .
Firstly , it establishes a clear legal framework vis-à-vis the right of the stronger , i.e. through requiring respect for legal rules adopted by agreement , and which have also been referred to by Mr Moniz , particularly in connection with the textile sector .
In addition , in point 6 of his report , Mr Kittelmann speaks of the principle of solidarity which requires full market access for the poorest developing countries without their being required to open their markets fully , additionally calling for the setting-up of an aid plan for them .
Finally , the report points out that the WTO 's work should not have a distorting effect through the adoption of unilateral measures : a clear reference to the right of the stronger , a phenomenon we are seeing , and are attempting to prevent , in connection with the United States and Cuba , with the Helms-Burton Act .
Generally speaking , I find his call for European Union undertakings to have better information on trade-policy instruments very positive , and therefore believe that the three reports we are debating constitute an enormously positive step forward , particularly Mr Kittelmann 's wide-ranging report on the World Trade Organization .

Madam President , I should like to congratulate Mr Moniz , the rapporteur , on his work and , of course , on having struck a certain balance in depicting the situation facing the textiles industry in my country .
We all know , even without opposing globalization , that , taken to the extreme as it has been , with the obvious hegemony of the US economy and its multinationals , it would have predictable consequences on the European economy .
In some cases , because the European economy is used to the welfare state and , in others , because it is backward , as is the case of my country .
The truth is that , within the inequalities to be found around the world , some people exploit others ' poverty and others exploit other people 's high technology .
It is difficult to reach an entente among nations in respect of maintaining a dignified level of humanity in working populations .
It is not a question of left or right : you just need common sense and intelligence in order to analyse things , to see that the measures taken in the profound defeat suffered by Europe in the GATT talks would have negative effects on poorer countries like my own .
No clauses were negotiated , nobody dared to defend poor economies against powerful ones or against exploited economies , such as some in Asia .
The result is now visible : this is a political question and not one for economists , it is a question of understanding the destiny of human beings and knowing how to defend people from abuse .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to refer specifically within this debate to the report submitted by our colleague , Mr Moniz , and to thank him for having paid particular attention to the international situation of the European Union textile and clothing sector , since this is an extremely important industry in terms of its production , foreign trade and the number of people it employs , and one deserving of such special treatment .

I am also pleased that Mr Moniz 's approach is an appropriate one in that he does not call for direct intervention or adopt a protectionist stance , but calls for the establishment of fair and equitable trading conditions which do not exert a distorting effect on the sector 's ability to participate , to maintain a presence , in international markets . Moreover , it is not subject to distortions or discrimination likely to have a very negative effect on the sector 's necessary reconversion and adaptation to the international market which is now governed by the agreements of the Uruguay Round and administered by the World Trade Organization .
I would like to conclude my intervention by calling for a detailed examination of those points in which he advocates fair competition , the power to apply measures to those rules which distort access or which are subject to fraud or which constitute de facto discrimination of a social , labour or commercial nature likely to cause serious harm to the textile industry and its possibilities within the European Union .
Madam President , trade always seems desirable to those who are in the strong position , and they dictate their terms to the others .
The purpose of trade is not to make the poor rich or to feed the hungry but to make money out of it .
Not that I have any real objection to that , but I do think we should abandon this mythology .
When we debate the fact that shipments of animals are going to North Africa and we get excited about the conditions in which they are shipped , we are right to do so , but the real basic problem is that we are taking animals there although there are plenty there already .
Burkina Faso , Mali , Niger , the poorest states in the world , traditionally live by livestock farming .
They are no longer able to sell their animals because we are taking away their market by shipping subsidized live animals out there , and torturing them into the bargain .
Then our agriculture minister , Mr Borchert , who is now attending the world food conference , says , ' well , we have to do it , because otherwise those markets would be taken by New Zealand and Australia and in that case the animals would be coming from even farther away ' .
So we aren 't talking about feeding the hungry , we 're talking about markets .
Why should animals be sent from New Zealand to North Africa when there are plenty of animals there already ?
In other words , we must safeguard the basic right to food .
We must see that all international treaties include a clause saying that it is a basic right of any people to pull back and ensure the security of their own food base , and we must conclude agreements to the effect that trade must not just take place on the terms dictated by the stronger countries , to the detriment and impoverishment of the poor , but should benefit them . That is what we should do if we really want to introduce an ethical aspect into international trade .
Madam President , completion of the Uruguay Round meant that an important step towards freer world trade had been achieved under the supervision of the WTO .
The Singapore Conference needs to build on that , but within the clear framework of a responsible policy on environmental safeguards , social policy and development cooperation .
It is in the interests of the poorer nations that the pledges given by the rich countries in earlier trade agreements should be kept .
Efforts must also be made to cut import tariffs for the least developed countries still further .
New efforts in social policy must be directed towards eliminating abuses such as forced labour and the exploitation of children , though caution is indicated here given the cultural context and the danger of hidden protectionism .
Regarding the connection between trade and the environment , we endorse the recommendations of the KreisslDörfler report that multilateral environmental agreements should be made part of the WTO and that exports of products which contaminate the environment should be banned .
I would like to commend Mr Moniz on his excellent report .
Now Mr Moniz quite rightly points out the depressing downward trend in employment in the textile industry , and this trend unfortunately looks set to continue .
It is quite clear that part of the responsibility for this downward trend lies with manufacturers and retailers who relocate production and processing facilities abroad , sometimes taking advantage of low social and environmental standards and , to their shame , exploiting workers who have little rights and no influence .
If we are to devise a strategy to deal with this situation , then I think we also need some transparency from the industry itself .
We need to know if manufacturers and retailers are sourcing abroad , what investment strategies they have and which markets these investments abroad are intended to serve .
The Commission has regular meetings with representatives of the textile industry and we would ask the Commission to pass on to us what information it receives as a result of these meetings , particularly in terms of trends and investment strategies .
Perhaps the Commission could even draw up a report on the trends in the relocation of European Union companies abroad .
The other part of Mr Moniz 's report which I think is extremely appropriate is the demand for an investigation into the use of child labour in the European Union .
I think we should go beyond that and look at working practices in general in the European Union .
The Financial Times recently produced a report which illustrated the extent of shoddy working practices and extremely low pay , and that was in the United Kingdom alone .
So I would ask the Commission to take this very seriously and examine these practices .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there are different interests in the European Community and sometimes there are contradictory interests between States which are essentially producers of equipment and those States which are traditionally the producers of consumer goods .
The European textiles and clothing sector has been a victim and continues to be a victim of this economic policy which allows a poorly regulated and sometimes fraudulent import of textiles as a bargaining chip for the export of equipment .
We all know that , after lengthy and difficult negotiations , the Community adhered to the agreement on textiles and clothing in the final act of the Uruguay Round .
In that agreement it was recognised that structural adjustments needed to be made to the European textiles industry in the new conditions of production and commercialisation which have affected textile products throughout the world .
It was also agreed that there should be a progressive integration , state by state over ten years .
No policy favouring other interests , deserving and legitimate though they are , can change this international agreement .
It is for the European Parliament , Madam President , to check that this agreement is complied with ; after all , as I said , it is an international agreement , and we should denounce any negative stance concerning the economy of the textile sector and the serious social problems resulting therefrom , if this agreement is not complied with .
The report drafted by our colleague , Mr Moniz , is a good one , and it goes in this direction , dealing in full with the whole subject . Therefore , in my opinion , it deserves our support .
Madam President , the short time available to me is barely sufficient to recall one basic idea out of all the topics we are discussing today : the international and internal context of trade as the base of a triangle which makes it a central factor in the market , alongside two others : industry and the consumer .
It follows that world trade and internal trade derive their efficiency from the strength of the distribution system . I believe that our efforts should be directed along those lines , to make it possible to succeed in improving links between countries .
An old Italian saying has it that trade can pass where armies cannot .
Well , then , our efforts - especially in the sectors under consideration today , such as textiles most of all but many others too , such as food - must be particularly targeted on small- and medium-sized enterprises , which , to emphasize it yet again , are the fundamental driving force behind the economic functioning of the European Community .
Madam President , the tragic situation confronting the textile and clothing industry in Europe compels us to tackle this subject without red tape or rhetoric .
The 850 thousand jobs already lost in the industry , and the prospect that employment and production will continue to decrease over the next ten years , must force the Union to be uncompromising in applying those WTO standards aimed at creating genuine conditions of fair competition and ensuring effective access to the world 's markets for European businesses .
The trade agreements between the European Union and third countries - Turkey , Eastern Europe , the former USSR , India , Pakistan and China - must ensure certain minimum conditions to preserve the balance in the textile industry . They must commit the Commission to denouncing and rejecting agreements in cases where situations exist that favour manufacturing conditions which are unconventional , to say the least , in terms of the international rules of economics and democracy , and to rejecting , for example , products made by children in the absence of any controls over respect for their basic human rights .
I would draw the attention of the Commission to the problem of the recognition of wool as an agricultural product .
I do so in order to prevent the wool production sector rapidly following the textile industry into crisis . Jobs are being lost in wool production , and that sector needs a programme of action to avert the crisis and prevent the disappearance of sheep from the Community 's territory .
Madam President , one positive point about the WTO report that I would particularly like to stress , as a new Member of the European Parliament , is that the Commission 's communication to the Council did incorporate the demand by the Social Affairs Committee that a working group should be set up to consider questions relating to the minimum social standard .
I welcome this because Europe 's trade unions have been campaigning intensively for more than 20 years to ensure that international trade agreements , too , include safeguards of workers ' rights , especially in view of the ever-increasing density of economic interrelationships .
This has absolutely nothing to do with some new form of protectionism .
The international division of labour will continue to function as in the past , and the developing countries will continue to enjoy adequate production advantages .
In this context , as we know , the world is changing very , very slowly .
That is why we call upon the representatives to the Commission to ensure that the position previously defined is maintained in Singapore - unambiguously , steadfastly and with no concessions !
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Singapore Conference has to set the new agenda for world trade . World trade and the environment will doubtless be discussed there but we want world trade and the social dimension to be discussed as well .
We expect the European Commission and the Council of Ministers to advocate not just free trade but fair trade , with greater emphasis on the word ' fair ' .
There are two difficulties for the textile and clothing sector .
The first is minimum social standards .
We are in favour of five WTO basic conventions .
This is a question not of protectionism , Commissioner , but of ' core ' rights , for example the right to freedom of association , the protection of children against exploitation in the form of child labour .
These are not protectionist measures .
Regrettably the Council of Ministers has not yet mandated a working group to look at the social standards because of blocking tactics on the part of some Member States .
But how are we to explain that to Europe 's textile industry ?
Employers are interested here just as much as workers .
The second difficulty is the transition to phase two of the Multi-Fibre Arrangement under the rules of the World Trade Organization .
Clear agreements were reached and conditions imposed in the Uruguay Round .
Have they been complied with ?
Have the necessary balances been achieved ?
The Uruguay Round envisaged a reciprocal opening-up of markets .
Have the exporting countries made proposals which are acceptable ?
I should appreciate it if the Commissioner could brief us on that satisfactorily .
I fear that we are once more in danger of pursuing what I think of as ' naive ' free trade .
The future of the European textile and clothing industry is at stake here .
That means two and a half million direct jobs and another two million jobs indirectly .
That is what we stand to lose .
We should follow the example of the United States which does not hesitate to protect its own industry .
Madam President , in the textile sector as in many others , harsh reality has overtaken and dispelled the illusions of a World Trade Organization that has been presented , untruthfully and demagogically , as fair and beneficial for all .
The cult of commerce , the creed of free trade and the dogma of globalization march on , with the deliberate sacrifice of hundreds of thousands of jobs in Europe .
The policy of opening up Europe to global competition , already a reality in the textile sector , is draining the life-blood from our industrial and social tissue and putting thousands of workers into the street .
The even greater liberalization of trade that has already been planned will drain that life-blood away altogether .
No amount of research or modernization of production technology will save jobs that are doomed to disappear as a result of savage global competition .
The frenzied quest for competitiveness resulting from the opening of our frontiers is forcing European business to lay off workers , to relocate , even to make use of illegal working .
This logic , and this mechanism , are socially criminal and economically damaging to the Union .
Madam President , I have been allowed one minute , which is not long at all , to say three things about the textile industry , not forgetting to congratulate Mr Moniz on his report .
First , representing as I do the North of France , a region which has lost tens of thousands of textile industry jobs , I must express the deep sorrow felt by workers in that industry on hearing the announcement of further redundancies .
Next , as a Frenchman , I believe that our textile industry does have a future provided that we play our trump cards of high technology and quality and benefit from new networks and methods in the clothing sector .
And finally , as a European , I once again call upon the Commission and the Council to make certain that the social clauses are put in place .
When we see the destructured form this sector takes in the developing countries , it is impossible to hide behind the most-favoured-nation clause of the GATT to deny ourselves the right to take action in defence of our textile industries , action which would be beneficial to all .
This time , at long last , perhaps someone will listen !
Madam President , I also wish to congratulate my colleague on the REX Committee , Fernando Moniz , on a well drafted report , which deserves our support for the motion for a resolution presented for vote in the House .
What is at stake is a sector facing many problems and it is of primary importance that we should emphasise that this is a sector with very good prospects and of great interest for the whole of Europe .
Apart from its direct economic importance , especially the maintenance and creation of jobs in industry and activities which are complementary to it , the placing of our textile products and clothing in the markets of third countries will depend on the recognition of the merits of European fashion , linked to cultural values which are a distinctive element of our presence in the whole world .
The promotion of this sector calls , however , for a very firm attitude on the part of those leading us .
I would put especial emphasis , as has already been pointed out by my colleague , Eurico de Melo , on respect for the deadlines which were already agreed at the Uruguay Round , and that we should meet expectations and the necessary programming in order to adapt our companies ; these deadlines should also be complied with in terms of opening up other markets , simultaneously liberalising their imports and not penalising the exports of raw materials which are necessary for us .
On the other hand , in the line of the programme for restructuring the textile and clothing industries , implemented three years ago by the Portuguese authorities , we must strengthen direct support measures for this sector , preparing it to be able to compete with an advantage on an open market , while respecting the rules of international trade ; it is also important that since modernising the sector leads to a liberation of some of the labour force , we should also promote alternative sectors which are able to occupy them in better conditions .
In this policy , it is important that the initiatives to be promoted should also take place in current textile regions , maintaining populations in existing social conditions and avoiding , on the contrary , a fresh concentration of investment in metropolitan areas , which are already overcrowded , which will only add an additional factor to the misery suffered there and increase the waste of resources .
Madam President , on the eve of the WTO Ministerial Conference in Singapore , it is vital that the European Union should maintain a firm common position vis-à-vis the application of the agreement on liberalisation of trade , especially in relation to the textile sector .
The excellent report drafted by my colleague , Fernando Moniz , demonstrated clearly and fully the importance which the textile industry has had , has and will continue to have in the economy of the European Union .
Therefore , we cannot tolerate any European Union negotiations which change the timetables and the agreements made in the accords , putting at stake the development and employment of regions where textiles play a decisive role .
Europe must and can continue to be a great producer and exporter of quality textiles .
The WTO has an obligation to protect fair trade , and the United States of America have shown that , whenever their interests are at stake , liberalisation must be properly regulated .
This must also be the role and responsibility of the European Union .
The European Parliament must demand proper compliance with the social , environmental and anti-fraud rules which all countries signed up to in the Marrakesh agreement , at the end of the Uruguay Round .
Madam President , I am grateful for Mr Kittelmann 's comprehensive report and welcome the support expressed in it for our market access strategy .
Much progress has already been achieved in its implementation , in particular by the setting up of a data base on trade barriers accessible by Internet as of yesterday .
I am also pleased by the very clear position taken by Parliament , for example by Mr Kittelmann and Mrs Randzio-Plath , on the issue of strengthening Article 113 in the Treaty in the context of the IGC .
Mr Kittelmann 's report covers all the important subjects to be discussed in Singapore and the Commission is actively pressing for substantial results there .
I fully appreciate Mr De Clercq 's concern about Parliament 's involvement in that process and am very glad that a delegation from Parliament will be present at Singapore .
The report supports in many respects the positions that we have taken in preparing for Singapore , particularly the case for the necessity to proceed with the liberalization of services by completing the negotiations on basic telecommunications by February 1997 , as well as by concluding a new multilateral agreement on financial services by the expiry of the interim agreement at the end of 1997 .
There is also a large convergence between the views developed in the report and our positions on subjects such as the compatibility of regional arrangements , WTO rules and accessions to the WTO .
We share the view that the WTO will be assessed not only on its ability to ensure appropriate implementation of the Uruguay Round and fulfil the tasks included in the built-in agenda , but also by adapting itself to the new trade environment , as Mrs Randzio-Plath rightly emphasized .
In this context the clear position of Parliament in favour of international rules on investment is very helpful .
With regard to trade and labour standards , which Mr Hughes and a number of other Members referred to , I welcome the Council 's pronouncement in favour of a debate on this subject in the WTO .
We will work hard on this objective with the United States and others but , given the opposition we are facing on this issue from the developing world , I am not sure how far the Singapore conference will go .
We must make sure that it is made clear that our approach is not inspired by protectionist purposes as Mr Ettl and Mr Chanterie rightly pointed out .

Turning to the report on competition policy from Mr Kittelmann , the support of the European Parliament for the Commission positions on international competition rules is also very welcome .
Since the publication of the report of the group of experts the Commission has issued a communication calling for an international framework of competition rules and also introduced in Geneva a draft decision for Singapore with a view to launching work in the WTO on this subject .
The main elements of Mr Kittelmann 's report are entirely consistent with our position .
Indeed , following the progress made in multilateral trade liberalization , anti-competitive business practices may have a more significant economic impact .
It is therefore time to deal with them in the WTO .
The analytical work already undertaken in other organizations means that it is now possible to deal with this issue at the WTO , which is the most appropriate organization for the agreement of a framework of international competition rules .
We will seek in Singapore a decision by ministers to launch work in that direction .
With regard to trade environment , I appreciate the considerable work done by a number of European Parliament committees , most particularly Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and his committee .
The focus today has to be on the WTO committee on trade and environment .
We have played a lead role in the committee 's discussions in the last two years and I think that Mr Pimenta would accept that that is the case .
We have made a proposal on the relationship between multilateral environmental agreements and the rules of the WTO and I welcome your support for that proposal .
We have pressed for the recognition by the trade rules of voluntary eco-labelling schemes based on lifecycle analysis .
On the other hand , we have shown ourselves flexible on issues of interest to other countries , particularly developing countries , such as domestically prohibited goods .
The committee finally agreed last week conclusions which will be presented at Singapore .
They do not match the initial ambitions of the European Union .
We have not yet won agreement for our position on MEAs and there are those , therefore , who would say that this proves that the process has been a failure .
I do not think so .
Let us see what the committee has achieved and what it can achieve .
Let us not forget that many other WTO members started from a position which was a long way from ours .
The work of the CTE has helped to clarify the issues and close the gap .
For example , the conclusions endorse multilateral solutions to trans-boundary or global problems .
They acknowledge that trade provisions may be needed to achieve environmental objectives and that the existing accommodation for such instruments within the WTO rules should be preserved .
We have protected our position for the discussions which will continue after Singapore .
On the most important issues , MEAs and eco-labelling , we have laid foundations on which we will build .
The process of debate has helped greatly to increase understanding of this complex issue and to lay the ground for future progress .
The extensive analytical work in the CTE has brought a much clearer understanding of the great complexities of the relationship between trade policy and environmental policy and that is important .
The first fruit of that understanding is better policy coordination in many administrations in these different areas , both in the development of MEAs and in domestic legislation .
That will decrease the chance of damaging and unnecessary conflicts .
In the international community the importance of meeting development concerns is better understood , as Mr van der Waal rightly showed .
There is a real fear among many developing countries that their needs are being overlooked ; that having brought about the liberalization of markets , we are now seeking to impose new forms of protectionism or to impose our standards on them .
These fears , whether real or perceived , have to be taken into account .
The global environment is far too important to allow this to degenerate into another North / South divide .
The discussions have made it clear that there are no quick and easy fixes to the delicate balance of the environmental , developmental and trade needs of a world undergoing rapid change .
I would rather be telling you today that we had substantive results already in the bag .
But we must be pragmatic .
As Mr Kreissl-Dörfler says in his report , the Singapore conference is only a staging post in the process .
The question is how to take forward the debate for the benefit of all .
We now need to build on the improved understanding achieved in the CTE .
That committee should be established on a permanent basis with its terms of reference and mandate renewed to provide a sound platform for further focused discussion .
We then need to draw countries into a consensual approach based on the work done so far and on a clear understanding of the benefits for all of making trade and the environment policies mutually supportive .
That is the direction in which we shall work .
I would like to thank Mr Moniz and the REX Committee for the report on our communication concerning the impact of international developments on the Community 's textile and clothing sector .
I agree very much with what Mr Pex said about that report .
The Commission 's communication was a response to the request from the Council .
The development of this sector has , of course , been very difficult in the last ten years .
We have heard from a number of Portuguese Members , for example , who have spoken very vocally and vividly about that .
But it remains an important sector for our economy with a worldwide reputation for know-how , creativity , performance and quality .
The answer to current problems must be found in two things : the development of our comparative advantages and the opening up of markets across the world .
I am glad you have given priority to the continued liberalization of the textile markets and the creation of fair conditions for international trade in these products .
We have to continue our efforts to create a competitive environment in the world 's markets , to strengthen our instruments for facilitating market access in third countries .
We have to provide an appropriate framework for the continuing adaptation efforts by European industry , and we have to strengthen our instruments against fraud and counterfeiting .
The impact of the Uruguay Round cannot be isolated from other economic factors determining the future of this industry .
I believe that the results of the international agreements should not provoke a major break in the expected development of the sector .
Within the framework of the progressive liberalization of textile and clothing trade , access to third country markets has to be one of our priorities .
In addition , the sector itself must be able to strengthen its competitive advantages by developing innovation and utilizing information technologies even more than in the past .
We have recently underlined the need for a more proactive role in international trade .
Increasing globalization , which cannot be avoided and is already happening , requires balanced efforts to open up markets .
That is the realistic response to events in the world .
For EU companies that is particularly important , since consumption within the EU is stagnating and Asian and Latin American markets with high growth rates offer a significant potential for new customers .
Among recent initiatives I would like to point out the creation of a database , that I have referred to , for trade barriers which will give us a regularly updated global framework to back up our requests to third countries .
The market access initiative is perhaps the most important innovation in external economic relations since the end of the Uruguay Round .
In that context the Commission has asked for an increase in the funds available for promoting European Union industry in third countries .
I am grateful to Mr Moniz for suggesting that this budget line be increased .
We attach also great importance to the fight against fraud and counterfeiting .
The textile anti-fraud initiative can be of decisive importance here .
The legislation on legal protection of designs and models will also help as soon as it comes into force , and at the same time , we are continuing our efforts to improve the protection of intellectual property in third countries .
Finally , when implementing our structural funds policy , the Commission recognises that the difficulties caused by adaptation to new conditions are felt to a different extent in different regions .
This industry has a future .
Our policies intend to guarantee an appropriate framework for its development .
We have taken the initiative to invite the social partners in the Member States to a dialogue about the measures taken by all concerned parties and to consider possible complementary initiatives .
This dialogue has taken place within three working groups .
I believe the results of those groups will enable us to target our actions even better than in the past .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the questions put by Mr Sonneveld , Mr Kofoed and Mr Jacob primarily relate to agricultural products .
I should of course say that for me to deal with each separate product now would call for an extremely long technical statement .
To spare you that , therefore , I suggest that I should talk briefly about the central , fundamental issues and simply quote a few examples covering individual products .
First , let me remind you that the new rules for complying with the WTO obligations have had to be implemented since 1 July 1995 for most agricultural products - a little later in some cases , such as olive oil and rice .
Those obligations include an annual limit on subsidized exports , which applies not only to quantities but also to the necessary budgetary expenditure .
The key element of these rules was the requirement that export licences had to be issued for all agricultural products .
These licences were an innovation for some products , such as fruit and vegetables , whereas in other cases , such as cereals , they already existed .
The way in which EC agricultural exports have been adjusted involves a combination of three different measures . First , an appropriate cut in production , taking due account of market forecasts ; secondly , exports without refunds , where this is both possible and acceptable ; and thirdly , the monitoring of subsidized exports over the course of the financial year with the aid of the distribution of export licences .
These three basic possibilities have been used for each individual product , although in different ways and to differing extents .
As far as the first question is concerned , I should like to make it clear that a reduction in agricultural exports is certainly to be expected , since after all the final act of the Uruguay Round calls for a 21 % reduction in the volume of subsidized exports over the six years from 1995 to 2000 , and at the same time requires an increase in minimum market access .
It must be borne in mind , though , that not all agricultural products will be affected in the same way .
For example , the restrictions on volumes will have a greater impact in the cases of poultry and cheese , whereas the quantities of sugar exported will change only insignificantly as a result of these limitations .
Regarding the questions concerned with the level of refunds , I should note that the size of the refund depends to a great extent on the situation in the agricultural markets , or , more accurately , on the current situation both in the internal market and in the world market .
Cereals , for example , offer a striking example .
Because the Community prices were actually below the world market price for a certain time , we had to impose levies on our exports in order to safeguard the Community 's supply .
The problem here arose from the market situation , not from the budget .
In addition , refunds logically have to be cut in cases where the number of licence applications is so great as to make it impossible to comply with the annual obligations in terms of quantities .
Overall , given the wide variety of agricultural products , this is quite a complex question , and any evaluation of an individual product calls for a separate analysis .
If individual Members are interested in a detailed account of certain particular agricultural products , I am prepared to provide a specific written analysis covering those products .
In addition , though , I should make the point that the Council 's implementing directive in any case calls for a general report on the implementation of the new GATT rules and the effects of that implementation to be presented before 30 June 1997 , so that a general debate on these matters can take place somewhere around the spring .
I have received five motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Topical and urgent debate ( Part 1 )
The next item is the first part of the topical and urgent debate on subjects of major importance .
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in eastern Zaire .
Madam President , on behalf of the Council I welcome this opportunity to discuss the grave and pressing situation in eastern Zaire with Parliament .
In so doing , I wish to pay tribute to the manner in which Parliament continues to emphasize the importance of international humanitarian and human rights issues for the Union .
The deteriorating situation in eastern Zaire has again brought the threatening legacy of genocide and ethnic division in the Great Lakes region to the fore .
Once again , the international community is faced with the daunting challenge of facilitating the creation of an effective and lasting framework to resolve the fundamental and unresolved issues facing the Great Lakes region .
The international community still has an opportunity to prevent any further deterioration of the situation in humanitarian terms .
This opportunity cannot be wasted by merely restoring the status quo ante in eastern Zaire .
It is an opportunity that must be grasped .
I believe that the generosity of the international humanitarian assistance in the past must now be matched with decisive and substantive political engagement and follow-up action .
Our current efforts to address the immediate humanitarian needs of the area must go ahead hand in hand with a commitment to address on-the-line political tensions and problems in the Great Lakes region .
Against this background , the presidency and our partners in the European Union are continuing our intensive efforts to assist in averting further human tragedy in eastern Zaire and to avert a potentially catastrophic humanitarian disaster in the Great Lakes region of Africa .
In our ongoing efforts , we are working in close cooperation with the EU Special Envoy to the Great Lakes region , Mr Aldo Aiello , the special representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations , the Organization of African Unity , regional leaders and other concerned members of the international community .
Foreign Ministers of the European Union discussed the situation in eastern Zaire on 28 and 29 October and called on all parties to exercise restraint and to have regard to the safety of civilians .
As a first step towards preventing any further escalation in violence and unrest , they called for the implementation of an immediate ceasefire and reiterated the Union 's firm conviction that the complex problems at issue can only be resolved through early and substantive dialogue .
We called on all parties concerned , and in particular the authorities of both Zaire and Rwanda , to begin such a process as soon as possible .
The Council also requested the European Commission to report urgently on the situation and to make proposals for action by the Union to assist actively in the process of getting supplies to those in need .
It is the hope of the presidency and our European partners that the unilateral ceasefire , which was recently declared by the Tutsi side in eastern Zaire , can become part of a fully agreed and sustainable ceasefire between all parties to the conflict .
This would facilitate both the immediate delivery of humanitarian assistance and the commencement of political dialogue to resolve the crisis .
The European Union specifically mandated its own envoy to return to the Great Lakes region where he has , over the past two weeks , been engaged in renewed and intensive consultations with the governments of Rwanda and Burundi , the United Nations , the Organization of African Unity and other concerned parties .
Mr Aiello also attended , on behalf of the European Union , the summit of regional leaders on the crisis in eastern Zaire , which was held in Nairobi on 5 November .
The European Union has welcomed the outcome of the Nairobi summit on 5 November as a further positive step towards the realization of a community , of a framework within which the crisis in eastern Zaire can be resolved in a peaceful and humanitarian manner .
The regional summit has given strong support to the calls made by the EU and other members of the international community for the implementation of a full and immediate ceasefire to facilitate the intensification of diplomatic efforts to achieve lasting peace .
The summit also strongly supported the establishment , in conjunction with the respective Secretaries-General of the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity , of safe corridors and areas of sanctuary inside Zaire , with an appropriate protection force to facilitate humanitarian assistance and the voluntary and safe repatriation of refugees .
These positive proposals are being encouraged by the European Union as part of its ongoing support for the efforts of regional leaders and the Organization of African Unity , whose central role is both recognized and supported by the Union , to bring about a peaceful resolution of the conflict .
The European Union recognizes that there is a strong interrelationship between humanitarian and political aspects of the crisis and that both dimensions must be addressed together in a comprehensive way .
For this reason , the Union will continue to urge that the necessary conditions exist for essential humanitarian tasks to be carried out as quickly as possible and for the process of dialogue to be advanced .
As part of this approach , my colleague , the Minister of State , John Burton TD , chaired a special meeting of European Union Development and Humanitarian Aid Ministers in Brussels on 7 November .
The meeting reaffirmed the Union 's deep concern on the situation in eastern Zaire and the threat posed to peace and stability in the entire Great Lakes area .
It also reaffirmed the Union 's determination and commitment to do everything in its power to help and to assist immediately vulnerable people , refugees and displaced persons in eastern Zaire , in averting human tragedy there and in avoiding a potentially catastrophic humanitarian disaster in the region .
Ministers recalled the Union 's commitment to promote the voluntary return of refugees to their countries of origin and strongly underlined the need to ensure safe and protected humanitarian corridors in order to facilitate delivery of immediate relief supplies to the victims of the crisis where they are , as well as the voluntary , safe and dignified return of refugees to their countries of origin .
The need for support for development efforts , as well as for strengthening the legal system , notably within Rwanda , to facilitate the integration of returned refugees , was also noted .
Ministers also underlined the importance of support for the democratic process in Zaire .
Ministers agreed on the need to work in a coordinated manner with international humanitarian agencies and NGOs to ensure an effective humanitarian response to the crisis .
Since the beginning of the crisis the European Community and Member States have provided about ECU 755m in humanitarian aid .
They noted the resource needs of the humanitarian agencies and agreed on the importance of ensuring that aid resources are made available for agreed priorities as a matter of urgency .
The meeting also called on all parties in the region to ensure the safety and freedom of movement of all international humanitarian aid personnel .
The meeting agreed to send immediately a special mission of the development ministers from Ireland , the Netherlands and Italy to make an assessment of the humanitarian situation and to identify ways and means to speed up humanitarian assistance .
Minister of State Burton accompanied by Ministers Pronk of the Netherlands and Serri of Italy visited Zaire and Rwanda between 9 and 12 November .
Commissioner Bonino also accompanied the delegation .
In discussions with Prime Minister Kengo as well as the other Zairean Government ministers the EU delegation impressed on ministers the importance attached by the Union to early adoption of measures in the region to advance reconciliation and for actions to facilitate immediate humanitarian assistance for those in acute need .
The EU delegation emphasized the importance attached by the Union to the opening of safe and protected humanitarian corridors to assist delivery of emergency relief supplies as well as the importance of facilitating the voluntary and safe return of refugees to their countries of origin .
For its part , the Zairean side expressed to the EU delegation the view that refugees in Zaire must return to their countries of origin and stated the government 's view that the existence of the refugee camps is a main factor leading to instability in the region .
The EU delegation visited Kigali on 11 and 12 November and held lengthy discussions with President Bizimungo , Vice-President Kagame and other ministers .
The Rwandan side indicated that it had been working over recent days with UN agencies and NGOs to facilitate the sending of humanitarian aid to eastern Zaire .
The EU delegation also met on 11 November with UN Special Envoy Raymond Chrétien .
Ambassador Chrétien outlined his discussions to date in the region concerning possible modalities of a UN mandated intervention force to facilitate humanitarian supplies for safe and secure corridors and enable refugee return as well as the disarming of militia forces among the refugee population .
I should emphasize that the humanitarian situation in eastern Zaire remains extremely precarious .
Currently there are over 1 million Hutu refugees and more than 160 , 000 displaced Zaireans who urgently require food aid and medical assistance .
Although to date the security situation had prevented humanitarian agencies from operating in the region , there have been some hopeful developments over recent days , including the delivery of limited humanitarian supplies to Goma , although these supplies have not yet been distributed .
The Rwandan Government agreed earlier this week to allow eight humanitarian agencies and NGOs to enter Zaire to provide humanitarian assistance and prepare a plan of action on the refugee issues .
These organizations crossed the border from Rwanda on Monday and have begun to assess the precise needs in the area .
It is hoped that this will be followed by provision of further supplies over the coming days as well as access to Bukavu .
We are all aware that the international aid community stands ready to deliver immediately food , medicine and shelter to those who most need it .
This cannot be done without support to do so safely .
For this reason at their meeting in Brussels on 7 November , European development ministers welcomed the call by regional heads of state for the immediate setting up of safe corridors and temporary sanctuaries inside Zaire to facilitate humanitarian assistance and the repatriation of refugees and noted their request in this regard to the United Nations Security Council for the deployment of a neutral force .
They also noted that special arrangements are urgently required in the short-term to ensure a stable security situation in eastern Zaire and noted the efforts to this end being pursued by the UN Security Council .
As Parliament will be aware , the UN Security Council has adopted enabling Resolution 1078 of 9 November which strongly urges member states on an urgent and temporary basis and in cooperation with the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity to prepare the necessary arrangements in consultation with the states concerned , to allow the immediate return of the humanitarian organizations and the safe delivery of humanitarian aid to displaced persons , refugees and civilians at risk in eastern Zaire and to create the necessary conditions for the voluntary and secure repatriation of refugees .
Resolution 1078 also requests the Secretary-General to report to the Security Council by 20 November with a concept of operations and framework for humanitarian taskforce with military assistance if necessary .
European Union Member States are now considering how best they can assist in the early implementation of Resolution 1078 as the basis for the authorization of a multinational humanitarian intervention , taking account of its prospective mandate and the contributions which can be made by partners - the Organization of African Unity , African states , the United States , Canada and others .
The Union will continue to make every possible effort towards the resolution of the current humanitarian crisis and the ongoing conflict in eastern Zaire through this and other appropriate means .
At an extraordinary meeting in Addis Ababa on 11 November at which the Union was represented by Special Envoy Aiello , the central organ of the Organization of African Unity mechanism for conflict prevention endorsed the position taken by the regional summit of 5 November in relation to the establishment of a neutral intervention force .
It also stressed the importance of an effective African contribution to such a force and called on the Security Council and the international community to create a mechanism which will ensure this .
The Foreign Ministers of Cameroon , Ethiopia and Zimbabwe have been charged with following up the implementation of the Addis summit in cooperation with the OAU Secretary-General .
The European Union welcomes the outcome of the extraordinary meeting as further confirmation of the commitment of African countries to contribute effectively to resolving the crisis in the Great Lakes region .
In the context of the need for a comprehensive approach to the complex and interconnected problems at issue in the Great Lakes region , the European Union continues to support the convening of an international conference under the joint auspices of the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity , in order to address within a global approach the root causes of the crisis and to ensure respect for commitments .
We believe that such a conference has a central role to play in the establishment of a lasting comprehensive settlement .
The situation in the Great Lakes region is a challenge to the entire international community .
It is essential that the European Union plays its full part in meeting its responsibilities and seeking new ways forward and in addressing urgent humanitarian needs .
I can assure Parliament this is what we intend to do .
In conclusion , it again highlights the need for this Union through the Intergovernmental Conference to strengthen its capacity to act internationally in dealing with situations of this kind .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , what you are witnessing here , day after day , as you follow the more and more alarming information provided by the media , is nothing less than a humanitarian disaster .
My colleague Emma Bonino , who has just returned from the Great Lakes region , will no doubt remind us of the tragic impact of these events on the refugees and displaced persons , and the impossibility , hitherto , of providing any aid to those in need , those in danger of death for lack of food , water and medical care .
Yet everything is in place for an immediate humanitarian operation .
The events of recent weeks - we need to be clear about this - were not unexpected in the regional context that we have been familiar with for several years , the crisis situation in the Great Lakes region .
After all , the day-to-day reality that we see in the Kivu , in eastern Zaire , is the most violent and tragic manifestation yet of a particularly complex regional situation involving not only Zaire , Rwanda and Burundi but also Uganda and Tanzania .
The problems of the region are exceptionally serious in humanitarian terms and explosive in military and political terms .
The roots of the present situation go far back into history , to the pre-colonial era . However , we are not here to analyse the historical events that have led to the present armed conflict in the Kivu , or to lay the blame for those events at any particular door .
European public opinion expects us to act quickly to stop a sequence of events that is not predestined : to end the fighting and bring aid to those who need it so much and so urgently .
It also expects to see the European Union making an effective contribution to defining and implementing an overall political solution to guarantee peace and stability in this region .
Ladies and gentlemen , any steps towards finding a general political solution necessarily involve the refugees ' return to their country of origin .
This in turn requires implementing the decision taken back in 1994 to separate the soldiers , militiamen and other forces of intimidation from the main body of refugees .
And so the problem , clearly , is how we can send out a neutral international force , with the agreement of the OAU Security Council and the various countries in the region , to separate the army and the armed militia from the main body of refugees and displaced persons .
Unless we can remove the armed elements , we are going to be unable to solve the problem of returning the main body of refugees from Rwanda and Burundi , which is still a priority objective in resolving the crisis .
The governments of the countries of origin , for their part , must create the necessary conditions for their people to return , with the aid of the international community .
Next , and this is an absolutely essential aspect , everything possible must be done to involve the states in that region in the quest for a general political solution .
Without their effective long-term co-operation there can be no viable solution .
We should look towards a pragmatic policy of stabilization and regional security , coordinated by an appropriate mechanism such as Arusha .
The regional summit in Nairobi on 5 November showed that governments in the region are aware of the issues at stake in the present conflict and ready to assume their responsibilities in seeking a general , pragmatic and viable political solution .
Any such solution , I say again , would have to be formulated by the International Conference on Peace , Security and Stability to be organized under the aegis of the United Nations and the OAU .
The broad outline of that conference was also emphasized in Nairobi on 5 November .
Those , Madam President , are the few points I wanted to make this morning about the conflict in the Kivu and , more generally , about the Great Lakes region .
But I believe we have the privilege and benefit of having with us today Emma Bonino , whose voice has awakened consciences which had , perhaps , dozed off somewhat both in Europe and in the rest of the world .

Emma has just come back , and I believe she will be able to tell us in her own way what she has seen out there . I am afraid it is not a pretty story .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , after what has been said by the Council and the Commission , which has put this crisis in its historical and political context , if I can put it that way , it is now my duty to tell you a few things that may be new to you , information which I brought back with me early this morning .
The first point , an important one in my view , is to confirm that in all my discussions with everyone I met at every level , in Kinshasa , in Kigali , in Kiseny , with all the humanitarian agencies , with all the NGOs , I found complete unanimity on one point : without a multinational force in the field and without military protection there is no hope at all - I repeat , no hope at all - that the lives of hundreds of thousands of people can be saved .
I believe that this unanimity , this consensus , is of great importance .
Secondly , it transpires that , for once , Europe has spoken and is continuing to speak with a single voice .
On this occasion , at least , if we want to identify the obstacles which have prevented this force from being sent , and may still be preventing it , we need to look beyond the Atlantic .
Thirdly , I can tell you that yesterday , at Kiseny , they offered to allow us , to allow me , to cross the border from Rwanda to go to Goma .
I should say briefly why I declined .
First , I know Goma , having been there on various occasions , and that isn 't where the refugees are .
The refugees have never been in the town of Goma - as everyone knows , the refugees are in the camps at Kitali , Mugunga , Kahindo and Kibumba , 8 , 10 or 12 miles outside the town .
In point of fact , I would of course have met in Goma the rebel leader , their self-proclaimed chief , I imagine , Mr Kabila .
I felt , first , that I would not be allowed to see anything and , secondly , that the political ' toll ' to be paid would be too high for us to take the risk of paying it .
The ministers who were travelling with me felt the same way as I did , and our decision was a unanimous one .
Anyway , you saw what happened because it was reported in the press .
Finally , after interminable negotiations and under conditions which I must admit were hard to bear , a few United Nations agencies and a few NGOs were authorized to take 20 tonnes of food inside Goma .
So we 're not talking about refugees but , possibly , about displaced Zaireans and even more , perhaps , Banyamulenge rebels .
They were forced to leave these tonnes of supplies at the stadium , where I imagine they still are - I assume no one has distributed them to anybody at all .
But the VHA , on returning , did in fact confirm to us that there seemed to be no one really in danger or in need in Goma .
Also , we actually learned that Mr Kabila started by telling the press that there wasn 't really all that much food , or even enough , and also that it consisted entirely of biscuits .
He wanted to know where he could find the rice , fish and meat that he needed .
I have no doubt at all that , when you hear that kind of thing , you do have to keep a tight grip on yourself , and I can well understand the frustration of the humanitarian workers in the field , trying everything they know to do something , to take some positive action .
But I must add a word of warning : these initiatives , far from being effective in bringing people back together , do raise a lot of problems of principle , even political problems .
For all these reasons , I hope - and we all hope - that this multinational force which is going to open up the humanitarian corridors to allow the direct distribution of food to the endangered population will be in place as quickly as possible .
There is another important message , too , at the present time . This concerns the mandate of this multinational force .
First of all , these access routes and humanitarian corridors must , as we see it , definitely be ' two-way ' , in other words designed so as to make it easy to return .
I stress this point of the need to facilitate voluntary return , which is laid down in every convention on refugees and in humanitarian legislation . The second function of this force will be to move the food supplies , and the third will be to protect the refugees themselves , the equipment and the humanitarian personnel .
Fourthly , I must assure this House just as we assured the authorities in the local capital cities and our NGOs that there is no question of returning to the status quo , in other words the former camps .
Temporary areas will have to be set up , because people cannot be helped while they are on the move .
They have to be brought together somewhere .
But I do hope that you will do everything in your power to ensure that the mandate given to this force also includes a mandate to disarm the refugees .
If not , we shall be back in a situation where we have temporary areas sheltering perhaps a few thousand armed refugees - in other words , the same situation that we and the humanitarian aid workers have been familiar with for two years .
I hope , then , that we can all unite in demanding that the mandate for this force includes the right to disarm the refugees and to allow them , rather than forcing them , to return - I want to be quite clear about this , in other words to force a choice , to give the refugees the choice of deciding what they want to do .
If it is necessary to use the word ' force ' , which I keep hearing here and there in somewhat ambiguous contexts that caused me a great deal of concern , the target must be to force people to choose .
There can be no question of forcing them to return .
One final piece of information , ladies and gentlemen : this military intervention is a precondition , I say again , for trying to save lives .
I am very frustrated that I have not so far been able - I have tried , but I have not succeeded - to get across the message of urgency , because every minute counts , every hour counts .
Now , apparently , the question is no longer whether we shall have a multinational force , but when .
When ?
This is the real essence of this mission , because if that force arrives in three weeks ' time it will be kept very busy burying the bodies but it will have very little else to do .
( Applause ) So I hope that , even if some of my language has not been very diplomatic , you will understand the anger and frustration and even shame - yes , the shame , that all of us ...
( Applause ) ... will have to bear and endure in this crisis .
And I believe that , for once , Europe has clearly shown that , as far as it is concerned , dignity and human life and solidarity are not just empty words but words that mean something .
For my own part , I hope we shall be able to continue speaking as one and trying to be effective .
It is not up to us to take the decision about the troops , but it definitely is up to us to do everything we can to ensure that these lives can be saved .
( Applause )
Madam President , if I may , I should like to raise a procedural point which , just for once , is an ethical and sentimental one .
I feel that Parliament as a whole is poorly represented here - numerically , although not in terms of quality - to thank the Commission and the Council for what has just been said , and more particularly to express our admiration and recognition for Emma Bonino and for the way in which she acted both before and during her trip , and the way she is acting now .
Your journey was a necessary one , Commissioner , and we are grateful to you for the non-diplomatic channels you have emphasized .
Madam President , in the breathtakingly beautiful Great Lakes region the violent settling of accounts has come full circle .
The regime in Kigali is presenting refugees with a terrible account which shows forced expulsion , hunger , thirst and cholera on the one side and the abomination of the unpunished 1994 genocide on the other side .
Everyone knows it was impossible for the refugees to stay for ever in the border camps where , moreover , the perpetrators of the genocide were hiding and were never weeded out from the rest .
The elusive international community bears a heavy responsibility for this .
But at no time has Kigali 's policy inspired the refugees with the confidence to go back .
I would remind you of the conditions in Rwanda 's jails where death is the arbitrary judge , because anyone who does not have the constitution of an ox dies before he has any chance of coming to trial .
Nothing has been said about Kibeho , about other situations which have remained unpunished .
But the hundreds of thousands who have now fled can draw only cold comfort from statements of the ' I told you so ' variety and from lamentations over missed opportunities .
Those shortcomings must be made good now by the provision of drinking water , food and medicines , not tomorrow or next week but today at the latest ; they were needed really last week .
And those on the ground know that the security position is so uncertain that humanitarian aid has to be escorted by an intervention force , otherwise it will not get through .
The Organization of African Unity asked a specific question .
A decision in principle has been taken by the Security Council , so I wonder why we still have not seen any action .
Intervention will be discredited if this failure to act persists .
Those who block aid now , and this is happening , whether Kigali or the militias , will be to blame for the deaths of thousands .
Those who fail to protect the convoys will share the blame .
But fundamentally nothing will change unless there is a political dialogue , in the first place inside Rwanda , between representatives of the regime and genuine representatives of the Hutu community who are not responsible for the genocide and the rest of it .
If that dialogue does not get going , in a regional framework and with international support , in four weeks ' time we shall find ourselves talking again about the crisis in Burundi which will have returned to the agenda .
Because we are hearing nothing more about Burundi , ladies and gentlemen , though there too the situation continues unchanged .
Madam President , for over a fortnight we and the rest of the world have been watching the progress of yet another terrible humanitarian tragedy , and once again the international community has displayed its inability to take any action to prevent it .
Madam President , I feel shame and anguish , because this disaster was predictable , and no vestige of a solution has been found for the problem that began in 1994 , caused by the influx of thousands of Hutu and Rwandan refugees into the already overpopulated Zairean Kivu .
The refugee camps have been receiving humanitarian aid for two and a half years although we know and the UNHCR knew that they had been infiltrated by those responsible for the Rwandan genocide and that they were sheltering the army of the former Rwandan government and the extremist Hutu militia .
In mitigation of Zaire 's actions , we must acknowledge that the Kengo government was calling for these refugees - refugees who were increasingly well armed from day to day - to be expelled .
By whom ?
I ask the question , but I am afraid I already know the answer .
We must all bear a share of the responsibility . My own country , Belgium , has abandoned its African policy and no doubt makes that the excuse for its silence , although the historical ties that bind us to the Great Lakes region should have prompted the Prime Minister to act as a mediator .
But all of us here are saying the same thing : the time for procrastination is past , this is the time for action .
So we insist that an international force should be set up immediately .
I should add that it would be desirable for the Western European Union to be involved in that international force .
The latest development is that , today , Canada has agreed to take command of this international force .
Just ten thousand or so men would be enough to enable humanitarian aid to reach the Kivu , and enough to encourage the refugees to return to Rwanda .
Let us hope that the Security Council will finally , and as a matter of urgency , adopt a resolution allowing those men to be deployed and allowing the 80 , 000 tonnes or so of food supplies already in the region to be released .
Madam President , there is still time to avert apocalypse and to launch an appeal for an immediate cease-fire to allow the vital dialogue between all the factions concerned .
The OAU must help to bring about a political solution for the entire region , and South Africa must accept its responsibilities , even if it has other priorities than fighting the fires ravaging Central Africa , because otherwise the whole of the Dark Continent could catch fire .
Between us , we have the means to act .
Now let us show that we have the will as well .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall use the word ' shame ' twice .
Mrs Bonino did not shrink from using it in her statement following the latest meeting of the Security Council .
She said it was a shame , a scandal , to be dispersing without concrete decisions on the tragedy in Central Africa .
In so doing she saved the honour of the Commission .
I must congratulate her on that .
I must also thank Mr Pinheiro for his constructive attitude during this difficult time .
The lack of unanimity in the European Union up to and within the Security Council is also a scandal .
Why is our indignation not great enough to prompt us to act collectively at this time ?
We all say that immediate humanitarian aid must be given to the refugees within Zaire , and that without a military escort that aid will not reach its destination .
We also advocate a conference of the Great Lakes region to resolve the differences in that region .
This raises the problem of Africa itself , what Henry Kissinger called ' a crisis continent ' .
The scant regard for human life , intolerance , African-style racism , are unfortunately characteristic of life in the dark continent .
The question is whether the Member States of the European Union want to pursue nineteenth-century-style policies or whether they want to be part of a policy for the twenty-first century .
Are we honest when we talk of more democracy , human rights and the rule of law in Africa too ?
Does Europe not have a special responsibility to play a powerful cooperative role in this region ?
There used to be talk of Eurafrica , Europe-Africa , the name for a special policy between our two continents .
Where do we stand now on that ?
Every day we hear voices which want to leave Africa to its miserable fate of self-destruction .
Can the United Nations do anything ?
The current position is failure .
So what should be done ?
Should we not also consider the old idea of a trusteeship council , with a new and changed mandate being given to try , in certain cases , to combine democracy , tolerance and peaceful coexistence ?
I know how delicate it is , but how else are we to stop the killing in future ?
The challenge is to create a society in Africa which is not murderous , but also to rescue bodies such as the United Nations which represent the peoples of the world .
Surely they were set up to keep or restore peace ?
It says so in the text of the United Nations Charter , and it is also important - we should say so loud and clear in the European Parliament - to see how the European Union projects itself .
Where do we stand and what are we doing ?
Madam President , our group believes that the European Union should head any international intervention aimed at preventing the humanitarian disaster in eastern Zaire which we have been witnessing , at once horrified and powerless , for several weeks now .
As we see it , the international community must intervene within the framework of the United Nations , under the umbrella of an appropriate Security Council resolution , using all the means necessary to achieve the proposed objectives and clearly maintaining its neutrality , i.e. never favouring the interests of any of the parties to the conflict .
Intervention on the part of the international community must have a three-fold objective , in our view .
Firstly , the creation of corridors via which medicine and food aid can start to be distributed - such aid is arriving in great quantities but is being placed in storage because it is impossible to get it to those who need it .
Secondly , the establishment of safe havens where refugees can settle and where they are protected from current or future confrontations .
And , thirdly , to achieve the separation of the armed factions which were responsible for the 1994 genocide and therefore the huge numbers of refugees .
The objectives of any intervention on the part of the international community must also include the convening of an international conference aimed at finding long-term solutions to the fundamental problems which exist in the Great Lakes region .
Solutions to these problems should envisage cooperation between all countries in the region , the voluntary , free and safe return of refugees to their homes , the implementation of sustainable development programmes for the area , commencing with the immediate requirement for material reconstruction , a return to peaceful coexistence of different ethnic groups in each country and the establishment of democracy and full respect for human rights in all countries in the region .
It ought to be stated that this crisis , just like the 1994 crisis in Rwanda , arises from the persistent nature of the vestiges of colonialism and also the continuation of spurious and unacceptable strategies on the part of power bases outside the region who attempt to maintain areas in the region where they can exert their supremacy and influence .
Those directly responsible for the genocide must be punished and a total arms embargo must be applied to the region . In addition , Madame President , there are certain governments , such as the French or US governments , which ought to clarify for us their past and current tactics and activities in this part of Africa .
Of course , we cannot forget that the dictatorship of Mobutu Sese Seko has been involved throughout this crisis and has used food aid as an instrument of pressure .
His regime continues to be supported by a number of countries - this is totally unacceptable .
We must keep abreast of public opinion and , as happened yesterday in Spain , we must use the mass demonstrations called by the NGOs to demand immediate and effective action within the framework of preventive diplomacy .
Madam President , I should like to thank the Council and Commission for their communication , and add my own very particular congratulations to the Commissioner for Humanitarian Action , who , throughout these long and painful weeks , in the face of the silence of the international community and the cowardice of the United States , has shown by her words and deeds the meaning of clear-headedness , determination and courage .
I thank Mrs Bonino for having listened to the voice of Europe .
And yet , two years ago , the authorities in Kigali gave us warning of what to expect .
The existence of camps full of refugees , taken hostage and held to ransom by the former Rwandan armed forces before being used , initially , as a security and a political shield by the Zairean government , amounted to nothing less than a time bomb menacing the entire region .
Today , the tragedy has erupted , and only a strong display of political will by the Security Council can stop it .
Miliary resources , too , will be needed , but we must stress the need for the strict neutrality of an international intervention force , whose only mandate will be to allow humanitarian aid to get through and to ensure the possibility of voluntary return to Rwanda and Burundi for those refugees who will be welcome there .
As for those who prefer to stay in Zaire - and , sadly , we all know why they want to stay there - well , let them stay !
But let us not have any repetition of the ambiguities of Operation Turquoise .
The international force must not be ordered to prop up a corrupt and discredited Zairean administration , to protect an army that has been reduced to looting its own country , or to allow the re-establishment of the armed forces of those responsible for the 1994 genocide in Rwanda !
If we want this joint intervention by the Western and African states to be no more than the political reflection of our duty of solidarity towards the civilian population , then we will have to ensure that this intervention does not involve those countries which have for too long shown their concern to support the former power in Kigali and what power remains in Kinshasa !
This neutrality is essential for the future credibility of the European Union in that region .
As far as other matters are concerned , Mrs Bonino has shown us the path of humanitarianism and dignity .
That is the path we must follow - and quickly !
Madam President , first of all I would like to congratulate Commissioner Bonino for having visited the Great Lakes region at such short notice , for her sensitivity vis-à-vis the situation - and I refer here not only to her political sensitivity - , for her determination regarding the need for humanitarian involvement and for ECHO help in this area .
These are points on which we all agree .
However , this consensus of opinion which is sometimes the most difficult thing to achieve in politics does not mean , as it should , that the way is now clear for action , and it risks becoming a cause of frustration which merely illustrates , both to ourselves and to the rest of the world , the futility of our efforts .
I do not intend to give another account of the bloodshed in Zaire but will content myself with offering a few thoughts and suggestions .
We cannot claim to be surprised by the conflict in Zaire , because it is the culmination of a crisis in the Great Lakes region which we have seen developing , in all its detail , since 1993 .
Nor should we resign ourselves to accepting the deaths of thousands of people simply because these were anticipated .
At this eleventh hour , such events should inspire us to take the lead in finding a solution .
The EU and Member States have the diplomatic and logistic capacity to head any humanitarian intervention , to support a decision on the part of the United Nations Security Council to provide military protection for such intervention and to see it implemented .
The question on the lips of civilians , the NGOs and especially the victims of the warfare , and which I now ask the Council , is the following : why is this capability not being put to good use ?
Why do we always follow on behind the United States , Canada or whoever happens to be in the lead at the time ?
Yesterday , throughout Spain , crowds of people attended rallies to demand immediate Western intervention to solve the conflict , and they were given the unanimous support of the Spanish parliament .
There is a risk that the EU 's stance will be interpreted as cowardice - it could propose WEU participation in humanitarian missions , within the framework of the CFSP , but it does not do so .
The contrast between declarations made by Member States and their actual willingness to contribute to a solution , both immediately and in the long term , smacks of hypocrisy or even , at times , schizophrenia .
That aside , the most urgent problem to be solved is the crisis facing the population , and the formula for doing so is to provide humanitarian aid , but this can only be provided under military protection , as has become clear from experience in Bosnia and Iraq where it was possible to provide for the people 's needs only after exclusion zones had been decreed .
When this multinational force is set up to protect consignments of humanitarian aid , its objective being to safeguard the right to survival of a people under threat of barbaric attack , we will be able to congratulate ourselves .
But it must be set up and it must be deployed because , if it is not , it will be too late .
Such a force will also be of use in assisting the voluntary return of refugees to the area , and these refugees must be unarmed - in this area there are many weapons and many deaths .
I think it is rather a cruel irony that today the World Food Summit in Rome opens as we are here in the European Parliament contemplating the fact that millions are facing starvation in Central Africa .
The prevarication , the delays , of course are indefensible as both Commissioners have said .
Displaced refugees are suffering , starving to death , while the international political vacuum continues , only occasionally interspersed by fine words , but still no real action .
UN member states must declare their readiness now to deploy , equip and support a multinational force under the leadership of the Canadians .
I have argued very strongly that such a force should have a clear mandate to disarm the former Rwandan Army , the Interahamwe .
It is a nonsense to suggest that relief is possible as long as these armed militias continue to intimidate the refugees .
They must be screened , and all those who are not genuine refugees must be detained .
This will not only facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance , but of course it will also help the whole process of building a long-term solution in Rwanda and elsewhere .
Whatever happens in this current crisis , we must not lose sight of the need for a political strategy , for a regional solution , after the crisis has been sorted out .
We have seen , as both Commissioners have said , a paralysis , a callous indifference , and we have seen a lack of moral or political leadership in the world .
I hope that in our future dealings with this region that will no longer be a feature .
Madam President , having heard the introduction to this debate , I must say that we are fortunate to have a Commission as well as a Council , because what we have heard from the Commission here today has been very much more specific !
We stand here and say that we foresaw some of this , that we saw it coming .
I would like to qualify that ' we ' a bit , because over the last 18 months Parliament has repeatedly drawn attention to it and demanded that action be taken to defuse the situation in this very area of the Great Lakes .
I seem to remember that we appealed to Zaire to discontinue logistical , military and other support for the rebels in the refugee camps .
Another demand we made was for the setting up of security areas and safe havens .
There is one thing , though , that I feel a degree of relief at noticing : more and more , there seems to be an awareness that humanitarian aid alone without simultaneous safeguards , including military backup , is impossible .
More and more there seems to be a consensus on this in this House .
After all , it really is futile to call for round tables and discussions and arrange meetings between rebel leaders who may sit down and talk together for a day while the others go on shooting each other .
Another problem , undoubtedly , is the return of the refugees .
I strongly urge this House to learn from the events that we are now deploring so much in the Great Lakes region - refugee camps should not necessarily be set up in border areas where they are immediately exposed to fresh pressures .
Also , stricter yardsticks should be applied in order to guarantee that refugees can return home quickly .
Madam President , I know it is not the your brief , President-in-Office of the Council , but I have to say that your contribution today lacked a commitment to doing something about the serious situation in Zaire .
I regret to have to say that .
I want to say to Mr Pinheiro that his contribution was very welcome .
I want in particular to pay tribute to Commissioner Bonino who , over the weekend , made statements which were so incisive and so transparent that the people of Europe - I am sure of it - saw for the first time a commissioner coming out and saying exactly what needed to be done ; saying exactly what the people of Europe wanted to hear .
Zaire , as we know , is a by-word for exploitation and plunder .
We have in the European Union Mr Mobutu , so-called President Mobutu , who is being given refuge in his palace in the south of France .
I think , quite frankly , that Mr Mobutu should be arrested for genocide and war crimes against his own people .
I think Mobutu and his coterie of thugs and gangsters who are running that country , drinking pink champagne while their 44 million people have no education , no schools , no health , no hospitals are a disgrace .
The European Union has a terrific responsibility in this regard .
Finally , 80 % of the weapons are exported by the big five in the United Nations .
The big five have been very slow to act in this particular crisis in Zaire and the Great Lakes region .
I think the media should investigate where the weapons that the Hutus are now using are coming from .
A couple of months ago they were disarmed and now they are armed again with weapons coming from the European Union ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
At this point in the debate , we have heard from every group .
I know that there are still more speakers , amounting to perhaps another quarter of an hour of speaking time .
Our voting time begins at 12 noon .
Given the importance of this debate , I cannot take it upon myself to interrupt it , and so I shall put the matter to the House pursuant to Rule 130 .
Do you want the debate to be closed so that we can begin voting , or would you prefer the debate to continue for another 15 minutes or so ?
Madam President , looking around at the numbers present in the Chamber everyone is getting ready to vote in twelve minutes ' time .
We know that voting is to start very shortly , and so I would ask you to suspend the debate for the moment .
( Parliament agreed to suspend the debate )
I therefore declare the debate closed .
( Mixed reactions ) The vote will take place very shortly .
Written speeches by Members listed to speak in the debate :
Madam President , one of the most appalling humanitarian tragedies is now being played out in the eastern areas of Zaire : more than a million people are today in danger of dying of hunger and disease , and many thousands of refugees have already paid with their lives for the renewed outbreak of fighting in that region .
But , as ever , any humanitarian tragedy is also , and primarily , a political tragedy . Or rather a political crime .
The main responsibility for this crime rests with those Rwandan forces - both the militias of the former regime and those loyal to the new government in Kigali - which in recent years have done nothing to bring about a new national reconciliation but , instead , have deliberately fanned the flames of ethnic and political hatreds , which today are inevitably erupting in armed conflict .
However , some responsibility for this crime also rests with those members of the so-called international community which , once again , have allowed the situation to fester .
Today , as in 1994 , the price of all this is being paid by the civilian population - children , women , the weakest members of society .
It is already very late in the day , but the need now is to prevent the worst happening .
We all know that , in order to aid the refugees , what is needed is military , political and humanitarian intervention to re-establish minimal conditions of security for civilians and for the international bodies .
This intervention , the specific form of which will be determined in the next few hours , will of course have to take place under the auspices of the United Nations Security Council , but it also needs the commitment and help of the major African and European countries , and of the United States .
Let us open the humanitarian aid corridors at once !
That is the indispensable first step towards finding a lasting solution to the conflicts in the region .
It would have cost a lot less , both in terms of human lives and in terms of financial resources , if we had done it when we were asked to , several weeks ago .
Let us at least do it now , and let us learn from it some hard lessons for the future .
Votes
Mr President , as is unfortunately a regular occurrence , the debate on this report took place at 11.30 p.m. yesterday , and we were able to record a number of important points , in particular the position adopted by Mrs Bjerregaard and the Commission regarding a number of amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
I should simply like to point out that , among these amendments , which I regard and the Committee on the Environment regards as important , the Commission will accept Amendments Nos 35 and 39 in full , while Amendments Nos 12 , 16 , 38 and 41 will be accepted in part by the Commission .
I feel I must make this clear to all Members of this House so that voting can take place without any confusion .
We know that 314 votes are needed and that the Commission 's position is decisive regarding any amendment to the common position .
On Amendment No 24 :
To avoid any confusion , Mr President , if this Amendment No 24 is adopted that means that Annex II will have to be modified , because we are now dealing with Annex I , and if the type of project which is the subject of the amendment is included in Annex I , then necessarily it will no longer appear in Annex II .

I believe , therefore , that we must infer from this a deletion in Annex II , even if there is no amendment which explicitly calls for that .
On Amendment No 39 :
Mr President , this is an extremely important amendment .
It relates to industrial farming .
The vote which was adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection relates to the number of animal units , which would be 100 , but another amendment , tabled by Mrs Barthet-Mayer and other Members , suggests 200 .
I have no great hope of obtaining 314 votes in favour of the proposal by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , but I do support Mrs Barthet-Mayer 's amendment .
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Mr President , I should like to propose an oral amendment .
In paragraph 10 , where mention is made of enabling the refugees to return home , I think it is important to indicate that this would be a voluntary return .
After all , a forced return would give rise to every conceivable kind of irregularity .
I therefore suggest that the words ' to return home ' should be replaced by the words ' wishing to return home to do so ' .
( Parliament agreed to the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the joint resolution )
Mr President , even though we have adopted this resolution on Zaire , I must protest strongly at the way in which this debate has been interrupted .
At a time when the eyes of the entire world are on events on Zaire , I find it scandalous that we could not spend ten minutes more debating a problem which concerns the entire world .
I have to point out that half of those applauding voted to curtail the debate .
I want to take the floor before we begin the vote on the Dybkjær report on the review of the Fifth Environmental Action Programme .
Neither I nor the other Members in this House are strangers to political debate and controversy and the fact is that relations between the European Parliament and the European Commission sometimes involve disagreements .
That is in the natural order of things but it is important that these disagreements be conducted in an atmosphere of mutual respect .
When I read in the Danish press words like ' untrustworthy ' applied to a committee of the European Parliament then I begin to have doubts about the extent of this respect .
Words , like pollution , know no frontiers and when there are headlines in the newspapers saying that the Commissioner herself is attacking the Environment Committee , I am forced to wonder whether the spirit of mutual trust and cooperation that we on our side have tried to establish and build is still in existence .
I should therefore like to invite the Commissioner herself to say to Parliament this morning that while there always will be occasions when she and I and the committee and our rapporteur may have differences of opinion , she has no complaints to make either about the level of cooperation and help that she receives from the committee or about the competence of the committee , or about the way in which we choose to work .
Will she give Parliament that assurance and will she regret as much as I do that relations can be prejudiced by the unwise use of a press that is not always responsible ?
Mr President , I thank Mr Ken Collins for his question .
It is clear that what we are discussing here is of the greatest importance in relations between the Commission and Parliament , i.e. our cooperation on the one hand and the whole question of the development of democracy on the other .
I believe in fact that the Commission 's and Parliament 's greatest common interest lies in ensuring that we achieve as open a public debate as possible , that we be able to involve citizens and that we achieve some results .
This can be difficult in democratic systems .
We do not always agree .
There can be differences of opinion about the content of the proposal , as we will see later when we come to vote on this proposal , and there can also be disagreement on individual amendments , and yet finally we may also be able to achieve some results .
I would therefore emphasize that this is why , at one point , I criticized the fact that there had been over 100 amendments to the Fifth Action Programme .
In my view this is not to the benefit of the public .
Nor do I believe that the procedure has been good : on Monday the number was reduced to 50 , these were debated on Thursday evening , and now today we have to vote .
I do not believe this is the way to achieve great unity .
I believe that all of us would like to see the best possible public involvement in such a debate .
However , this does not of course mean that we are not to show respect for one another 's work .
I have been very pleased to work with the Environment Committee , with the Environment Committee 's President , with the rapporteurs , as we saw first with the report produced by Mr Lannoye and as we later saw in Mr Rübig 's report .
Hard words do not in any way detract from my appreciation of the cooperation .
I am committed to continuing with this and I certainly hope we can reach a favourable result .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , on a point of order .
With a roll call vote costing about ECU 1 , 500 , having 50 roll call votes , I reckon has just cost us about ECU 75 , 000 .
Mr President , I should be grateful if you would ask Parliament whether it agrees that the voting should continue .
We were told this morning that a large number of votes were to be taken and that rather more time would be needed .
It is now half-past one , and I think the limits of our patience may have been reached .
We have asked the Bureau , when so many votes are due , to being voting time at 11.30 a.m. so that voting does not have to continue throughout the middle of the day .
Please ask Parliament , therefore , whether it thinks we should take a break .
( Parliament decided to continue with the vote )
Surely the less mobile factor here is not labour but New Labour .
Since we are so far into lunchtime , I shall let you get away with cheap puns .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
As I stated at the first reading , all environmentalists in this House concerned with this key issue and virtually all those sitting on the left of the Chamber welcome the fact that we are amending and expanding the directive on the assessment of the environmental impacts of all public or private projects .
Such an amendment was already requested in the Fifth Action Programme and is crucial to attempts to comply with the concept of integration contained in Articles 2 and 130r ( 2 ) of the Treaty on European Union which shape Community environmental policy .
The expansion of the field of application to sectors such as agriculture or tourism , the requirement that Annex II should have equal weight to Annex I and the new provisions relating to information , monitoring and inspection of evaluation procedures are all necessary steps in complying with the concept of sustainable development which is contained in the Treaty on European Union , despite the strong vote against by the Right .
I shall be voting in favour of the proposals contained in the previous debate .
Thank you very much .
Cabrol report
The undersigned have voted against this report in its entirety .
The Commission lacks the requisite expertise for health monitoring which is proposed in the report .
The report & # x02BC ; s proposal creates an unnecessary and efficiency-stifling intermediate level in international health policy co-operation .
In contrast with this , there should be a consistent direct line operating between WHO and the health authorities in the respective states , as well as between the states themselves .
It is , of course , an admirable objective which we are aiming at here , namely the establishing of a centre for the control of infectious diseases .
I am , however , highly doubtful about the value of continually setting up new institutions at " Community level ' .
Sweden has already developed networks for this purpose , for example , in co-operation with WHO .
The fact is that these continual new EU institutions demand resources which have to be taken from somewhere .
A positive choice of an EU institution thereby perhaps requires - especially if we bear in mind of the negative attitude towards taxation within the Union - a negative decision at the national or global level .
I further regard it as somewhat debatable that we in Parliament ( see Amendment No 8 ) are also to put names to these new inspection institutions .
The fact that one simply calls the national bodies " Eurocentres ' does not make the situation any better .
Dybkjær report
A long list of amendments has been added to this report , many of them good and self-evident .
In our consideration of the programme we have confined ourselves strictly to the understanding that it is an overview of the present action programme and not a new action programme we are to produce .
This understanding is reflected in the way we have voted and therefore we have not approved many of the proposals which have been made .
We also regard the greatest challenge which now faces the EU is in fulfilling the requirements which have been imposed .
This relates , not least , to the interim rules which currently exist , for example , for Sweden in the chemicals sector .
The EU must , by practical action , show that environmental matters are taken seriously and that fine words are also translated into actual decision-taking .
The Dybkjær report , in the text produced by the Environment Committee , is highly critical of the revisions by the European Commission regarding progress with the implementation of the Fifth Programme .
We entirely share this view .
The objectives of the programme will not be achieved , at least in a great many very important areas , unless a clear signal is given to the Member States that they must give serious consideration and top priority to the commitment to sustainable development .
Since the Commission 's proposal for a decision failed to reflect this urgency , the committee has felt it necessary to take on the work that the Commission should have done , and at the same time to point out the most serious weaknesses in the Fifth Programme , such as the lack of definite objectives and time frames , and suggesting initial recommendations for the forthcoming Sixth Action Programme .
The revision forms part of the codecision procedure , and so offers Parliament the opportunity for an in-depth discussion with the Commission and the Member States on sustainable development in Europe , on the early integration of environmental questions with political ones , and on the need to define indicators which will make it possible to assess the progress made towards sustainability and to indicate objectives and time frames for future years .
The programme we are considering today is the fifth presented by the Commission since 1973 .
This in itself proves that the environment is becoming an indispensable datum in the institution of the various Community policies .
This proposal for a decision is based on two new documents : the Commission 's progress report , and the report by the European Environmental Agency on the state of the environment in Europe .
In my view , the efforts currently being made are inadequate to achieve the objectives of this Fifth Action Programme .
I therefore hope that this House will demonstrate greater determination .
I felt that the explanations given in last night 's debate by Commissioner Bjerregaard and her announcement of a Sixth Action Programme on the environment while we are still tied up with difficulties arising from a review of the V Programme were inappropriate .
Such statements not only detract from the credibility of the Union 's environmental policy but are also nonsensical .
Everyone is aware that , in the light of the Treaty on Union , a new global programme is inappropriate and contrary to the actual Treaty .
My vote will therefore take this contradiction into account .
The fifth programme of measures for the environment was adopted in 1992 and remains in force until the year 2000 .
The Commission & # x02BC ; s present " half-time ' review is a disaster for the environment : no concrete proposals , no timetable , no guarantees that the EU is to catch up with the Swedish four year environmental exemption and , thereby , a major risk that Sweden will not be able to retain its stricter environmental requirements after the end of the four year period .
The whole programme represents a big step backwards for the environment and shows clearly that this is not an area to which the EU gives priority .
The proposal should have been rejected .
There are no guarantees that a new proposal from the Commission would be any better .
I have therefore chosen to vote yes , but , at the same time , support as many as possible of the amendments for a tightening up of the programme .
I have also voted yes to the supplementary proposal for environmentally friendly agriculture , restrictions on the use of chemical agents , a reduction in the consumption of energy , energy taxes and a carbon dioxide tax .
Rübig report
The Commission has proposed that a legal framework should be provided for financial assistance with the administrative costs of associations concerned with environmental policies in Europe .
The Commission 's proposal is somewhat restrictive , and , as yet , falls short of genuine support for the existence of a strong , well coordinated environmentalist movement , which is what would actually be necessary in order to bring about and promote sustainable development in this area of the world .
The Rübig report , as agreed with the Committee on the Environment , nevertheless provides a response to the Commission 's proposal .
It sets out clearly which organizations should be supported , and it respects the need of those organizations to determine their own priorities and activities independently .
It also stresses the point that financial support for their work of coordination should be provided by other sources , too , though it avoids specifying the level of such support and does not make it a condition for European Union assistance .
This is the correct approach , since coordination at European level is expensive and , in line with the principle of subsidiarity , the European authorities should be the first to be aware of their responsibility to contribute to the involvement of citizens and their organizations in the development of European policy , rather than relying on national or even local financing .
Furthermore , it is a well known fact that the environmentalist associations , in a number of European countries , are only able to obtain extremely limited resources , and even those resources are tied to the implementation of highly specific environmental protection projects of national or local import .
Except in rare cases , no budget lines are provided for the purposes of European coordination and representation .
So it is extremely difficult for the associations to take action internationally without major support from the European Union .
Rapkay report
In the resolution on competition policy which it has just adopted , the European Parliament expressed ( in its own words ) ' categorical ' opposition to the German proposal that an independent agency should be set up at European level to arbitrate in competition disputes .
However , Parliament 's reasoning is not very clear .
The text of the resolution , in point of fact , criticizes this idea on the ground that it would tend to remove the agency ' from any democratic control ' .
At the same time , the explanatory statement is equally intemperate in its criticism but for precisely the opposite reason : the agency would be at risk of being a ' highly politicized body ' because it would come ' under the supervision of the Council , a body which jointly represents the governments of the Member States ' .
So it is hard to see whether Parliament is opposing this agency because it would not be democratic enough or , conversely , because it would be too democratic .
However , this in itself implies that there is undoubtedly another reason for this inflexible opposition : the fact of the matter is that a majority in this House is unhappy that anyone might consider reducing the powers of the Commission , in this respect or any other , in the course of the Intergovernmental Conference .
The rapporteur has seen fit to embellish this contradiction with an argument which , in fact , rebounds on him : the creation of an agency separate from the Commission would , in his view , be liable to cause ' a harmful lack of coordination between Europe 's policy on competition and the other essential objectives of the Treaty ' .
This statement , unfortunately for its author , amounts to an absolutely clear acknowledgement that the Commission is taking advantage of the many different hats it wears to confuse issues , at the risk of employing competition policy in the service of other objectives which it may have decreed are the objectives of the Treaty .
This is not the only instance of such confusion between issues .
I had occasion this morning to criticize another confusion of the same kind in the Commission 's tasks , where on the one hand it distributes dubious Community aid and on the other it is a harsh critic of aid distributed by the Member States .
It would be expedient to take advantage of the Intergovernmental Conference to clarify all this and restore order .
To achieve this , we need to refocus the Commission on its original task , which is the preparation of regulations .
It must not , then , be made responsible either for the distribution of aid ( a function of the Member States ) or for arbitration in competition disputes , a task which should be given to a specialized body under the overriding political control of the Council , as described in Article 93 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
Kuckelkorn report
The aim behind the loan guarantees for investments for small business at EU level is laudable enough .
But our view is that these matters are better dealt with at the national and regional level , where one is closer to the action .
In our view it is better to refrain from a programme for this activity at the EU level and , instead , to reduce the contributions of Member States to the EU so that they have more resources available for the support for small businesses at the national and regional level .
In this way there will be less bureaucracy , better control and better assessment of the support for small businesses .
We are voting in favour of this report , but we reaffirm our view that we wish to see future support for small businesses within the EU organised in keeping with the above-mentioned guidelines .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the PPE Group will also be making a written explanation of vote , but I wanted to make an oral addition to it at this point , to the effect that the PPE Group has now rejected a report for the first time in 25 years - since reports on competition were first debated in this House .
The PPE Group expressly welcomes the report presented by the Commission , but rejects Mrs García Arías 's report because , in certain very important areas , it runs counter to a policy focusing on competition and integration .
I wanted to add that orally , and I will also be providing a written explanation .
On the whole , we regard the report as very good and in that it contains significant observations in relation to the Commission & # x02BC ; s report on competition policy .
We must , however , state that , for us , the report contains clauses which are far too ambitious on the need to reduce state support , on deregulation , etc .
We do not , for example , support the recommendation in paragraph 30 that national support levels must be harmonised , or that postal services should be opened up to competition ( paragraph 40 ) .
In short , we do not share the rapporteur & # x02BC ; s very positive attitude towards deregulation and increased competition , but , in spite of this , we shall vote for the report since it contains a lot of valid observations .
We support the rapporteur & # x02BC ; s report on the Commission & # x02BC ; s report on competition policy .
We would , however , further emphasise that a deregulation of the energy sector and the postal service does not necessarily mean privatisation .
Healthy publicly-owned organisations which enjoy the confidence of the public , can withstand competition .
Publicly-owned organisations should not however be the only ones which have to shoulder the burden of social responsibility for , e.g. people in sparsely populated areas , while private businesses are allowed to concentrate only upon areas where the business rewards are considerable .
A relevant example in Sweden is how the privately-owned business Citymail concentrates its activity upon the major city areas , whereas the publicly-owned Posten is prevented from competing on equal terms with Citymail .
Publicly-owned organisations must be given the same competitive conditions as private businesses .
We are being asked to vote on the XXVth annual report by the Commission on competition policy .
The Directorate-General for Competition ( DG IV ) tells us that 1995 saw a sharp increase in the number of cases referred to it .
This increase is explained by the accession of three new Member States .
This increased workload shows how difficult enterprises find it to come to terms with the outlines of competition policy .
Apart from this first matter , what concerns me is the use of Article 90 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
After all , privatization and market logic must not be allowed to compromise the existence of the public services .
Anxiety about these services increases every day : electricity , telecommunications , the postal sector .
Every day , the approach adopted by the Commission , citing this article , is depriving these services of their substance .
This is a policy which I , as a socialist , cannot accept .
The XXVth report by the European Commission on Competition Policy should provide an opportunity for reflection on public aid to employment , which has been the subject of numerous controversies recently .
For example , the European Commission , applying the virtually exclusive powers vested in it by Articles 92 to 94 of the Treaty , has criticized the French textile plan which proposed to ease the burden of social security costs in this sector in exchange for specific commitments by undertakings regarding the preservation of jobs , employment for young people and adjustments to working hours .
France , moreover , is not the only country that has recently been targeted by decisions of this kind : it happened to Italy in connection with its aid to employment in the footwear sector , to Germany in the case of the support given by one Land to Volkswagen , and it happened to plenty of other countries as well .
This situation must raise a few questions .
True , government aid to industry often results in distortions of competition , delays with the necessary structural adjustments , and the passing-on to healthy enterprises , through taxation , of the cost of unprofitable support for lame ducks .
At the same time , though , we must not lose sight of the fact that , in the present climate of economic and social upheaval , the Member States have a duty to try to preserve the cohesion of their societies .
It seems strange that the Member States should be denied , or only grudgingly granted , the right to pursue this objective of cohesion , considering that , being closer to the problem , they are best placed to pursue it with discretion and considering , too , that under the principle of subsidiarity they also bear the prime responsibility for employment policy .
It seems even stranger that the Commission , refusing to apply to itself the principles that it applies to others , uses the Structural Funds as a channel for distributing Community aid which distorts competition and helps to encourage artificial relocation , as we have just seen with the case of the Japanese enterprise JVC in France .
What we want to see , then , is first the discontinuation of the distribution of aid from Brussels , because it is too short-sighted , and secondly judgements on the aid provided by national governments which are rather more tempered by consideration for the need for cohesion .
With this in mind , and to reduce the inconsistencies perpetrated by the Commission , it seems to us that we should facilitate the Council 's use of the ultimate power of control which it has under Article 93 ( 2 ) but which it seems never to have used .
The European Union and the European Parliament won 't be stopped by a mere contradiction !
In October , we voted for the sharing of working hours .
In November , we were in favour of everincreasing competition .
Well , the more competition increases , the greater the concentration of labour .
Today , the fifteen Member States are split into two camps : those which have employment and , under the pressure of competition , work longer and longer and harder and harder ; and those which , rejected by the employment market , endure longer and longer periods of unemployment .
This system - exploitation on the one hand , exclusion on the other - is the product of ever-increasing competition .
Competition is an economic necessity .
Elevating it to the status of a dogma is a social and human aberration .
Once again , on the opportunity of the annual report on competition , the Commission and the rapporteur are preparing us for further deregulation of the market and acceleration of the liberalization and privatization procedures , for stricter monitoring of state support , and for extension of the relevant controls and the toughening of sanctions .
It seems that the EU is not disposed to learn from the realities that are emerging and from the tragic results of its policies .
It refuses to accept that employment has been the first victim of the competition policy .
It refuses to admit that hundreds of thousands of SMEs have been sacrificed on the altar of ' free ' competition , and entire branches have been dislocated .
Reality , however , is also painful from an institutional point of view , from the standpoint of ability to exercise democratic control .
Reality teaches that the privatization of strategic productive sectors , using the excuse that competition is being distorted , leads to the surrender of those sectors to the control of a small number of omnipotent multinational concerns .
This is a scandalous concentration of power in the hands of unaccountable forces , which as multinational profiteering groups manipulate the economies of entire countries , and this in areas that are strategically important because of their nature as sectors of public interest .
A characteristic example is provided by recent developments in the telecommunications sector , with the decision to merge British Telecom with MCI , the second-largest international telephone company in the USA .
This will produce a complex extending over 73 countries , while the combined turnover of the two companies today amounts to 43 billion dollars .
We call upon the Commission to explain to us whether and how that plan is compatible with its much-vaunted legislation on competition .
Does it not consider this to be not only an abuse of a predominant position , but in essence an abolition of competition and the creation of a world-wide oligopolistic mechanism ?
The same is about to happen with the forthcoming privatization and merger of France Telecom and Deutsche Telecom , which will result in a gigantic private monopoly .
It is positive that the problem is mentioned by the rapporteur , though she does not propose any solution to do anything about the concentration of economic power in oligopolistic groups of world-wide dimensions .
She also does not propose any measures to address the constantly increasing inter-involvement between credit institutions and other institutional investors and privatized public corporations , for example in the energy sector .
She does not condemn the phenomenon , which she herself recognises , of the privatization of profitable and strategically important public corporations at derisory prices , as with the shipyards in Greece or Thomson in France .
On the contrary , the report recommends strengthening the deregulation procedures for energy and for the postal services , when the facts demonstrate that this would result in the abolition of universal coverage by those services and abandonment of the most remote areas , especially island and mountain regions .
It also recommends a further hardening of the policy applied in those sectors .
We will vote against the report , not because we disagree with the need for some rules of competition , which with certain provisos could protect peoples and economies , but because we condemn the philosophy that governs the EU in this sector and which brings tragic consequences for working people and for our national economy .
Secchi report
On the whole , we regard the report as containing important points , but certain clauses mean that in the final vote we are unable to support it .
At several points there is mention of the need for long-term harmonisation of taxation .
We feel that this authority should remain with democratically elected national parliaments .
The Swedish people should be able to retain their age-old right " to tax themselves ' .
We believe that total submission to a completely free market economy and the demands for a common currency , is the principal cause of the high unemployment and , consequently , the low rate of growth in Europe .
The full abolition of passport controls as discussed in paragraph 6 , we regard as being capable of contributing towards drug smuggling and other criminality spreading more easily throughout the Union .
The assertion that not having to show a passport contributes to public welfare is dubious .
A smoothly operating internal market constitutes one of the cornerstones of the EU .
A correct implementation of the internal market constitutes an important part of the work aimed at achieving higher efficiency and , thereby , greater prosperity and more jobs .
If this internal market is really to work , it needs to be supplemented by measures such as increased consumer protection and a viable social policy with common minimum rules .
Mr Secchi & # x02BC ; s report brings out some of the problems which remain before the four fundamental liberties can be implemented .
We are opposed , however , to those parts of the report which concern a complete harmonisation of direct taxes .
The Commission 's report on the single market in 1995 will stand as a monument to unilateral vision .
Admittedly , the single market has brought some advantages , as set out in the text - for example , 300 , 000 to 900 , 000 additional jobs .
However , first , the advantages gained have failed to live up to what was promised ( 5 million jobs ) .
Secondly , and more to the point , one cannot help wondering why , on the ground , these new jobs that are such a source of pride are reflected by millions more people out of work .
The Commission 's report never touches on this aspect of the question , but is entirely based on the simplistic idea that , while the progress achieved is due to the beneficial effects of the single market , the setbacks must originate elsewhere - though precisely where we are not told .
The explanation is there , though , between the lines - every page reveals a thinly veiled obsession with converting the single market into a war machine to unify everything and construct a European superstate .
For example , the Commission 's report , while regretting the fact that checks on individuals still take place at the Union 's internal frontiers , expresses satisfaction that the Schengen Member States have ' irrevocably ' abolished such checks at their common frontiers , and denounces the Commission 's determination to extend this system to the whole of Europe .
As the report stresses , ' in the Commission 's view , the internal market must function under the same conditions as national markets , and intra-Community travel must take place in the same way as travel between regions or provinces within a Member State ' , in the same way , in other words , for Community nationals as for those coming from third countries .
Here we can clearly see the source of the negative effects of the single market : the ideological vision which drives its sponsors .
Abolishing controls at the internal frontiers to satisfy the adherence of the federalist doctrine will impose substantial burdens on the various Member States , and therefore on their economies : the burdens of clandestine immigration , an increase in smuggling and greater insecurity .
This determination to weld everything together , a perversion of the original moderate view of the single market , can be found on every page of the report .
Regarding the single currency , for example , the European Parliament 's explanatory statement maintains that Europe 's economies , and therefore its societies , will need to be completely unified in order for monetary union to function properly .
The reasoning , incidentally , seems impeccably logical ; as long as ' substantial differences remain between the real economic variables , the external shock-absorbing mechanisms would inevitably result in differing processes of adjustment , with serious consequences for the process of monetary co-existence ' .
In other words , we are going to create a single currency without having previously created the optimum monetary area which should sustain it ; so let 's rush ahead and unify everything to create that optimum monetary area as fast as possible !
So how much is this frenzied unification , this new rigidity , going to cost in terms of jobs ?
We need only wait for the Commission 's report on the single market in 2002 which , if monetary union goes through , will surely explain to us calmly that - hooray ! - we have created 500 , 000 new jobs although , sadly , the number of people unemployed has increased by 10 million .
We , the undersigned , who voted against the Secchi report in its entirety , wish to expressly warn against an implementation of the recommendations in paragraph 37 .
A common tax policy will lead to substantial chaos and exacerbate the social problems in Member States .
The requirement in paragraph 37 is an attack upon national sovereignty and upon parliamentary democracy in Member States .
If this requirement is pursued , it will create a crisis for the Union .
We cannot agree that the implementation of the internal market will solve the problem of unemployment in EU Member States .
On the contrary , a harmonisation of all possible areas will only lead to inequalities being created , since regions within the EU are different , for example with regard to industries and in cultural , historical and linguistic respects .
A totally free internal market which does not acknowledge environment , animal welfare and regional differences , promotes neither long-term growth nor the welfare of its citizens .
In addition , a harmonisation of taxes will lead to a worsening of the unemployment situation in that the opportunities for financial flexibility of Member States will be reduced .
We further regard it as beneficial that border controls should not be totally abolished .
It is necessary to maintain border safeguards , even within the internal market , against - for example - drug smuggling .
Unfortunately membership of the EU has already meant , for Sweden , a clear deterioration in border controls , which can easily lead to increased smuggling of drugs .
It is helpful that the rapporteur does not wish to " depart ' from the principle of subsidiarity , but the proposals in the resolution will tend to stifle it .
The distance between those who make the decisions and those who are affected by them , increases and power is transferred from the various Member States to " Brussels ' .
This development must be reversed .
The Danish Social Democrats are against the proposals on tax harmonization and do not believe that tax harmonization is a prerequisite for a well-functioning internal market .
I have supported this report today as it rightly emphasises the importance of applying those single market rules we have agreed on in every Member State .
Too often our citizens get the impression that only in their own country are the rules enforced whilst people and companies in other states receive an unfair competitive advantage by lighter application of EU rules .
This obviously leads to disillusionment with Europe - so any measure to tackle this problem is welcome .
The most important task facing the EU today is the consolidation of the single market , in order to ensure that European companies can operate effectively and therefore create jobs .
The report has many merits , but there are three things which mean that I am unable to vote for it in the final voting :
1.In paragraph B there is mention that a " higher rate in the full implementation is a prerequisite for ... the introduction of a common currency being successful ' and , further , in paragraph C that " a properly functioning internal market ... is a basic prerequisite for economic growth ' .I cannot possibly vote in favour of this , as I am convinced that the internal market with its complete submission to a totally free market economy , together with the requirement of a common currency , is one of the main causes of the high unemployment and , hence , the low economic growth in Europe .
2.In several paragraphs mention is made of the need for a long-term harmonisation of taxes .
As I made clear in my speech , I do not believe that this in any way serves a sensible economic objective .
The only objective it serves is to strengthen people & # x02BC ; s distrust of the Union.3.In paragraph 6 there is talk of the desirability of totally abolishing checks on people at borders .
I do not believe that this in any way involves any enhancement of people & # x02BC ; s welfare ; it is , after all , only a small inconvenience to have to show a passport .
What happens instead is that drug smuggling and other criminality spreads throughout the Union.- Hautala report
Many positive things are stated in the report , e.g. on the need for a social framework legislation or on the need for a tax on currency speculation .
There are also , however , a number of highly dubious conclusions drawn in the report .
We cannot in any way support the positive assertions which are made in several places in the report , concerning the implementation of a common currency .
We remain totally unconvinced that EMU will solve the problems of currency speculation and unemployment .
In paragraph 5 the Commission is urged to adopt measures to avoid obstacles which exist so that , for example , workers may be able to take advantage of the internal market .
As an example , mention is made of the lack of harmonisation of taxation .
This is a view we do not in any way share .
The tax differences which exist have negligible ( if any ) negative economic effects .
On the other hand , democracy continues to be served by the people of Europe continuing to have the right to " tax themselves ' .
With these reservations we shall , however , vote for the report in its entirety .
My group has profound reservations about this report which in many respects flies in the face of some of our deeply held convictions .
In particular :
we reject those aspects of it which could put at risk the single market ; -we regret that it appears to take no account of the distinction between intra-Community and extra-Community relocation ; -it fails to acknowledge the importance of foreign direct investment in creating jobs.We believe , too , that the report strays into areas which are the responsibility of other committees .
It refers to the ' subsidy chasing ' involved in the allocation of grants under the structural funds ( but makes no reference , incidentally , to the same phenomenon in connection with the cohesion funds ) .
In any case , such considerations are more properly in the remit of our Committee on Regional Policy .
The report makes numerous suggestions about the role of the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) .
The WTO is the subject of three separate reports this very week from the REX Committee ( the two Kittelmann and the KreisslDörfler reports ) .
For these reasons my group does not feel able to give its support to the resolution .
We have voted for the report in spite of the fact that it contains a number of well-known federalist ideas , e.g. on monetary union , to which we are opposed .
In spite of these failings , the report still represents an attempt to get to grips with one the most serious problems of our time : the globalization of the economy and the transfer of power from democratic institutions to trans-national company boardrooms .
Our group supported Mrs Hautala 's report because , generally speaking , it expresses our concerns not only regarding the failure to create jobs but also the continuing loss of jobs brought about by the growing trend for undertakings to relocate .
As the rapporteur states , such transfers of undertakings usually have a prejudicial effect on the employment market and on living conditions both in the regions of origin and in those to which the undertakings relocate .
We need to draw up a legislative framework for European social matters by means of a decision adopted by qualified majority .
We also share the rapporteur 's opinion regarding the need for fiscal harmonization and the drafting of a genuine European industrial policy .
In my own country , which is Spain , countless relocations are taking place in the textile sector , for example , with undertakings transferring to Morocco in order to reduce labour costs .
The transnational corporation Alcatel Alsthom is terminating the contracts of thousands of workers in its subsidiaries in Spain , France , Italy and Portugal ( specifically 1 , 338 workers in Alcatel-España ) .
It is therefore essential to guarantee transparency and to ensure that the workers affected by restructuring operations and relocations are kept informed and are consulted , in case such actions should become inevitable .
In the face of massive resistance from conservative circles , this Parliament has now launched , with the Hautala report , an important and wide-ranging debate which it is to be hoped will be successfully continued from now on .
The problems of relocation are phenomena which , as such , were initially seen as a positive influence on the market by the Community 's instruments , for example as positive subsidization of disadvantaged areas by the Structural Funds .
This view , however , disregarded a competitive counter-balance in the form of a long-term responsibility on the part of the beneficiary enterprises .
The large enterprises soon found this loophole in the rules and indulged in an increasing orgy of subsidy shopping , with the result that the incentives had become more and more costly without long-term regional development having any opportunities at all .
On closer examination , fiscal distortions such as the gross overtaxation of labour clearly highlighted the dilemma of a false interpretation of the free market economy .
The present WTO , which to date not only lacks transparency but is unaccountable to anyone , is in no way performing its true function of providing a genuine basis for world trade by creating environmental and social standards and , where there is a real economic necessity , allowing exemptions to give the less developed countries an opportunity by making relocated industries aware of their additional responsibility for structural development .
Now it is up to the Commission to collect the ball passed to it by the EP and compensate for the advantages of subsidization , both in internal structural development and in its external relations , by means of instruments with a close-range effect on competition , such as taxes .
Kittelmann report
Even though we are voting in favour of the report in its entirety , we cannot in any way support paragraphs 29-31 of the report .
The EU currently has no authority to act in all the areas which are covered by the WTO agreement .
A certain part of the authority devolves entirely upon the Member States .
Even in all these matters where authority is shared , each Member State may currently act in accordance with its own views .
This provision is enshrined in the Treaty of Rome under Article 113 .
This is a fundamental right which each state enjoys within international organisations .
Our point of departure is that individual Member States shall have a free and independent voice in all the international co-operative ventures in which it participates .
To take away this authority is to undermine the sovereignty of Member States .
The EU is an international cooperation between free states , and this presupposes the authority to act freely with regard to co-operation in other international organisations .
The Kittelmann report , which the European Parliament has just adopted on the eve of the first ministerial conference of the World Trade Organization , to be held this December in Singapore , represents a major step in the right direction for this House .
The report sets out ideas which , admittedly , it would have been better to assert at the time of ratification of the Uruguay Round , but which even so must be welcomed today .
Better late than never !
For example , the European Parliament calls for ' trade issues to be linked to environmental , social and cultural issues ' ; endorses the opinion that , today , ' the prices of goods and services do not fully reflect the associated environmental costs ' ; it ' condemns distortions of competition caused by social and environmental dumping ' .
Unfortunately , this onset of awareness has come very late in the day , perhaps even too late .
We would have preferred for there not just to be 65 of us out of 405 members who rejected the GATT in 1994 , for precisely these same reasons .
It is obvious , in point of fact , that the Singapore meeting is not going to concede to the demands of the European Parliament , and , in particular , that any discussion of a ' social clause ' to be observed in international trade is going to be set aside and reduced , at best , to a few minimal social standards which fail to address the scope of the problem .
We are now seeing just how great a strategic error the adoption of the Uruguay Round was for Europe .
We agreed to reductions in customs tariffs without being sufficiently sure that we were introducing a balanced system .
And now , the trap has closed , because it is virtually impossible to make the essential amendments .
We shall of course support the European Parliament if it finally decides to defend positions that are vital for the survival of our societies .
However , it would also be necessary for Parliament not to repeat the errors that have already cost us so dear .
In this context , it is impossible not to be seriously concerned when we see that this House is urging the Intergovernmental Conference to grant greater powers to the Commission for the coming negotiations .
Have we not already had sufficient evidence that the Commission is prepared to yield to all the temptations of free trade ?
If the Union were to make the Commission its sole negotiator , it would be likely to increase the scale of this disadvantage , and would be encouraging the kind of obscurity in negotiation from which we suffered so severely at Blair House .
The concept of a sole negotiator may have more effects than simply weakening the control exercised by the Member States over the Commission - it may also , by restricting the number of opinions we can express from 15 to 1 , erode our diplomatic room for manoeuvre .
We therefore call upon the Intergovernmental Conference to take , immediately , institutional steps which will enable us to avoid having conditions imposed on us by others , as happened at the time of the Uruguay Round .
In particular , Articles 113 and 228 need revision in order to ensure clarity of negotiations and the Council 's control over the Commission , and in order to ensure that the Member States are never again confronted with a fait accompli .
For the first time since the WTO was founded , two years ago , we will have the opportunity this December , at the ministerial conference in Singapore , to take stock of what the World Trade Organization has achieved , make any necessary adjustments to the course it is steering , and set it new tasks to perform .
That is precisely why this conference is so important , and precisely why it is essential that the signals should be correct and clear .
The draft report presented by Peter Kittelmann was certainly a step in the right direction , because the EU delegation must be given clear indications of the stance it is to adopt at the Singapore conference .
This is particularly important because the EU is not just another piece in the power game of the WTO member states but is one of the most important and strongest voices within that body .
For this reason , the Greens welcome the attempt to involve us , as Members of the European Parliament , in the Singapore process .
However , today sees us doubly disappointed .
In recent months and weeks , we have already had to watch the official programme for Singapore being constantly trimmed on all sides .
Ultimately , 140 ministers are going to meet and shake hands in Singapore and say how glad they are that they have all turned up .
And that will be it .
Almost more disappointing is that in this House , too , the watchword seems to be , ' don 't let 's be too specific , a conference of this kind mustn 't be overburdened with demands ' .
And so , today , one after the other , all the good ideas produced by the REX Committee and adopted in the report are going to fall by the wayside .
But is it just a matter of not making waves , not giving certain governments any excuse for the accusation of protectionism , an accusation as dreaded as it is false ?
Is it not more the case that all the champions of free trade are now hypnotized by the WTO Conference , gazing as the rabbit does at the snake ?
In case it moves .
Best if nothing happens at all , because if it does all the fine illusions about ' the market will fix it ' will burst like so many bubbles .
Because we have known for a very long time that the market doesn 't fix it .
What it does fix , left to itself , is a great many things that can never be put right again .
No study has yet been produced to demonstrate any real benefits to the developing countries as a result of the WTO .
Quite the reverse , in fact : more and more local markets are collapsing , more and more companies are falling into foreign hands , there is less and less control over the transnationals , more and more people are working in the most degrading conditions so that their bosses can survive the stiffer competition , less and less self-controlled regional supply is possible , more and more ecological systems are being destroyed .
These , of course , are precisely the kind of subjects that should have appeared on the Singapore agenda .
But probably all we can expect from the conference are exhortations to an even more stringent approach to the continuing liberalization of markets , for the benefit of the multis and with no social or ecological back-up .
The Council itself , despite its earlier protestations , has yielded to pressure from Britain and , especially , from Germany in recent weeks and announced its abandonment of any attempt to introduce a debate on social standards to the agenda .
Any debate on the democratic control of the totally undemocratic institution which is the WTO is completely out of the question .
NGOs will continue to be kept waiting outside while economic experts representing governments take decisions that affect us all .
Small countries , too , whose budgets will not run to permanent representation in Geneva are excluded from the WTO 's decision processes , even though they may formally be members , as we saw recently in the banana dispute .
The REX report , when it was adopted in committee , was appropriately embellished to take account of all these themes .
That was a good thing , though it was nothing like enough .
The report was still far too wedded to a fetish of economic growth which is totally incomprehensible ecologically .
But the fact that numerous amendments have now been tabled to launch an attempt to dilute the more or less tolerable REX version testifies to the poverty of a parliament which should be something more than just a water-carrier serving the interests of the all-powerful .
If concepts like social and environmental dumping are no longer allowed to be mentioned , if no more studies are to be permitted which demonstrate the consequences of the WTO 's liberalization for the developing countries , if no further mention is allowed of the fact that women are particularly hard-hit by exploitation , if even the thought of a sub-working group on ' Social human rights ' is too much of a good thing , then this report is , quite frankly , too much of a bad thing .
Even though the report does not live up to our expectations in all respects , we shall vote in favour .
But for the fact that world free trade is causing so many personal , industrial and social tragedies in the European Union , Mr Kittelmann 's report might raise a smile , because it seems more like an act of faith , a creed , than a real political report .
Who can still believe today that world trade means raising living standards , ensuring full employment and increasing prosperity , as recital B of the report so unfortunately puts it ?
Go and tell that to the people who have lost their jobs because their company has shut down for good or relocated to a low-waged country !
Deny it if you dare , after what was said at Davos by the main players in world trade : a direct consequence of globalization is , and will be even more in the future , social decline in the industrialized countries !
Look at what is happening in the United States today , with jobs at risk and wages falling everywhere !
Look at the difficulties the countries of Europe are now experiencing in maintaining welfare levels !
Your social and environmental clauses , even though they may be a good idea in themselves , are worthless unless they are applied .
So make a start by imposing them in the criminal agreements which the Commission is signing with every country in the world , and see that they are respected !
Equip the Union with real retaliatory legislation , cribbing it from American law if you have to !
Pluck up your courage , at long last , to show the rest of the world that the European Union is the greatest economic and commercial power on earth and that it is time for it to be a winner instead of a consenting loser !
Stop sacrificing Europeans ' jobs , our industries and our agriculture , our living standards and our prosperity - which was only relative anyway - to the doctrines of free trade and competition !
Unless the European Union does this , each of its constituent nations would have to draw the appropriate conclusions and reinstate the necessary protective barriers at its own frontiers to ensure its survival .
I cannot accept that the Treaty of Rome is amended to the effect that only the EU will be a member of WTO in the future .
Each Member State shall obviously make its own decisions on what it wishes to do .
The present report from the Committee on External Economic Relations contains a glowing summary of developments within the new World Trade Organization ( WTO ) and of implementation of the results of the Uruguay round .
The rapporteur and the committee also deserve credit for their systematic examination of the uncompleted debate results , including the new WTO areas , from which I would like to draw attention to the themes of joint trade and the environment , and the social minimum standards .
In this connection the committee is right to emphasize that the EU should stand firm in its opposition to industrially organized forced child labour .
Three years have passed since the conclusion of the Uruguay Round that led to the creation of the WTO .
Today , as emerges from the decision by the European Union 's Council of Ministers concerning the line to be followed by the EU during the forthcoming Ministerial conference in Singapore , proposals are to be made for further deregulation of services and in particular telecommunications and other technologies related to the information society , and for faithful implementation of the timetable for liberalization and opening of the markets .
It is striking that no mention whatever is made of the need to renegotiate agreements in the agricultural sector .
Though the European Union is well aware of the disastrous consequences for the agricultural economy of reducing quotas , export subsidies and import duties , which have affected Mediterranean agricultural products worst of all and have really exterminated farming communities in countries such as my own , it is deliberately avoiding demands for renegotiation or even for any compensatory measures .
The Council has taken no decision on the need to adopt a social clause in the WTO rules or to exert pressure on countries practising social dumping .
At the same time , taking advantage of that , it is pressing for the curtailment of European working peoples ' acquired social rights , precisely because of their high cost and the securing of competitiveness for European industry .
We consider that as a member of the WTO , the European Union should take the lead in the reorientation and redefinition of the principles that govern world trade .
The rules that govern international economic relations must link the development of international commerce with respect for fundamental social rights as defined in the five basic conventions of the ILO on the right of association and the free negotiation of collective agreements , the ban on child labour and forced labour , and the ban on discrimination .
Minimum environmental standards should be incorporated in the rules of international trade .
The WTO 's statutes should be amended to make the implementation of social and environmental clauses a prerequisite for the granting of most-favoured nation status , while their infringement should constitute legal justification for exclusion from the rules of the organization .
International multipartite agreements must take into account the interests of less developed countries , make the most of the comparative advantages of each country within the framework of an international apportionment , and create prerequisites for the development of all peoples .
We will vote against Mr Kittelmann 's report .
Though it contains some positive proposals , it accords - among other things - with the agreements on agricultural products and also presupposes a new review of the CAP along the lines of the GATT agreements and the new negotiations due to take place in two years , whose basic criterion is ' socio-economic ' restrictions .
It calls for implementation of the timetable for the deregulation of trade in textile products , despite the fact that it recognises the disastrous consequences of this for Europe 's textile industry .
It asks for acceleration of the deregulation of services and for the immediate conclusion of negotiations on the deregulation of telecommunications , and calls for new negotiations on the deregulation of marine transport markets or international direct investment .
Clearly , such positions conflict entirely with our own views about international trade , ignore their tragic consequences for the peoples and economies of the less developed countries , take no account of the Marrakesh agreements , and are likely to prove particularly dangerous for working people all over the world .
That concludes the vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 2.10 p.m. and resumed at 4 p.m. )

Middle-East peace process
The next item is the report ( A4-0351 / 96 ) by Mr Colajanni , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the Middle East Peace Process .
Mr President , in recent years the European Parliament has taken a continuous interest first in the opening of the peace process , and then in its subsequent development .
In doing so , it has given constant support to peace , negotiation and reconciliation .
I doubt if there is any matter in which the European Parliament has been more consistently involved .
Parliament supported the European Union 's important commitment to ensuring the existence of the Palestine government , it did not hesitate to criticize the Israeli government when the latter seemed to be obstructing aid , or to criticize the Palestinians when they seemed to be insufficiently resolute in their action against terrorist groups .
The European Parliament ensured that the elections in Palestine were monitored , and was applauded not only by the Palestinians but also by the Israeli government of the day .
I could go on listing the commitments the European Parliament has entered into , the interest it has shown , the constructive positions it has taken .
What I am trying to say is that Parliament has developed , internally , a carefully considered and widely shared position and stance , and that I believe that position is the one expressed in today 's motion for a resolution ; that resolution indicates the determination of Parliament to support the peace process at a difficult time - indeed , a very difficult time - by asserting its confidence in the ' land for peace ' strategy and its conviction that the Oslo agreements must be applied .
We see no alternative to continuing along this road , no alternative but fresh conflicts between the peoples of Israel and Palestine .
I need make no further comment on the text , which speaks for itself ; though I should point out that the resolution also examines other unresolved conflicts or disputes in the region associated with the IsraelPalestine conflict .
Precisely because , as I see it , there is a strong consensus here , the majority of the amendments to my report tabled by the various groups are designed to improve or clarify it , and I regard virtually all of them as acceptable ; when I state my opposition to any particular amendment , the only reason will be that a better version is being proposed or already exists .
I should add that we are not alone in feeling the concerns we do .
A recent survey just published by Israeli newspapers reports that 48 % of those questioned in Israel felt that the country was not on the right track , while only 37 % held the opposite view or had no opinion .
That was not true a few months ago .
There is , then , concern inside Israel as well .
This must provide everyone with food for thought , and essentially it is the people of Israel upon whom we call to show their leaders the right road - the road of negotiation , reconciliation and respect for the accords signed in Oslo . This is the only way to oppose terrorism , on whichever side it exists , and to strengthen all those on both sides who desire peace .
I am glad to pay tribute to the efforts of the troika in the region - I know that its contacts have been important and fruitful , and the Commissioner will be talking to us about it .
I believe it is important that new negotiations on Hebron have opened , if I have correctly understood the information given to me at the United States Embassy in Tel Aviv , even though it worries me that the Israeli government seems prepared to negotiate on Hebron but reluctant to enter into any commitments regarding the subsequent stages of the application of the Oslo accord .
This is certainly cause for concern , and I believe we should view with concern the way in which Syria , Jordan and Egypt have generally distanced themselves from the future prospects of the peace process , even though the leaders of those countries had expressed enthusiasm and hope regarding those prospects , and some of them had entered into politically significant commitments .
We need to re-establish confidence in the peace process ; and I hope that Parliament will help to bring that about by adopting this resolution by a large majority .
Mr President , in the last few days the Irish Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister , Mr Dick Spring , has led a ministerial troika to the region , visiting Syria , Jordan , Gaza and Egypt .
The visit culminated in the opening of the Middle East and North Africa Economic Conference in Cairo where the troika also met Israeli Foreign Minister Levi .
One of the main reasons for the troika , apart from demonstrating the Union 's commitment to the peace process , was to explain to the regional parties the EU 's reasons for appointing its special envoy and to discuss with them the implementation of his mandate .
The violence which flared up in Jerusalem at the end of September showed again that the continuation of the Middle East peace process cannot be taken for granted .
As Mr Spring said to the MENA Conference , the Union is a friend for the bad times as well as for the good times and our commitment to the process is for the long haul as long as it is necessary for a just , comprehensive and lasting peace to be established in the Middle East .
The troika began with a visit to Syria , where it met President Assad and the Syrian Foreign Minister .
President Assad reconfirmed Syria 's strategic decision for peace and willingness to resume negotiations with Israel .
He welcomed and enhanced the EU role and the appointment of the envoy .
He agreed with the Union 's view that its efforts must be complementary to that of the US .
In Jordan , the troika met King Hussein and the Crown Prince Hassan , who expressed grave concern about the future of the peace process and warmly welcomed EU efforts to play a greater role in it .
The King also stressed the need to strengthen regional efforts which could reinforce the peace process , particularly the Barcelona process and the multilateral track of the peace process .
In Gaza , the troika met President Arafat .
The President maintained that while negotiations on Hebron and related issues had not made progress since his visit to Dublin on 29 and 30 October , they were continuing at an intensive level .
He called on the Union , as a co-signatory of the interim agreement , to play a role in arbitration between the Israelis and the Palestinians .
The troika assured Mr Arafat of the Union 's determination that there should be full and prompt implementation of the Oslo Accord .
In relation to President Arafat 's proposal on arbitration , I would only like to comment that the mandate of the UN envoy envisages that he may contribute where requested to the implementation of the international agreements reached between the parties and engage with them diplomatically in the event of non-compliance with the terms of these agreements and that there may be a future role of the EU in this respect .
In Egypt , the troika met President Mubarak , Foreign Minister Amr Musa , Arab League Secretary-General Meguid , and Israeli Foreign Minister Levi , who also tended the MENA Conference .
President Mubarak expressed deep concern about the deterioration of the peace process and the danger of increasing extremism for the region as a whole .
Both President Mubarak and Foreign Minister Amr Musa welcomed the Union 's wish to take a greater role in the peace process , which they saw as complementary to that of the US .
Secretary-General Meguid stressed that the Arab states have made a strategic commitment to peace .
I am happy to report that the troika also had a good and constructive meeting in Cairo with Mr Levi , even though a visit to Israel was unfortunately not possible because of the Israeli Government 's position in relation to EU policy on Jerusalem , as manifested by our practice of visits to Orient House .
Meeting Foreign Minister Levi before the MENA Conference , the troika stressed the need for early progress in the negotiations .
It emphasized the Union 's willingness to work closely with Israel and the other parties to overcome the difficulties in the peace process .
The troika also emphasized the importance of economic progress for the Palestinians , given the devastating effect the closures are having on the Palestinian economy .
Mr Levi reaffirmed Israel 's commitment to honour the Oslo Accords .
He welcomed the appointment of the EU envoy and stressed his willingness to work closely with Ambassador Moratinos , provided the Union did not attempt to cut across the negotiations between the parties .
At the end of the visit Mr Spring addressed the MENA Conference which is intended to underpin and support regional cooperation and the peace process .
In his speech he called on the parties to reclaim the spirit of Madrid and Oslo and to continue towards the common goal of a just , lasting and comprehensive peace for the whole region on the basis of all relevant resolutions at the Security Council and the principle of land for peace .
Overall , the Union has good reason to be pleased with the results of the troika visit .
All parties welcomed an enhanced European role and the appointment of an EU envoy .
We would hope that the troika visit and the EU envoy will help to restore urgently-needed momentum to the peace process .
The appointment of the EU special envoy is another very significant development .
The informal European Council in Dublin on 5 October considered this proposal and on 28 October the General Affairs Council confirmed the mandate for the envoy and appointed Ambassador Moratinos of Spain to the post .
Under the terms of the envoy 's mandate , he has first of all to establish and maintain close contact with all parties concerned in order to work with them in strengthening the peace process .
He will also work with other countries of the region , the US and other interested parties , as well as international organizations .
He is mandated to observe peace negotiations between the parties and to be ready to offer the EU 's advice and good offices should the parties request this .
In the same way , he will monitor actions by either side which might prejudice the outcome of the permanent status negotiations .
Furthermore , the envoy will do all within his power to promote compliance with the basic norms of democracy , including respect for human rights and the rule of law .
It is expected that the envoy will be uniquely placed to report to the Union on the possibilities for EU interventions in the peace process and on the best way of pursuing EU initiatives and ongoing Middle East peace-process-related business , including the political aspects of relevant EU development projects .
When Ireland first assumed the presidency of the Council of the European Union , we stated that the Middle East peace process must be one of the Union 's highest priorities .
We have not flinched from that responsibility and I am glad to report some progress in that regard .
Mr President , allow me to welcome this European Parliament resolution on the Middle East peace process , which is based , moreover , on the excellent and comprehensive report written by Mr Luigi Colajanni .
As the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Mitchell , pointed out , there can be no question that this debate and resolution cover an entire series of topics which are fundamental in terms of the future of the region .
On behalf of the Commission , I would like to make a few pertinent comments .
Firstly , some thoughts on European Union economic support for the peace process .
As you will be aware and as emerges from the report , the Corfu European Council and , subsequently , those in Essen and Cannes saw the definition of a whole series of political , economic , financial and commercial undertakings which now mean that the Mediterranean and the European Union 's southern border are of utmost interest to the Union making us , by virtue of the close relationship which has been created , capable of guaranteeing the setting-up of an area of peace and stability in the Mediterranean .
This process was finally confirmed at the Barcelona Conference in November 1995 , which set the bases for this future of cooperation on the Union 's southern border .
The Commission has set this political development moving and I would now like to inform the House that we are negotiating the Euro-Mediterranean partnership agreement with the Palestine Liberation Organization , for the benefit of the Palestinian Authority , which will enable us to treat the Palestinians in a similar way to that in which we treat other countries which have already signed partnership agreements of this type with us .
Why am I providing this definition ?
As you will be aware , the economic aid we provide to the region makes the European Union by far the principal contributor - we represent precisely 53 % of the total financial aid provided to the region in recent years .
And the European Union has not only undertaken to provide aid but has effectively paid over 80 % of this contribution , something that other financial and political partners in the peace process cannot match .
Let me return , then , to the potential role to be played by the European Union , not only as principal economic , financial and commercial agent in the region but also because of its involvement , in doing whatever is possible to seek a satisfactory conclusion to the peace process .
It is my belief that great progress has been achieved and , as Mr Mitchell mentioned , a political chain of events - Florence Summit , position of the Council in Luxembourg , resolution adopted by the Heads of State and Government in Dublin - has finally been set in motion and this has gradually been focusing the political attention of the Union as a whole on the situation .
What situation am I referring to ?
Basically , Mr Mitchell and Mr Colajanni have already referred to this , the peace process potentially involves a high degree of risk for all the parties concerned if the Oslo agreements are not recognized - this is the key to the problem .
We understand perfectly well that the new Israeli government needed some time to grow accustomed to the new situation and to apply peace accords which , when it was in opposition , it criticized most harshly .
However , we now believe that the Israeli government has had enough time to adapt and that a question of time cannot be converted into one of content .
The Oslo agreement must be applied .
They cannot be renegotiated .
Pacta sunt servanda : this principle is the key to the proper continuation of the peace process .
So , using political dialogue - in the manner of the troika led by the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Dick Spring , in which I also took part - we have to attempt to remind the parties that confrontation , mistrust and suspicion must be avoided and that we must try to renew dialogue between the parties , abide by what has already been agreed and , on the basis of the latter , arrive at solutions to our problems .
In political terms , two points should be mentioned in support of the Union 's position , which appears to be a balanced one : firstly , the European Union , the Commission , Mr Colajanni 's report and the amendments which have been proposed continue to confirm , reconfirm and endorse Israel 's right to its own security .
However , security must in no event be an element in the economic collapse of Gaza and the West Bank .
In the Commission 's view , a further , absolutely fundamental element in any peace is that the economic structure which we have still been unable to apply owing to border closures should be resolved in such a way that it guarantees the economic viability of the future of Palestine , because without economic viability in Palestine it will be very difficult to maintain the peace process .
We believe that rapid progress has to be made in complying fully with the undertakings entered into because otherwise there is an even greater risk , i.e. that extremists on both sides - and there are indeed extremists both on the Israeli and the Palestinian side - will finally succeed in achieving short-term benefits through violence and terrorism which can then , in the longer term , be used as an excuse to hold back progress in the peace process .
In my view , this is a genuine risk .
The Council recently decided to appoint a special envoy , Mr Moratinos , and members of the Commission are extremely pleased at the professional standing of this ambassador .
We have placed ourselves at his disposal and will spare no effort in enabling the special envoy 's mission to achieve the degree of success we expect it to .
Lastly , a topic relating to democracy and human rights .
Once again , it is important to maintain a balance and the troika put the problem of the democratic opening-up of the Palestinian system very clearly to President Arafat .
The first democratic elections have taken place , as Mr Colajanni is well aware , as are other Members of this House , since he was one of the official observers , and they constituted an enormous advance , but progress has to be made in democratizing Palestinian political life .
Human rights in Palestine undoubtedly have to be respected .
However , in Israel , owing to the behaviour of certain elements in the Israeli police and army , human rights are also under attack .
As a consequence , we once again have to maintain a balance and require both parties to fulfil their responsibilities in this area .
I believe that the European Union is in a position to adopt a more neutral , more aseptic and more balanced position vis-à-vis the conflict between the various parties on the basis of our financial commitment .
With a partnership agreement already signed with Israel and one about to be signed with the Palestinians , it will be possible to incorporate a political dialogue which will enormously aid the peace process , but on one condition : that the commitments entered into are applied .
This is the key which might enable us to renew this dialogue and it is to be hoped that this happens soon because otherwise - I repeat - the situation could be ' an increase in fishermen ' , not in the Biblical sense , but in the worst sense . That is to say , an increase in fishermen , an increase in those who use violence and an increase in extremists .
I wonder if the time has come for the two parties to seek immediate solutions on the basis of what is written , signed and has to be accepted .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I would like to lend my support to the Colajanni report .
Why am I doing this ?
Because the European Union is deeply involved in a number of respects in the Middle East peace process .
However , the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner will forgive me if , after their clarifications , I still have the impression that in the peace process we are still the subject of a de facto veto on the part of the Israeli government and I would like to know whether Foreign Minister Levy has corrected his statement to the effect that the European Union ought to pay up and shut up with regard to the peace process .
We not only have to pay up , but also take decisive action , for three reasons .
The first reason is historical and moral in nature and has to do with the fact that , for better or for worse , Europe is historically involved with Israelis and Arabs , as we Spaniards well know - a historian , Benjamin Netanyahu , wrote one of the best books ever about the Spanish Inquisition and also happens to be the father of the current Israeli Prime Minister , and according to Shimon Peres it was he who convinced him of the absolute isolation of the Jewish people .
I therefore believe we have to come out openly in favour , as the Commissioner has stated , of a reconciliation process , we ourselves being the result of a reconciliation process .
However , if we recognize Israel 's right to existence within safe frontiers , we also have to recognize the right of the Palestinians to a homeland .
Not in vain have the Israeli people spent 2000 years crying out for a return to their homeland .
So I feel we have to adopt a balanced approach , which is what the European Union attempted to do in the interim between the now far-off Venice declaration and the two fundamental events which have defined this process , namely the Madrid Conference and the Oslo agreements .
A second reason is security .
We cannot claim that the Mediterranean is an area where there is cooperation and security whilst there is an ongoing conflict between Arabs and Israelis .
It has to be remembered , a year after the Barcelona Conference , that , there , for the first time , Israelis , Palestinians and Syrians sat down together to discuss specific topics .
We have to continue along this road and I would ask the Commissioner to persevere with this .
The third reason is that there can be no doubt that we have provided more assistance than anyone else , that we are involved in more trade than anyone else , and there is the additional element of Israel 's attempts at securing a privileged relationship with the European Union , just as in the case of EFTA countries .
I feel that this factor , too , ought to make Israel consider its position vis-à-vis the Union , not only in terms of its complying with the agreements - I concur with Commissioner Marín that pacta sunt servanda - but also so that any process we are involved in and are party to enables us to participate actively in the consolidation of peace .
It is my belief that the appointment of Ambassador Moratinos is good news .
I wish him and you the very best of luck .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to congratulate Mr Colajanni on the excellent work he has presented , and to welcome Commissioner Marín and commend all the positive things he has told us today about what the Commission has done to further the peace process .
The same applies to the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Mitchell , because in contrast to other times , today he really told us many interesting things , and I think nobody can still doubt that the peace process in the Middle East is today , and must remain the first priority for the European Union 's much-debated external policy .
That policy must certainly lead to some result , and for that to be possible , in our view a number of prerequisites must be satisfied :
The first , is that the peace process must have a vision and an aim , and that vision can be none other than to find a just and lasting solution to the Middle East problem , acceptable to all , and one which must of course include a normal and real homeland for Palestinians .
The second prerequisite is that on the way towards the first , a number of specific problems will have to be addressed .
For example , what is Jerusalem 's status to be in the future ?
What is to be done about the settlers and about the refugees ?
What is to happen in Hebron ?
There are many indications that an agreement is not far off , and I certainly hope so !
The third prerequisite is to reach some acceptable level regarding our relations with and policy towards neighbouring countries such as Syria and Lebanon , and I would not like to leave Jordan out of account .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very glad to have heard at last from the Council that a European mediator has been appointed for the Middle East .
I welcome the decision , even though I disagree with the way that decision was taken .
There are further proposals for Europe 's political role , which is a necessary and essential one .
And if there is one thing we ought to do today , then besides supporting the Colajanni report we must insist that Europe 's political role should be extended and should become more substantial in the Middle East .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for nearly half a century the international scene has been darkened by the East-West conflict and by the confrontation between peoples in the Middle East .
Today , the cold war is no more than a memory , and the hope of real peace in the Middle East has seen the light of day .
The Washington agreements of December 1993 and the drawing-up of a peace plan bear witness to a deepseated determination to put an end to what threatened to be an everlasting conflict .
That is why the fact that a start has been made is so decisive .
Of course there have been delays and hesitations in the peace process , and the recent crisis in Jerusalem gives legitimate grounds for concern .
But in the context of a peace process that is still so fragile , the important thing is not to be carried away by emotion , but to take a cool look at the present situation and the progress that has been made in an attempt to obtain a clearer view of the future .
Of course , apart from the recent crisis , the attitude of the new Israeli authorities does raise a few questions .
Voted into power on a platform of opposition to the concessions made to the Palestinians , the new majority and its leader have awakened fears in Palestine , and more generally in the international community .
In stressing , first and foremost , the security of the Israeli population , did Mr Netanyahu really change the whole basis of the problem ?
If we answer in the affirmative and take the view that the Oslo agreements are no longer in force , that is to forget the very foundations upon which civilized nations base their actions .
For States governed by the rule of law , the principle of pacta sunt servanda is inviolable , and an agreement entered into commits the State and not one particular government .
The Israeli government may admittedly be hesitating for a moment , but it knows - and no one has the right to suspect it of not knowing - that it is bound by the commitments entered into on Israel 's behalf .
Moreover , the hopes raised by the peace process are in everyone 's minds , both in Israel and on the Palestinian side .
They are conditioning people to think in terms of peace .
To turn back , to drive men back into terrorism and blind hatred , is hardly conceivable .
The foundations of peace do exist , they are the result of the steps taken by each of the parties involved in the conflict to narrow the gap between them .
That has taken much courage and clarity of thought on both sides , which occasional crises cannot wipe out .
The first achievement of this mutual effort to bury grudges and hatreds is each side 's recognition of the other .
If we add to that the election of the Palestinian legislative council , the peace treaty between Israel and Jordan and the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the main towns on the West Bank , we cannot fail to be struck by the difference between the situation that existed before the Oslo agreements and that which exists today , despite the hitches and the slowing of the peace process .
There is no alternative to the adopted principle of ' peace for land ' other than a return to terrorism and warfare , which is unthinkable now that people on both sides have begun to think in terms of peace and mutual security .
Hatred has had its day , but nor can we accept the idea of a cold peace in the region , which would obstruct the present situation and make genuine peace a vanished dream rather than a dynamic which , despite all the difficulties , will shape the future of the Middle East .
We need to return as quickly as possible to the dialogue that had begun , and continue along that road .
We should never forget that , after decades of conflict , restoring peace and coexistence between peoples is difficult .
Although the process can be called into question at any time , every achievement , every step forward , makes a return to conflict more unlikely , even though the edifice of peace may be fragile for a while .
Each of the parties , then , must be sure to resist the provocations which extremists of all persuasions are going out of their way to create .
Because peace is difficult to achieve , because passions are an inevitable part of the process and a check to progress , it is necessary to call on the goodwill of all concerned , and to resort to the good offices of a mediator who enjoys the trust of the opposing sides .
The European Union has the capability to participate actively in this process , and to be more involved than it has in the past , but to do so it must remain impartial , above suspicion of favouring one side or the other .
The text before us does not entirely satisfy that requirement .
I hope that Parliament , at voting time , will bring its customary wisdom to bear in introducing the necessary balance , by way of amendments which the rapporteur seems to have accepted in advance , and in that case my group would be able to support it .
Mr President , the problems arising from the current crisis in the Middle East peace process require decisive , coordinated and consistent political action on the part of the European Union to overcome the deadlock .
From the Union 's standpoint , such political action must be based on the conviction that peace in the Middle East will be achieved only when the Palestinian question has been resolved in a just and long-term manner , in accordance with international resolutions and on the basis of the principle of peace in exchange for territory .
At the present time , the Oslo agreements are our best means of achieving and consolidating peace in the region , despite their obvious shortfalls and deficiencies .
The European Union , therefore , must urge the Israeli government to comply strictly , and within the terms and deadlines set , with the undertakings made in Oslo , abandoning the provocative and risky policy followed since its election by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu , who is principally responsible for the critical point at which the peace process now finds itself and , of course , for the bloodshed which took place at the end of September .
The Union must demand that the Israeli authorities give up their policy of expanding Jewish settlements and illegal occupation of land .
It must also demand that the Israeli government withdraw from the city of Hebron , open up the territory administered by the Palestinian National Authority and release every one of those Palestinian prisoners who are currently being held , unjustly and with complete disregard for human rights , in Israeli jails .
The European Union must put pressure on Israel both politically and economically , because the Oslo agreements contained and still contain a strong side and a weak side , and achieving balance means that the weak side , also , has to be assisted in any negotiations .
We therefore ask the Council and the Commission to suspend application of the provisional trade agreement and the flanking measures which exist between the Community and the State of Israel and which entered into force on 1 January 1996 .
We also believe that the national parliaments should not ratify the partnership agreement with Tel Aviv for as long as Mr Netanyahu refuses to comply with the Oslo agreements .
We are very pleased to hear about the appointment of Ambassador Moratinos as the Union 's special envoy , since we believe that the European Union should have an independent policy and role in the Middle East , in collaboration with but not subordinate to the United States .
This was the course mapped out at the Barcelona Conference and this is the road to peace that the Union has to attempt to establish in the Mediterranean , a peace that will be finally achieved only when there is a Palestinian state with its capital in East Jerusalem , which will surely be the best guarantee of Israel 's security .
However , we cannot ignore other topics : for example the fact that Israel illegally occupies part of South Lebanon and that it does not apply the Security Council 's Resolution 425 ; it also illegally occupies the Golan Heights and , although it refuses to acknowledge the fact , is a nuclear power .
We should support pacifists on all sides and isolate extremists , but one thing is certain : we should make no mistake that one party bears responsibility for the current situation - the Israeli government .
Mr President , it is excellent that there is now so much agreement on a justified , severe and tough criticism of Israel .
When criticism was levelled some 10-15 years ago by some of us , it was regarded as deceitful , anti-Semitic propaganda .
The criticism is very valid , but now there is another problem , namely democracy in Palestine .
Without democracy in Palestine there cannot be any peace either .
If Palestine is developed , into what the Palestinian author Edward Said has said that he fears , " into a combination of Iraqi terror dictatorship and Lebanese anarchy ' , then there will be no peace in the Middle East .
For making this statement , Edward Said has been punished by having his books banned in the Palestinian-controlled area , which itself testifies to the fact that his fears are not simply a figment of his imagination .
That is why we , the Greens , have maintained that it is important that , in connection with the statements made and the attitudes assumed in respect of the peace process , we also direct a justified criticism at the Palestinian administration & # x02BC ; s contravention of human rights and freedom of expression which are cited by Amnesty , Reporters sans frontières , reliable journalists and by many others .
We must not repeat the mistakes which have been made so many times before with solidarity movements and freedom movements , and look the other way at the failings in a solidarity movement when it becomes the party of government .
Those of us who have been their friends need to stand up and be counted in telling them that they are not living up to our ideals .
It is therefore pleasing that the other parties have also now come up with these demands .
It was a disaster in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , that our demand was rejected ; it was the intention of the report that it should not contain any criticism whatsoever of the Palestinian administration .
Now the other groups have also woken up to the fact and the serious flaw may hopefully be corrected .
Mr President , the peace process in the Middle East is once again causing deep concern .
Once again , we are going to reassert our commitment to the peace process !
What more can we do ?
Let me start by restating our determination that the European Union should play its part in this process , as indeed it is already doing through substantial economic and financial aid .
The Union must continue to provide that aid , which makes it the main backer in the Middle East region , but it must also play a political role .
We cannot accept a demand from the Prime Minister of Israel or the United States government that Europe should not interfere .
However , in order to play its part the European Union must satisfy certain conditions .
First , the Member States must act in concert , agreeing a common standpoint .
It is good news that the troika finally decided to visit Syria , Jordan , the self-governing Palestinian territories and Egypt , good news that the European Union has appointed a special envoy to the Middle East .
It was high time .
But this improvement in coordination between the Member States needs to go hand in hand with skilful strategic and tactical choices .
This is where one cannot help fearing that the somewhat curt manner adopted by President Chirac during his visit to the region may make it more difficult for the Union to play what should be its normal role as an impartial mediator .
It must be admitted that , today , responsibility for the renewal of tensions is not evenly divided .
Mr Netanyahu has taken provocative steps which could hardly fail to produce a violent reaction .
More seriously , some of the Israeli population seems to support this kind of provocation .
There is no escaping the fact that religious fanaticism - fanaticism , period - is breaking out again to disfigure the democratic heritage of the founding fathers of Israel .
My last comment looks towards the future .
It is my profound hope that the European Union will maintain ties with all the forces of peace , among the Palestinians certainly , but among the Israelis too .
Under no circumstances must we isolate Israel .
Under no circumstances must we match our forces against the forces of democracy and peace in that country .
More than ever before , surely , those democrats , who respect human rights , those men of peace need the understanding and help of the European Union which is a friend both to the Palestinians and to the Israelis and is resolutely determined to implement a really active policy , in which firmness may have a part to play .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the response by the Israeli authorities to the representatives of the European States who dare to venture the slightest criticism of the peace process that our taxpayers are financing can be summarized as ' pay up and shut up ' .
The Israelis are happy to take our money , but not our advice .
When it comes to advice , they prefer to go to Clinton , who is more generous with advice than he is with money except , admittedly , when it comes to ensuring that the humanitarian organization known as Isahal should never go short .
This is why I doubt the value of Mr Colajanni 's report .
There is little prospect that a Member of the European Parliament will command any more attention than did the French Head of State , who was certainly presumptuous during his latest trip to the Middle East , and was also unacceptably insulted .
Even so , Mr Colajanni has made some excellent points .
Yes , the Israeli government has broken its word .
There have been many breaches of the Oslo agreements : the maintenance of occupying troops in Hebron , the settlement of Israeli extremists on the West Bank , the provocation of the opening of the Jerusalem tunnel , the blockade of the Palestinian territories , and so on .
The Oslo agreements , which were negotiated under the aegis of America and which the rapporteur would like to see respected , are far from being a suitable basis for a lasting peace .
My friends and I did not share the optimism of this House when it hailed the signing of those agreements on 13 December 1993 .
Why ?
Because a lasting peace must be a just peace .
Yet the Oslo agreements did nothing to repair any of the injustices committed between two peoples in the Middle East , and against two peoples in the Middle East : the Palestinians who were driven out of their lands in 1948 and 1967 and are now incarcerated in Bantustans more secure than those you formerly denounced in South Africa , or the Lebanese who for twenty years have endured occupation by both Israel and Syria .
A genuine peace must be based on the following principles : the creation of an independent Palestinian State with sovereignty over a viable territory , the granting of international status to Jerusalem , and the restoration of sovereignty to the Lebanon , which must no longer be occupied by Israelis , Syrians , Palestinians or Iranians .
Those are the bases for peace , and , I should add , the conditions for the survival of Israel , which could then join together with those peoples in the region which favour it to form a confederation of the Middle East - no more difficult to construct , after all , than the Federal Republic of South Africa .
Mr President , Commissioner , for reasons which have nothing to do with politics Israel is like a second home to me .
Some of you here will know that already . Well , I am afraid .
The resolution we are now debating is an essential one , which seems to me balanced and quite fair .
I would , however , like to add a few personal comments .
The Middle East is the most serious of the unhealed wounds that divide the Muslim peoples from the Western World , Christians and Jews alike .
But it is not the only one - other examples include Algeria , Bosnia and Chechnya .
Any reopening of the conflict between Israel and the Palestinian people , on the very doorstep of dictatorial or totalitarian States such as Iran , Iraq and Syria , may have incalculable repercussions .
So it is absolutely necessary that pressure should be exerted in favour of peace . But how ?
Europe must not make itself ridiculous .
I have always believed and always said that the only way to achieve peace is by direct negotiation between the parties concerned .
Incidentally , in order for the Oslo agreements - which deserve better than the comments we have just heard - to be negotiated and signed , it was necessary for Palestinians and Israelis to meet in secret , using the Madrid process to escape the generous but inconvenient supervision of the United States .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Netanyahu and his supporters in Israel make fun of Europe 's claims to have a part to play , and I am not particularly enamoured of the nursemaid diplomacy sometimes practised by Europe , and especially by my own country , France .
We have no majority decision process , no common diplomacy and no joint armed forces , so let us not act as if we had .
The present government of Israel is putting its people and the peace process at an unreasonable risk , but it is dogmatic and listens to no one .
I very much doubt whether anything at all will be achieved by admonishments and pleadings .
The people of Israel must be told that we want to bring them security through peace , and the government of Israel must be told that we strongly disapprove of its brinkmanship policy .
It reacts only to the kind of pressure that involves specific penalties .
Our influence can only be economic , but that influence is powerful .
A more fruitful approach would be to suspend application of the interim trade agreement between the European Union and Israel , and defer ratification of the Euro-Mediterranean agreement , signed between the European Union and Israel on 20 October 1995 , until the Israeli government has honoured the agreements concluded between Israel and the Palestinian authority .
The rest is just empty words .
Israel and the present Israeli government laugh at it .
Our disapproval must be made known , Mr President , and it must also be effective .
Mr President , Mr Colajanni 's motion for a resolution offers us today the opportunity both to tackle the exceptionally complex and important question of the current peace process in the Middle East and to evaluate the effectiveness and appropriateness of resolutions as a political instrument in the hands of the European Parliament .
As for the peace process , there is no denying that it is in crisis .
The reasons for that crisis , however , are much less clear : is it entirely attributable to the conduct of the present Israeli government , or can it perhaps also be ascribed to the excessively permissive approach adopted by the previous government , making it necessary to strike a new balance between things promised and things not done , or can it even be blamed on the destabilizing activities of outside agents such as Iran and Syria , or even on the Palestinians because their response to the peace process is not yet what it should be ?
I think it fair to conclude that all parties have some responsibility , to varying but none the less very important extents , for the present crisis .
I am equally convinced that not only is this parliament in no position to judge fairly a dispute which is beyond the comprehension and control even of the Middle Eastern protagonists themselves , but that we should indeed refrain from trying to do so , in the interests of the peace process and of the credibility of our own political intervention .
Mr Colajanni himself has made his views crystal clear .
I quote : ' The European Parliament must declare clearly and unambiguously that it is not on the side of the Palestinians or Israelis , but on the side of peace . '
Well , that is precisely what the present version of the document , following our amendments in committee , seems incapable of doing , since it is too unbalanced against Israel : witness twelve articles , out of a total of 24 , which are almost intimidatory , trying over-ambitiously to impose all kinds of conditions on the Israeli government .
There are also two - just two - gentle hints addressed to the Palestinians , and another two honeyed pleas to Syria and Iran , for them to be nice .
For anyone with a sense of humour let me read the wording of the appeal to Iran .
I quote : ' Calls on Iran to use whatever influence it has over fundamentalist groups ... to assist and not obstruct the peace process . ' ' No comment , ' as my English-speaking friends would say .
In addition to this , moreover , there are numerous attempts at arbitrary interference in the internal Israeli political debate , a comparison being made between the good guys , in other words the members of the former government , and the bad guys , the members of the present government .
This approach is as dangerous as it is out of place , if only because it casts doubt on the impartiality of our judgement .
It must also be added that the lack of any European foreign and security policy has an adverse impact on all this , giving free rein to nationalistic and partisan sympathies and antipathies which undoubtedly affect and influence the form and content of the text .
To summarize , if the intention was to promote reason and co-operation between the opposing parties , the present text will undoubtedly achieve the opposite effect .
I am however encouraged by the fact that , as Mr Colajanni himself has said , virtually all the amendments tabled today by the various groups are designed to moderate the tone of the report .
So , if they are all accepted , the final text will be a balanced one , and if that is the case we shall vote in favour of it .
Mr President , the Liberal Group will not be voting for Mr Colajanni 's text as it stands .
Despite certain oratorical precautions , this text is unbalanced and unjust .
Mr Colajanni 's objectivity reminds me of the old recipe for lark pâté : half horse , half lark , one of each .

In Mr Colajanni 's report there is a hero , Mr Arafat , no matter how he runs the Palestinian authority , and there is a villain , Mr Netanyahu , no matter how hard he tries to solve the Hebron problem .
This lack of objectivity is extremely harmful , because , quite obviously , a text of this kind suggest that Europe lacks authority to act as a mediator .
Unless Mr Colajanni 's text is radically amended , Mr President , we are prepared to wager that even if it is adopted it will soon find its way to the overcrowded graveyard of still-born resolutions .
Mr President , when Yasser Arafat received a delegation of French communist Members of Parliament in Gaza last October , he made an urgent appeal to Europe .
He said : ' We need you even more today than we did yesterday , the peace process is at a standstill , ' and he added , ' The situation is nearing the threshold of unacceptable risk and posing a grave threat to the entire region . '
In essence , the situation has not changed since then .
The Israeli government is continuing to renege on its commitments and still refusing to apply the Oslo agreements , even though the Knesset has ratified them .
There are 34 points in those agreements that are still not being applied .
More and more provocations are being launched against the Palestinians : continued establishment of colonies in the occupied territories , the tighter sealing-off of the territories which increases the difficulties of the Palestinian population , the continuing military presence in Hebron and the violations of the status of East Jerusalem .
Let us meet the challenge of this appeal to preserve peace .
Our essential objective must be to induce Israel to respect the Oslo agreements in their entirety and to desist from all provocation .
In order to achieve this objective , we first need the means .
Experience has shown that declarations and resolutions , however strongly worded , get nowhere .
Confronted with such a critical situation , we have no alternative to a political show of strength , tying respect for the peace process more closely to the implementation of the association agreement with Israel .
Other Members have already said the same : I believe that , as things stand , the EC-Israel interim agreement , which came into force on 1 January 1996 , must be suspended .
That more or less amounts to renewing the decision we took at the time of the Shamir government , when co-operation with Israel was suspended for two years .
We also appeal to the national parliaments to suspend ratification of the agreement until such time as the Israeli government respects the Oslo agreements and opens genuine negotiations with the Palestinian authority .
The European Union must meet the expectations of the Palestinians and the peaceful faction in Israel , and take an active part in the peace process without waiting for permission from the United States .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , the Middle East chessboard has always served as a test bench for European diplomacy , which as yet has failed to adopt a unified political approach .
The peace process which , despite an endless series of difficulties , had begun to take shape between the Palestinians and Israelis is going through a profound crisis . Although , on the one hand , that crisis seems to be the logical consequence of the change of course by the Netanyahu government away from the agreements negotiated by its predecessors in office , on the other hand it does show how strained the political will that originated it may have been , and how necessary a more resolute presence on the part of the European Union is today .
Today , the continued presence of the Israeli army in Hebron , the increased colonization of Palestinian territory and the opening of the tunnel under the esplanade of the mosques in East Jerusalem are clear symbols of the difficulties against which the peace process is having to struggle , and show how little may have been achieved by the various missions of the European ministerial troikas .
The latest of these , comprising Italy , Ireland and the Netherlands , which visited the region by way of preparation for the Economic Conference now being held in Cairo , was refused permission to meet with the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Levi , precisely because , in conformity with a Community decision of July 1996 , it had planned to visit Orient House , the headquarters of the official PLO representative in occupied Jerusalem .
Our view is that the Union cannot accept this kind of blackmail , but must carry out its specific role in the peace process without being treated just as a dispenser of funds and cash .
We want a political initiative by the Union which will serve to remind the Israeli government to respect the agreements that were signed , will serve as a basis for an agreement on economic and trade co-operation with Palestine , will raise the European Union to the status of a qualified arbiter in a regional peace process which is not confined to a few factions but is comprehensive and includes the necessary resumption of the dialogue with Syria and Jordan , will assess the possibility of freeing Lebanon from foreign occupying forces , and will ask Iran to exercise its influence over the Islamic groups so that the path of dialogue can bring back peace and prosperity to the peoples of the region .
Ladies and gentlemen , it was certainly necessary for the European Parliament to adopt a clear position and make specific proposals for the restarting of the peace process in the Middle East , and in that light I pay tribute to the efforts of Mr Colajanni .
Whether it was necessary to do it today may be debatable in the light of the state and nature of the current negotiations .
At any rate , at this stage of our debate , I want to make three clear points in my capacity as chairman of the ' Europe-Israel ' delegation .
First , we are - and I am - in favour of a just peace between the Israelis and Palestinians , and therefore in favour of the spirit and the letter of the Oslo agreements , which must be applied .
Secondly , we regret - and I regret - the present delays and the words and deeds of the new Israeli Prime Minister , some of which may be seen as provocations which jeopardize the continuation of the peace process .
Thirdly , we demand - and therefore I demand - that the agreements signed should be respected and that discussions should continue with a view to solving the many problems that have overrun the proposed timetable .
Having said that , I should add that an efficient approach requires that the European Union does not try to replace the negotiators , that it does not take the side of one party or the other , and that it should not anticipate future discussions , the timetable for which was laid down in the Oslo agreements - the final status of Jerusalem , for example .
Nor , above all , should it deviate into a form of blackmail by threatening to cast doubt on the agreements concluded between the state of Israel and the European Union .
If yesterday 's enemies , and today 's , in the Middle East are to move forward quickly to become partners , they need our aid and support .
Like a majority of the Israeli people who are fighting for it in the name of Yitzhak Rabin , they need our support and our understanding .
They do not need to be given lessons , by anyone .
If we want peace we must realize that it depends first and foremost on the people living in the region , and that they have no particular desire to die in battle .
They just want to live in peace and security .
It is up to us to help them .
Mr President , the late José Maria Gil-Robles , a Spanish politician of great standing and whose son my group has just approved as its candidate to stand for the presidency of our Parliament , once wrote a terrifying book entitled No fue posible la paz , which was based on the terrible Spanish Civil War , but might just as well have referred to the First or Second World War or to any of the many others the world has seen .
Mr President , I believe the following question needs to be asked : Is peace in the Middle East actually possible ?
Naturally , we must spare no effort in attempting to bring this about and , to this end , the European Union must undoubtedly play a much more active and decisive role than hitherto .
Congratulations are therefore due since , on this occasion , the President-in-Office of the Council , the troika and the Commission have exercised their powers and authority more decisively .
It is to our credit that we have finally appointed a mediator to represent us - and I am pleased to hear that he is my friend , compatriot and colleague , Ambassador Moratinos - and that we are able to give our support to Mr Colajanni 's report . This is a document which we will certainly be able to improve somewhat by means of the amendments which have been tabled .
I have the impression that , overall , it is a balanced document and correctly reflects the wishes of this House insofar as it does not wish to be marginalized vis-à-vis the process , wishes to be involved in it and can contribute more than just financial resources to a part of the world which , if peace is possible , will be an area where the inhabitants can enjoy mutual , shared prosperity .
Mr President , I appreciate the clarification we have been given by Council and Commission .
However , I find it rather inappropriate to be debating this resolution on the Middle East just now .
First of all the troika has not yet reported to us on its visit to the region ; an economic conference on the region is currently taking place in Cairo ; the Israeli Government has opened up its borders rather more to allow Palestinians to work within their own territory and the authorities have cracked down on extremist settlers in Hebron .
The talks between Israel and the Palestinians on the further continuation of the peace process , namely Hebron , are being held , but not at the pace and with the result we would like to see .
For all these reasons I would have preferred us to postpone the debate for a month , but so be it .
I will look at the resolution as it stands .
My feeling is that this resolution on the Middle East is not at all balanced and is even biased .
This bias surprises me very much because hitherto I have always regarded Mr Colajanni as one of the most balanced analysts of the Middle Eastern peace process .
I also think that this kind of approach to the complex situation in the Middle East totally disqualifies the European Union as a trustworthy mediator there .
Whilst the Union still has no common foreign policy and whilst constant and vain attempts are made to force a mediating role for it on the basis of financial aid , our disappointment will continue to grow and we shall be excluded from the process .
In view of its history Israel cannot afford a mediator with many faces whilst the Palestinians are possibly - I say possibly , because they too are realists - looking to Europe for their salvation at present .
Things like the tunnel and Orient House are in my view precisely the kind of things that Palestinians and Israelis have to sort out between them .
We must not concern ourselves with these at this stage .
The Union and Parliament are doing their best to promote democratic principles throughout the Middle East - I am thinking of Syria , Egypt and Lebanon .
This kind of approach will in the medium to long term and by natural means earn us the role we should like to play in this region .


There are a few good amendments by Mr Dimitrakopoulos , Mr Caligaris , Mr Bertens and Mr Sakellariou ; these may restore a proper balance to the resolution .
If not I shall have to withhold my support .
Mr President , I should like to say that the European Union wants to play a part in the peace process in the Middle East , to assist and promote the peace process .
I believe this is the right position for the European Union to adopt , but , obviously , if that is the part we want to play we do need to take a very balanced position between the parties . If we are to participate in this effort with any prospect of success , we must talk to both sides .
In the report we are considering , after the amendments made by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , the European Parliament has distanced itself from this stance ; it is opting for making a political and moral judgement , which may be right or wrong - significantly wrong , as I see it , in the way it is expressed - but politically , above all , it is opting out .
Mr Colajanni 's original report was more balanced ; unless it proves possible to amend the text to restore that greater balance , the Liberal and Democratic Reformist Group will be unable to vote in favour .
I hope , therefore , that this balance can be restored tomorrow .
Mr President , the tension between Israel and the Palestinian authority which heightened when the Netanyahu Government took power has not yet dissipated .
But despite the large measure of mistrust which still exists between the two sides , the talks have resumed thanks to American mediation .
It is clear that the Israeli Government needs time to decide its stance on the peace process .
Given these circumstances it will be best if the talks are allowed to proceed with a minimum of outside interference , so that they can be kept low-key .
The genesis of the Oslo Agreement shows that this offers the best prospect of success .
In our view this is not helped by the role which the Union is arrogating to itself in the peace process at the moment .
Undoubtedly the Union is the most important economic partner in the region .
But as regards European diplomatic intervention in the peace process , both Israel and the United States have made it known that there is no need for this .
So one also wonders what the benefits are of the Union 's recent diplomatic initiatives in connection with the peace efforts of the United States .
One must also wonder what credibility the Union can still retain as a neutral mediator .
The talks with Arafat , the Council statement of 1 October with its one-sided criticism of Israel , earlier visits to Orient House , but also the recent visit of President Chirac , have certainly done nothing to enhance the Union 's status as a peacemaker .
Nor does Mr Colajanni 's resolution improve the position of the EU at all because it makes far-reaching pronouncements on East Jerusalem and the status of the Palestinian territories even before negotiations on these crucial and sensitive matters have begun .
Meantime a special Union envoy on the Middle East has been appointed .
One wonders , however , whether his room for manoeuvre may not be seriously limited by the views expressed by the Union .
We are convinced that all parties in the Middle East , including the Israeli Government , are anxious for a final peace settlement .
They must , however , be given the time and the chance to work one out for themselves , without the European Union choosing sides and dictating terms .
Mr Colajanni 's resolution does not respect that need .
Consequently we shall not support the resolution in its current form .
Mr President , what we are talking about here is not simply settling a dispute between Israel and the Palestinians .
We are talking about the peace and stability of the whole Middle Eastern region ; a peace and stability which directly affects us because if we lose control of that situation , we will be sucked into the crisis .
It also affects us because we have all been victims of terrorist activities which have stemmed from the Middle Eastern conflict .
For those reasons I reject those voices I have heard in recent weeks that suggest that the European Union has no role to play , or ought not to interfere , in the Middle East peace process .
I welcome the work of the Irish presidency , particularly the Foreign Minister , Mr Spring , in trying to take the initiative towards developing the EU 's role in relation to the Middle East peace process .
We have all been very frustrated by what has happened , not least the actions of the Israeli Government which , following its election , did not appear to feel itself committed to the peace process .
But , as colleagues have said , we ought to take an even-handed approach and we must remind the Palestinian authorities , in particular , that their police should not be using their arms to attack the Israeli security forces .
At the same time , we ought to be using our influence with other Middle Eastern states , not least Iran and Syria , to get them to use their influence with fundamentalist groups in the Middle East to support the peace process and not undermine it because ultimately the victims of any efforts to undermine the peace process will be the Palestinians .
As Commissioner Marín has pointed out , ultimately the path to peace lies as much with economic development as with international diplomacy .
The tremendous poverty of the Palestinians has to be alleviated and we should be looking to encourage projects of economic cooperation which link the Palestinians with the Israelis in order , in the long term , to cement the peace process .
In particular , I would emphasize once again the importance of projects to guarantee the supply of water to all in the long term .
I welcome Mr Colajanni 's report .
I congratulate the Irish presidency on its work and I hope that we can continue our efforts to bring peace to the Middle East .
Mr President , I had intended to read out a brief speech but , at this late stage , it would not have contributed anything further to the debate .
I fully support what Mr Barón has said on behalf of the Socialist Group . I will , instead , recount a brief anecdote involving a group of MPs , some of whom are present .
We woke up in Damascus , on the day after the Israeli elections , and that day , at precisely 9 a.m. , our first meeting was with the Syrian Foreign Minister .
As you can imagine , this was a tense and complicated meeting .
The Minister was , to say the least , extremely concerned , but no one , I believe , other than a group of representatives from this House , could more vigorously champion Israeli democracy and the fact that that democracy was not a matter of good and evil .
What none of us could have known was that , so shortly afterwards , the situation was to deteriorate as it did .
When I recall what we said on that occasion , I find it hard to believe that we were so optimistic and actually so out of step with what occurred later .
I would therefore like to say that , for me , it is not the resolution that is off balance but the situation .
Mr Colajanni 's resolution addresses the party with the ball in its court - Mr Netanyahu .
We support the continuation of the Oslo process although , currently , one side is more at fault than the other .
The Commission and the Council have been acting positively up to now and , like many of my colleagues , I am glad about the appointment of Mr Moratinos .
Mr Colajanni 's resolution is a good one and I fully support it .
It is not , I say again , an unbalanced resolution but one which addresses the right person , the person on whom the continuation of the Oslo process currently depends .
Mr President , I regret that the peace process has not moved on and I recognize the frustration and the erosion of confidence that has taken place .
But I believe that we must recognize that there is a new government in Israel .
I believe that we have got to recognize that that new government may adopt a different position from the previous government and , whether we like it or not , that is called democracy .
Strong political and commercial links exist between Europe and the Middle East .
It is in all our interests that the peace process should continue and indeed be accelerated because nobody likes the frustrations of the present moment .
Destabilization is something else that is happening out there , whether it be from Iran or Iraq .
I believe that the most important thing that we have got to do is push to make sure that there is redeployment from Hebron .
That must be our first priority .
It is a crucial issue for the future of the peace process .
Lasting settlement will have to recognize the rights of the Palestinians as well .
That is quite clear .
The Palestinians , however , must recognize that Israel has some rights and all , I believe , want to live in peace and security .
The European Union is the largest financial supporter of the Palestinians .
I believe that peace needs to be rewarded .
Friends of both Israel and Palestine want to see each other living comfortably side by side but it takes statesmanship to achieve that and not belligerence .
I salute King Hussein , I salute President Mubarak of Egypt .
I hope that the European Union and the United States of America can all work closely together to achieve what we all want : that is the development , the continuation and hopefully , the finality of the peace movement .
Mr President , the first anniversary of the murder of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was once again marked , like the event itself , with a wave of sympathy but also of reflection by the great majority of the Israeli population and by the international community .
Once again , however , sadly , a large proportion of Israeli society held aloof , that section of Israeli society which largely determines policy at present and is dominated by religious and , in some cases , political fanaticism .
We note with ever-increasing resignation that the real beneficiaries of Rabin 's murder are the assassin Yigal Amir , the Hamas terrorist groups and this same part of the Israeli political spectrum .
On the occasion of this debate , though , I would like to draw attention to another aspect which is very often overlooked by outsiders - the complexity of this whole situation .
For the Israeli people , the top priority is security , first , last and all the time , and that is something that must always be borne in mind , including now , as the European Union considers what specific political action it can take .
When I hear one of my colleagues here unthinkingly demanding withdrawal from southern Lebanon , I must point out to him that any such move would favour the infiltration of terrorist groups and Hezbollah , and the firing of katyushas at the population of northern Israel .
I think we need to develop the understanding that this must not be allowed to happen and that , of course , this withdrawal can only take place in the overall context of a comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East .
The role of the European Union should be a discreet one - it should remain in the background .
We should not adopt the kind of profile demonstrated by President Chirac , whose performance in Israel was a total disaster !
I believe that we in the European Union should refrain from that kind of thing and concentrate on behind-the-scenes politics .
King Hussein said at Yitzhak Rabin 's graveside , ' We all have to die , but when we do it is worth dying for something - in this case , for peace . ' He also said , ' My friend , Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin , died for peace ! '
Let us hope that his words prove prophetic and that the peace process can soon move forward again .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Colajanni , on his magnificent report on the Middle East peace process .
Recent events have unfortunately produced a stalemate in this peace process and the situation is currently very finely poised .
The principal concern of the European Parliament - as has been repeatedly stated in this House - must be and has always been the achievement of a lasting and stable peace in the region .
A prerequisite for achieving peace in the region is the strict application of the Oslo agreements , since dialogue is the only way to attain peace .
Only dialogue will bring solutions , an end to the war - a move away from the domination of one people over another , from acts of terrorism and from the pressures which cannot but bring in their wake misfortune and ill luck for all concerned .
This dialogue has already had positive results - an autonomous , recognized Palestinian Authority now exists -and it will be dialogue - nothing else - which will make it possible to resolve the conflict . What is needed is the special support of the European Union which should play a decisive role in developing this dialogue and which , in fact , has a duty to do so .
The Union must provide the diplomatic motivation for negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians to move forward , and it must assume a leading role , which is its due , together with other mediators , such as the United States .
It is not just economics which will assist attempts to restructure equilibrium in the region - economic cooperation must also be accompanied by political initiatives .
The recent violence is a reminder to us that our priority should be to reach definite agreements as soon as possible .
Any solution which does not result in the setting-up of a genuine Palestinian State will only lead to an intensification of the conflict .
The principles of non-violence and unity are the only way in which we can find solutions and make progress in the negotiations .
Honourable Members , progress has to be made and be made urgently .
Allow me , Mr President , to finish by lending my support to the slogan which has been heard on the streets of Tel Aviv : Only peace will put an end to war .
Mr President , Mr Netanyahu 's government has taken a number of actions which have ostensibly violated the Peace Agreement .
Actions which tend to take us back to the status quo ante before the Agreement and which have triggered off new confrontations between Palestinians and Israelis , giving strength to extremists on both sides and undermining peace and reconciliation .
I think that the task that we must respond to is to halt this downward spiral .
As has already been said , we must be balanced : we must oppose extremism on both sides and we must also demand the respect of human rights on both sides . We must call upon both sides to make an effort to resume negotiations in order to put the Peace Process back on track .
That does not mean that we can hush up or lessen the decisive responsibility of the new Israeli government .
I think that the Colajanni report is not an unbalanced report .
I very much agree with what Anna Terron said , namely that the situation 's balance has been lost and that it is the European Union 's duty to try and restore the lost balances in this region .
And indeed it is its responsibility to do this .
The Union does not but it should have a common external and security policy - but it does have principles . And these are the principles we should bring into play here .
The European Union has an economic , financial and humanitarian presence in the Middle East which is far greater than its political effectiveness or visibility . We must therefore bring into full play these political , economic and financial instruments for two aims : to force the Israeli government to respect the agreement and the Peace Process and support the Palestinian population , economy and authorities and , with a united voice , we should exercise the role which belongs to us in the region and which has linked us with so many connections , of neighbourhood , history , culture and human solidarity , because there is not just the risk that the whole region will blow up but that the whole Islamic world might be destabilised .

From this point of view , I think that the Colajanni report is a very balanced base for the European Union 's action in this area .
Mr President , the change of course by Israeli policy following the elections held in that country causes us grave concern .
Concern about the Middle East process and , in the long run , concern for the security of Israel .
Between Madrid and Oslo , we finally became convinced that the fragile shoots of peace had finally taken root in Palestinian soil .
An objective was set , a path was mapped out , a timetable was approved , hope was born - but , it would seem , intransigence is back .
The resumption of colonization , the highly symbolic shattering of the status quo in Jerusalem , the expulsions , the restricted highways , the sealed-off areas - there may be some who see these things as designed to strengthen Israel 's security .
In actual fact , they are undermining it .
These actions are creating a climate which makes dialogue more difficult , if not impossible , and they are providing the extremists - all the extremists - with alibis for their policies .
Very cool heads and great restraint are thus needed on both sides if the path of peace and co-operation is to be reopened .
Europe , the main contributor to the Middle East , many of whose States have long experience of that region and have shown that they were as much concerned with the security of Israel as they were with the existence of a Palestinian State , would have liked to make a greater contribution to the relaunching of the peace process .
The United States is monopolizing the issue , as it does many other issues .
That is a great temptation , on the face of it , but the day will come when such an attitude may become very dangerous and hard to sustain , even for the world 's biggest and only superpower .
Today , admittedly , all we can do is warn , comment , perhaps participate .
But I have no doubt that , when the time comes , Europe will still be here and we shall be able to make a vital contribution to settling these conflicts .
In doing so , we shall ensure the greatest possible international co-operation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time to the Council ( B4-1218 / 96 )
Question No 1 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0851 / 96 )
Subject : Directive on the limitation of the operation of aeroplanes
When does the Council intend to adopt the proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 92 / 14 on the limitation of the operation of aeroplanes ?
On 4 September 1996 the Commission submitted to the Council a proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 92 / 14 / EEC on the limitation of the operation of aeroplanes covered by Part II , Chapter 2 , Volume I of Annex 16 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation , second edition , 1988 .
This amendment aims : ( a ) to update the annex of the directive , including a list of aircraft from developing nations which are to be exempted from the non-operation rule until 1 April 2002 ; ( b ) to allow Member States which operate an airport system the possibility of limiting or excluding the operation of certain noisier types of aircraft at one or more of the airports forming part of the system ; and ( c ) to introduce definitions and other drafting amendments that seek to clarify the objectives of Directive 92 / 14 / EEC so as to allow a uniform interpretation within the Community .
This proposal for a Council directive will be examined by the Council bodies in the near future .
I understand that Parliament is also examining this proposal and Council adoption , as you are aware , must await Parliament 's opinion on this matter .
As examination by Council bodies is at an early stage I am not in a position to give the honourable Member more precise information as to when the Council might adopt this proposal .
The problem which caused us to submit this question to the Council is that many European citizens , in a good number of cities in the Union , are suffering on account of uncontrolled noise from certain , usually antiquated , aircraft which make life unbearable for many people living near airports .
If anyone is unaware of the problem , they only have to ask the people living in the Coslada district near Barajas Airport in Madrid .

Ladies and gentlemen , we are faced here with no more and no less than a health problem which has a general adverse effect on the nervous system , and this problem has a solution - limiting the operation of certain types of aircraft which , even now , still produce levels of noise in excess of those permitted in Community legislation .
It is heartening to hear the Council state that a solution is nearer to hand .
Actually , it was stated that this would be ' in the near future ' .
We would have liked a little more precision in this matter but at least the Council is demonstrating its sensitivity in seeking an urgent solution .
I know we are all concerned about the matters raised by the honourable Member .
Certainly I will ensure that the concerns he expressed are taken into account so far as I can .
I am sure he will arrange for Parliament to do so in its consideration .
At the same time I would point out that in doing this we have to take special account of the concerns of developing countries , which might not be able to meet the requirements in the same timescale .
I appreciate the spirit of the question and I am sure it is one we all share .
As a Member of Parliament whose constituency adjoins Heathrow Airport - the busiest international airport in the world - and as president of the local authority consortium against aircraft noise , I am deeply concerned in this matter .
I would like to ask two brief questions .
Does the proposal include private executive aircraft which are proliferating increasingly ?
Secondly , although I am delighted with what we have been told and although we have made a lot of progress in eliminating the noisier aircraft , all aircraft are noisy to some extent , especially at certain times of the day .
Many airports in the European Union operate night-time bans although not all do so .
Does the Council not feel it is time we started to try to harmonize night restrictions on aircraft flying across the European Union to achieve uniformity and to protect the health and quality of life of the people who live near these huge airports ?
I am not sure whether the directive covers private aircraft , I feel that it does .
If that is not the case I will communicate it to the Member .
In relation to the second part of the honourable Member 's question : I feel this is something which needs consideration , and I will certainly bring his comments to the attention of the presidency and the Council when these matters are being considered .
Question No 2 by Anne McIntosh ( H-0854 / 96 )
Subject : Attempts to tackle the problem of BSE
Does the Council agree that the BSE crisis has highlighted the need for a more comprehensive system of cattle labelling and traceability throughout the European Union , which would improve control of the disease and bolster consumer confidence ?
Is the Council planning to undertake such measures , for example a double tagging system , in the near future ?
It is also vital to the beef sector in the UK that an effective system of income and market support is put in place .
Could the Council indicate how it is proposed that the large amount involved will be shared between the European Union and the UK ?
The Council has already underlined many times , and most recently at the Informal Council in Killarney , the primary importance of improving the consumer information on the identification and quality of bovine meat .
Directive 92 / 102 / EEC on the identification and registration of animals , introduced arrangements to identify cattle , sheep and pigs .
The BSE crisis has demonstrated that the identification and registration systems for bovine animals are in need of improvement .
At the beginning of October the Council received proposals from the Commission which aimed to introduce a package of measures relating to the identification of animals and the labelling of meat .
The purpose of these proposals is to facilitate the traceability of animals and meat and to contribute also to the restoration of consumer confidence .
The proposals will reinforce the provisions of the current directive with regard to a central computerized database , a passport for each animal , a double ear-tagging arrangement for identifying each animal and registers of animals on each holding .
In response to the crisis experienced in the beef market this year , the Commission unveiled a number of proposals involving measures to reduce beef production in the short and medium term , thereby restoring balance in the market following the substantial decline in consumption , the achievement of economies within the EAGGF Guarantee Section by reducing compensatory payments in the arable crops sector in order to resolve the problems in the beef and veal sector and amendments to Regulation 2328 / 91 on improving the efficiency of agriculture structures .
A first thorough examination of these proposals at the Agriculture Council on 16 and 17 September revealed a wide divergence of views on each of the Commission 's proposals .
In particular there was concern about the proposal to reduce aid in the arable sector and there were reservations regarding the proposal to make the calf slaughtering premium compulsory .
The Council of Agriculture Ministers meeting on the 28 , 29 and 30 October reached political agreement on the main elements of the Commission 's proposal for the amendment of the basic regulation for the beef and veal market .
The measures agreed are designed to bring balance to the beef market in the short to medium term and include calf slaughtering premium schemes , adjustments in regional premia rights ceilings , adjustment to intervention rules , increased support for extensive production and a recognition of the need for a promotion campaign .
In relation to calves , the Council decided that Member States should have a choice of actions to reduce the overall numbers .
Therefore , under the package agreed in October , Member States can opt for either a calf processing premium in respect of male calves , as originally proposed by the Commission , or an early marketing premium for calves , or a combination of both these measures .
These measures , which will operate for a period of 2 years from 1 December 1996 , are designed to lead to a reduction of at least 1 million in the number of calves in the Community .
In relation to funding , the Council decided that any adjustment in expenditure for 1998 should be dealt with in parallel with the drafting of the agriculture budget for that year .
Obviously this decision is without prejudice to the European Parliament 's opinion on the matter .
In relation to 1997 , the Council took a favourable view of the Commission 's proposal to postpone the oilseed advances as a means of meeting 1997 budgetary needs .
The Council decision on funding must await a Commission proposal to modify the relevant regulation and the opinion of the European Parliament on this proposal .
The Council of Ministers also recognized that the package of measures agreed at the October Council is designed to deal with the short-term consequences arising in particular from the BSE crisis and believes that further changes in the beef premium are necessary to align the beef supplies in the Union with the likely long-term level of internal and external demand .
The Council invited the Commission to examine this issue and to submit proposals within the next 6 months with regard to beef .
The objective of the Council is to take a decision on such proposals before the 31 December 1997 .
The Commission 's proposals on agriculture structures will be considered in this context .
In addition to the measures designed to restore balance to the veal market the Council of Agriculture Ministers meeting on the 28-30 October also agreed on the provision of an additional compensation package amounting to ECU 500 million to support producers ' incomes which had been significantly reduced as a result of the BSE crisis .
The Council also decided on the distribution key to be applied in the allocation between Member States of this additional compensation .
In relation to the other part of the question , under the distribution key agreed by Council for the allocation of the additional amount the UK will receive 13.1 % .
I thank the President-in-Office , Mr Mitchell , for a very full reply .
On the percentage allocated to the United Kingdom , would he not agree that it would seem fairer to give a higher percentage to the country whose market and whose consumer confidence in that market has been most seriously damaged ?
On the question of tagging , with regard to whatever scheme of cattle labelling the Council agrees to introduce , would the President-in-Office not accept this could involve either an electronic system , as in Ulster , or where this is simply impractical , a paper base system ?
My interest is in the practical way in which the scheme will operate .
Clearly , there are certain parts of the EU where it is not possible to introduce a system of electronic tagging .
It is important in these areas that at the very least an extensive paper or cattle passport system will be put in place .
In relation to the second part of the honourable Member 's question , I will bring her comments to the attention of the President of the Council of Agriculture Ministers .
I am not sure what the implications for the industry would be if there was a system as she proposes , but I certainly will raise her concerns .
In relation to the suggestion that a higher degree of the allocations should go to Member States whose market is most damaged , I would point out that for a country like Ireland , for example , which is a much smaller country than the United Kingdom , where we have something like a little more than half of the total number of cattle that they have in the United Kingdom , the knock-on effect has been significantly greater , because in our case we export 85 % of our product .
So a number of factors had to be taken into account in this allocation .
At the end of the day the Council of Ministers considered that this was the fairest allocation .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office , Mr Mitchell , for his extensive answer to the original question .
I have actually read the proposals in Council Directive 92 / 102 and I welcome them .
I know that the farmers in East Anglia , the region I represent in the United Kingdom , have suffered considerably over the BSE crisis and are still suffering from the inadequate way the United Kingdom Government has handled this .
My question is : with regard to the introduction of a required computer database system for Member States , would the Council support financial assistance on a European basis similar to that introduced for the funding support schemes ?
I can confirm that the Council recently received a Commission proposal for a set of measures in the beef sector on which the European Parliament has been consulted .
As soon as it receives the European Parliament 's opinion the Council will , of course , act swiftly on that proposal .
When these matters are being considered by the Council , I will bring to the attention of the President-in-Office of the Council the concerns expressed by the honourable Member , but I am not in a position to give such a commitment here today .
Question No 3 by Ulla Sandbæk ( H-0856 / 96 )
Subject : The Council 's position on the use of the Moscow mechanism
On 27 September 1996 , Amnesty published a report on human rights in Turkey , recommending that the Moscow mechanism be applied under the auspices of the OSCE so that a delegation can be sent to Turkey to investigate the human rights situation , with or without Turkish consent .
How does the Council view that option , and what action has it thought of taking in this matter ?
The Council follows the human rights situation in Turkey with great attention and actively pursues its concerns about violations in this area both in its contacts with the Turkish authorities in the framework of the EU / Turkey political dialogue and in the multilateral dialogue at the OSCE .
It has made it clear to these authorities , and will continue to do so , that observance of the rule of law , of human rights and of fundamental freedoms forms the basis of closer relations between Turkey and the European Union .
The OSCE , by monitoring the implementation of the commitments of its participating states , is able to assist in the development and consolidation of democracy and the rule of law , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms as matters of direct and legitimate concern for all participating states .
The Council is aware of the possibilities offered by the OSCE 's Moscow mechanism .
While this mechanism foresees the possibility for OSCE participating states to decide on the constitution of an OSCE mission to investigate the human rights situation in another OSCE state , in practice the cooperation of the latter state is vital for the mission to be able to operate .
Although it believes that the Moscow mechanism constitutes a valuable instrument in certain cases , the Council has not considered that it was the most appropriate means to address the issue the honourable Member refers to .
The European Union will continue to carefully monitor developments in relation to this situation and to call on Turkey to respect the human rights commitment it has undertaken in the OSCE as well as in other relevant organizations such as the Council of Europe .
I would like to know why the Council did not regard it as a valid mechanism .
In other words , why the Council was not of the view that a delegation should be sent to Turkey when it is nevertheless clear that Turkey is failing to recognize human rights , and when the diseases are becoming worse and worse in Turkey .
I believe the report asks its own significant question .
What is the justification for the view that one need not do anything ?
As I said in reply to the honourable Member , in practice it is vital for the success of these missions that the state which they intend to visit should cooperate .
The OSCE has substantially developed since the Moscow mechanism was agreed in 1991 .
The organization now has a permanent Council which meets on a weekly basis and which now provides the opportunity for all OSCE issues to be addressed .
The OSCE parliamentary assembly has also addressed the question of developments in human rights and sent a delegation to Turkey .
So the Moscow mechanism is not an exclusive one and , on balance , it would appear that sending such a delegation without the cooperation of the recipient state would not be advantageous on this occasion .
But it is a matter where circumstances may change .
There are other ways of trying to influence the situation and the Council is doing everything in its power to use those avenues .
Mr President , unfortunately the answer is incomplete .
The Council 's representative repeats that this is implemented by the classical and known methods .
So far , those methods have proved inadequate .
The question is why the Council is unwilling to apply this special Moscow mechanism procedure , since all else has failed .
And I insist , Mr President , because this evening I had a telegram from Ankara , from the human rights organizations saying that , firstly , there are 150 hunger-strikers in prisons who are in danger of dying , 15 of whom have already been transferred to hospitals and are on their death-beds while the death of others is imminent , and secondly , those organizations are trying to see the Turkish prosecution authorities , to see the detainees and to find a compromise to the conditions so that the hunger-strike can be ended .
In view of that situation , Mr Mitchell , why is the Council not hastening to apply this special Moscow mechanism ?
It is not by chance that the mechanism was established .
The special mechanism was agreed precisely for cases when other mechanisms prove insufficient .
So why are you stubbornly refusing to make use of it ?
May I point out that the Moscow mechanism is not for the Council to use , it is for the OSCE to use .
I am answering questions here as President-in-Office of the European Union Council of Ministers .
Can I say that the European Union recognizes the need for further improvements and progress in the implementation of human rights and democratic freedoms in Turkey .
We have continued to make it clear to the Turkish authorities that observance of the rule of law and basic liberties is the basis of continued rapprochement between the European Union and Turkey .
We note the assurances given by the Turkish authorities that they intend to pursue the process of constitutional and legislative reform , and we are continuing to press them to go down that road .
The President-in-Office of the Council has had three meetings with the Deputy Prime Minister , Mrs Çiller , to stress the importance we attach to early progress in the adoption and implementation of the further reforms necessary to ensure respect for human rights and we will continue to pursue the issue in contacts with Turkey .
The Commission has supported Turkish NGOs and professional organizations promoting human rights for a number of years , including the Human Rights Association , the Human Rights Foundation and the Turkish Medical Association .
The Commission will continue to cooperate and grant aid for various projects aimed at promoting human rights in Turkey .
The report of Amnesty International clearly raises many human rights issues which remain of serious concern to the Council .
We have made clear our view that further reforms are necessary in such areas as human rights , freedom of expression and democratic freedoms and we will continue to do so .
Lastly , the Council would support any initiative aimed at investigating allegations of human rights violations and the question of persons reported to have disappeared .
This can only contribute to a greater openness in dealing with human rights issues .
Speaking personally , I would like to see a full , thorough and impartial investigation into the state of those who have disappeared in Turkey , but the question was in relation to the Moscow mechanism and , for the reasons given , I think the views and replies given should stand .
Mr President , this is not the first time that the question of human rights and Turkey has come up for discussion .
It came up as recently as yesterday , when more or less the same question was put to the Commission .
It came up a month ago , and two months ago .
I was among those who , barely a year ago , in December 1995 , voted against the customs union .
There were those who voted in favour .
Several of my colleagues have regretted that they voted in favour .
My question is : If we do not wish to accept the Moscow mechanism now , about which this matter deals , what are we prepared to do over and above what the Council refers to , i.e. " to keep an eye on the situation ' ?
If one party does not keep to an agreement , is it not natural for the other party to cancel the agreement , since the agreement concerns mutual obligations ?
I have already outlined at great length the moves which the Council is taking in this regard .
The President-in-Office , Mr Spring , has met with Mrs Ciller on three occasions in the recent past .
We have only been in office five months !
That is a very clear indication of how seriously Mr Spring and the Irish presidency take the concerns of the European Parliament , and we will continue to do so .
Any reading of the record will show that the strength of my reply here today indicates that we are at one with Parliament .
But I am not for adopting cosmetic exercises .
If we believe an exercise will work , we will pursue that exercise .
But , in the view of the Council at this moment in time , for the reasons I have stated , we do not see a role for the Council in triggering the Moscow mechanism .
Question No 4 by Birgitta Ahlqvist ( H-0859 / 96 )
Subject : Recent events in Belarus
President Lukashenko of Belarus has sought to extend his constitutional powers , dissolve the present Parliament and introduce authoritarian presidential rule .
He has announced a referendum on his proposal to be held on 7 November .
The Belarus parliament has responded by calling a rival referendum on 24 November .
The President of Russia has put heavy pressure on President Lukashenko to seek a compromise with his parliament on the country 's new constitution , but he has altered only one detail in his proposal .
Has the Council exerted any pressure on the President of Belarus to abandon his attempts to shut out his country 's parliament ?
Has the Council discussed the extent to which the European Union should collectively protest against this attempt to introduce authoritarian presidential rule , which is completely out of place in Europe in 1996 ?
The Council shares the concerns expressed by the honourable Member regarding the political situation in Belarus and has made these concerns known to the Belarussian authorities .
The matter was discussed by EU Foreign Ministers at the special European Council in Dublin on 5 October where it was agreed that the Union 's concerns about recent negative developments should be made known to the Belarussian authorities .
These concerns were conveyed in a démarche made by the EU ambassadors in Minsk on 14 October .
In addition , it was decided , together with the associated Central and Eastern European countries and Cyprus and Malta , to reiterate these concerns in a declaration made on 18 October last .
This declaration expressed the Union 's concern and called on all parties to reach a solution which fully respected the prerogative of Parliament and the constitutional court and democratic principles .
The importance of freedom of the media and of public assembly were particularly emphasized , as well as the EU 's wish to see Belarus play a full part in Europe , in cooperation with European institutions .
The Council notes that a ruling of the Belarussian constitutional court on 4 November last made clear that only parliament could make a definitive decision on changes to the constitution .
As the Council is given to understand , the proposed national referendum may proceed on 24 November but with the alternative proposals to amend the constitution put only to a consultative , not binding , vote .
The European Union is continuing to monitor the situation with a view to any further appropriate action .
I would like to thank the Council for the answer .
None of our actions has thus far influenced the President of Belarus .
Information and diplomacy used to be a good form of action in such a situation , but do not appear to help where Belarus is concerned .
Has the Council discussed other ways of getting the Belarussian President to be less authoritarian in his presidential control ?
Has any discussion been held about breaking the TACIS co-operation ?
Something has got to happen - we cannot simply adopt a wait and see attitude .
I think that the Council should have made clear its dissatisfaction earlier .
In expressing our displeasure , we have to be careful not to punish any further the suffering people of Belarus .
I do not think that taking these steps which have been proposed in relation to TACIS would necessarily have the effect the honourable Member suggested .
As I stated in my reply we are continuing to monitor the situation .
The Council will be following developments closely with a view to taking further action if such action is considered appropriate .
Obviously any such action will be a matter for discussion and agreement in the Council but I assure the Member we will keep the situation under close review .
As the author is not present , Question No 5 lapses .
Question No 6 by Jan Andersson ( H-0868 / 96 )
Subject : Combating the harmful effects of alcohol
Alcohol lies at the root of many of society 's problems , and its social costs are high .
In spite of this , it is considered by some to be a purely agricultural matter .
It should , in my view , be regarded instead as a health-related matter .
What steps will the Irish presidency take to highlight alcohol 's harmful effects on health ?
There are no specific proposals relating to combating the ill effects of alcohol before Council at the present .
However , the honourable Member will be aware that on 29 March last the European Parliament , in co-decision with the Council , adopted a decision relating to the implementation of a common action programme 1996-2000 of promotion , information , education and training in health matters within the framework of action in the public health domain .
This programme aims to promote awareness of risk factors and aspects conducive to health and encourage the adoption of lifestyles beneficial to health .
The programme envisages a number of specific prevention and health promotion measures , which include promotion of the study , evaluation and exchange of experience concerning alcohol abuse and its health and social consequences , and supports actions related to these .
This programme is implemented by the Commission in close cooperation with the Member States and institutions and organizations active in health promotion , with the assistance of a special advisory committee .
I would like to thank the Council for the answer .
There are many different traditions with regard to alcohol policy .
The reason for my question is that I have found that in many countries in Europe , alcohol is dealt with primarily as a matter for the internal market , just like any other goods .
The damaging effects of alcohol are well supported by research .
It gives rise to many illnesses and it is abundantly clear that too much alcohol represents a health risk .
In a number of countries , for example , my own country Sweden , attempts have been made to limit the injurious effects by restricting accessibility .
This has been achieved via high tax pressure , by preventing young people from using alcohol and by means of strict import controls .
I would like to ask a question about import controls .
Is it not possible for certain countries to retain stricter import controls via the derogation in Article 36 which refers to derogations to the internal market where people & # x02BC ; s health is concerned ?
What is the Council & # x02BC ; s view on this ?
In relation to the latter part of the honourable Member 's question , if he puts down a separate question I will try to deal with it .
I am afraid I do not have the information to hand .
One of the things which surprised me in preparing this reply to the honourable Member 's question was that we were not able in the short time available to determine or even make an accurate estimate which I could give to the House of the number of alcoholics within the European Union .
I think if we are to tackle the problem , the first thing we should do is determine the extent of the problem , so I do believe much work remains to be done .
The presidency agrees with the honourable Member that this is an important issue .
We are conscious of the damage inflicted on our society by alcohol abuse and the social costs that this entails .
In my own country , the government launched in September a national alcohol policy based on a multi-sectoral approach which marshals a wide range of statutory and non-statutory organizations to work together to reduce the prevalence of alcoholrelated problems in Irish society by emphasizing moderation in alcohol consumption .
The national alcohol policy will discourage under-age and excessive drinking through promotion of alcoholism-awareness and encouragement of participation in alternative activities .
National authorities will encourage the widening of treatment programmes .
This follows Ireland 's endorsement of the European Charter on alcohol of the World Health Organization 's Paris conference last December .
The presidency will look favourably on all proposals for Community-level action which will give greater added-value to what is being done at national level , but there are no proposals other than those I have mentioned which I am aware of at present .
Question No 7 by Hans Lindqvist ( H-0871 / 96 )
Subject : Swedish policy on alcohol
Sweden has operated a very restrictive policy on alcohol with high rates of duty on alcoholic beverages , controls on the sale of alcohol and strict rules on imports of alcohol , instruments which form the basis of the social and health-oriented perspective which it believes has had a restraining effect on Swedish consumption of alcoholic beverages .
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries excessive alcohol consumption was widespread in Sweden .
The Swedish model for policy on alcohol went a long way to reducing the widespread alcohol abuse .
The high levels of duty levied on alcoholic beverages in Sweden now pay for much of the very high cost of providing medical care for people suffering from alcohol-related disorders .
In order to be able to maintain this model , Sweden must be allowed a permanent derogation as regards restrictions on imports of alcoholic beverages from other EU Member States .
Will it be possible for Sweden to keep its current derogations in place indefinitely ?
Sweden 's Treaty of Accession to the European Union envisaged that Sweden could maintain , for a transitional period , quantitative restrictions on the importation of cigarettes and other tobacco products , spirits , wines and beers from other Member States under the conditions set out in Article 26 of Directive 92 / 12 / EEC .
The article applies ' without prejudice to Article 8 until 31 December 1996 and subject to a review mechanism similar to that laid down in Article 28 ( 2 ) of Directive 77 / 388 / EEC , which concerns the common VAT regime . '
The presidency 's understanding is that explicit monitoring of the VAT regime would be preferable for Sweden .
However , in the absence of a Commission proposal to modify these provisions , the Council cannot comment on the honourable Member 's question .
The restrictive Nordic alcohol policy is based upon high taxation , controlled sales and strict import controls , as Jan Andersson has just said .
It has been successful , and it has been motivated by considerations of public health .
It has had a restrictive effect upon consumption , and it has kept alcohol abuse down .
It also finances the investments in the health care sector which are necessary as a result of damage caused by alcohol .
We wish to retain the alcohol policy as a permanent derogation .
I would like to ask what reasons there are why a country which wishes to retain its alcohol policy for health reasons , should not be allowed to do so .
We are in a Union which has an internal market .
Some Members negotiated a derogation .
The presidency completely understands the reasons underlying the honourable Member 's question , but that derogation will run out at the end of December next .
I would like to draw the honourable Member 's attention to the fact that in adopting by codecision a Community programme of action for promotion , information , education and training in the area of public health , the European Parliament and the Council have given particular attention to the problems linked to alcohol abuse and to its health and social consequences .
I understand that a number of options are being considered , including the possibility of extending the derogation into early next century , but the Member might pursue that directly with the Commission .
I also understand that if there is a further temporary derogation it will be just that , a further temporary derogation .
I come back again to my previous question , since it is correct as the President says , that this concerns the internal market and derogations .
But why should there just be an temporary derogation ?
There is Article 36 which , for example , deals with health aspects .
If this Article is applied with regard to alcohol , should not the alcohol policy be able to constitute a permanent derogation , since alcohol demonstrably damages people & # x02BC ; s lives .
Why is that not possible , in the Council & # x02BC ; s view ?
Going back to the previous question , it was based on the other article , which relates to agricultural products .
If the Member puts down a question in relation to this particular article I will attempt to answer it .
It is a separate question .
Mr President , in this debate it is the Swedish membership treaty with the European Union which is important .
When the agreement was presented in Sweden in connection with the debate before the referendum , it was said that a unanimous decision by the Council of Ministers was needed in order for these importation restrictions to be altered , and that Sweden could thereby block new rules .
Does the Council of Ministers share the view that it is this decision process which is applicable ?
I can only reply that the article states ' without prejudice to Article 8 until 31 December 1996 and subject to a review mechanism similar to that laid down in Article 28 ( 2 ) of Directive 77 / 388 / EC , which concerns the VAT regime ' .
This remains the situation .
I do understand that a number of representations have been made and that the Commission is considering a temporary extension of this derogation into early next century , but the honourable Member would obtain much more information on the likelihood of that if he put down a question to the Commission .
Question No 8 by Miguel Arias Cañete ( H-0873 / 96 )
Subject : Design of spare parts for cars
Is the Council aware that , in countries in which there is no monopoly on the design of parts , the prices of spare parts for cars are lower than in countries in which such a monopoly is imposed by law ?
Is this a criterion to be taken into account by the Council when it establishes its position regarding the proposed directive on the legal protection of designs ?
It is no secret that the question of design protection for component parts of complex products , such as spare parts for cars , is one of the most controversial issues raised by the proposal for a directive on the legal protection of designs .
The Council hopes to be able to adopt a common position on this proposal in the near future .
In the meantime , the honourable parliamentarian will appreciate that , while the Council is fully aware of the questions at issue , it cannot say anything at this stage which might prejudge its common position .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his reply , an extremely diplomatic reply which does nothing to clarify the situation .
In October 1995 , this House approved , at the first reading , the amending clause which proposed an examination of the components industry 's paying a reasonable price to manufacturers for the right to use the design for spare parts from the time a new model first goes on sale .
Commissioner Monti pointed to the Commission 's intention to follow the line indicated by Parliament , upholding and supporting the amending clause .
Mr Mitchell is merely stating that the Council intends to solve this problem at some future date , but gives us no indication of whether Ireland intends to make any proposal regarding support for Parliament 's and the Commission 's opinion , or whether , on the other hand , it intends to defend alternatives which are more favourable to car manufacturers and those with title to the designs .
We would therefore welcome any further clarification on the part of the Irish presidency as to what position it intends to take : Does it intend to support the opinion of Parliament and the Commission or , on the other hand , champion alternative positions which are much less favourable to consumers ?
The question at issue is whether , and if so under what conditions , a derogation may be made from the normal rules governing design protection , that is exclusive rights , to enable third parties to use spare parts without the authorization of the right-holder for the purpose of repairing complex products , such as motor vehicles .
I did not realize until I took up this brief just how complex motor vehicles can be .
The Commission 's original proposal provided for a derogation whereby the design right could no longer be invoked against such use after a period of three years .
The normal term of design protection under the directive is 25 years .
The Commission considered that for costly , long-lasting , complex products , such as motor vehicles , protection of the design relating to individual parts could exclude or limit competition , creating a captive market in spare parts in the absence of an appropriate derogation .
The honourable Member will appreciate that ongoing discussions are taking place aimed at achieving a common position .
Thus , it would be unhelpful for me at this stage to elaborate further .
However , as I pointed out , it is hoped that the Council will soon be in a position to reach such a common position .
Thank you , President-in-Office , for that supplementary reply .
Like you , I have discovered just how controversial this matter is .
I understand the sensitivity of it but I am sure you are aware of the mounting concern which this directive is causing in the UK and elsewhere and which has , in fact , been stoked by very critical media and television articles .
During the past couple of months I and my colleagues have received the very strongest possible representations from small businesses in the car-part retail sector , owners of older vehicles - where part replacement is already difficult - and from major consumer organizations , all of which support Parliament 's revised position against the original proposal .
So , could you ensure that unreasonable pressure from manufacturers does not distort positions to be taken at the internal market Council on 25 November ?
Will you pay particular attention to the nature and level of any proposed royalty payment which is being put forward which , if adopted , must be kept to a minimum rate with minimum bureaucracy ?
I will ensure that the honourable Member 's views are taken into account .
I understand the meeting of the internal market is on 26 November and it is hoped to adopt a common position at that Council meeting on that date .
I understand that the Council may feel that it has gone as far as it can in terms of comments tonight , so I will not press any further on that point .
Perhaps he would make a personal comment about the operation of Directive No 1475 that has already been passed .
It has now been on the statute book for over a year and my understanding is that there are still companies who are just refusing to comply with that directive .
BMW , I am told by a small firm in my constituency - Whitford Motor Industry Services - just give a blunt no ; their dealers give a blunt no when asked for technical manuals - even by the owners of those cars .
If that is the experience of a directive already passed into European law , can the President-in-Office please ensure that the interests of the consumers and of small businesses come first when you deliberate on this subject ?
If a Member State does not apply European Union law , it is a matter for the Commission to pursue that matter .
In relation to the issue at hand I thank the honourable Member for his understanding .
I do not want to say or do anything which might upset negotiations which are at a delicate stage and where the Council will endeavour to take a common position within two weeks .
But I will ensure that the concerns raised here today are brought to the attention of the President-in-Office of the Council .
Question No 9 by Sören Wibe ( H-0875 / 96 )
Subject : Local elections in Albania
The OSCE ( Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe ) decided not to send anyone to observe the local elections in Albania in October as it could not send the number of observers it wished to .
Earlier this year , it condemned the general election in Albania as its international team of observers considered that the ruling party had systematically committed electoral irregularities .
What are the Council 's relations with Albania like now ?
Did it monitor the local elections there at close quarters ?
The Council regrets that the parliamentary assembly of the OSCE and the ODIHR did not participate in the observation of the local elections in Albania .
The Council had made clear to the Albanian Government the strong view of the European Union and the ODIHR that the latter should participate in the monitoring of the elections .
We also urged the Albanian Government to take all measures necessary to ensure that the elections were held in a free and fair manner under procedures and conduct that meet acceptable international standards for the democratic process .
The Council has noted that over 300 international observers monitored the elections , including observers from several Member States of the European Union .
We have also noted that the Council of Europe which coordinated the international monitoring operation has said that it is generally satisfied that the elections were held in a free and fair manner despite isolated irregularities in certain districts .
While we welcome this initial assessment as a positive step in the right direction , the Council will consider further the final reports on the conduct of the elections from the international monitors , when they are available , before arriving at a conclusion on the acceptability of the elections and their outcome .
The Albanian Government has assured the European Union of its wish to make progress in the area of democratic and constitutional reform .
The Council continues to urge the Albanian Government to give early and practical effect to these assurances and to expedite implementation of reform measures .
I am grateful for the answer .
It is quite right , as the Council 's representative says , that these local elections were conducted for the most part correctly .
But we are still concerned about a government which bases its power on a blatant electoral fraud in ordinary parliamentary elections .
My view is that we should put constant pressure on this government on behalf of the Union .
The obvious question to the Council is : Are you making such demands upon the government in Albania , for example demands for new elections ?
Are you threatening , planning or considering , for example , any kind of economic sanctions against the government because of its refusal to undertake proper new parliamentary elections ?
We must always recall that economic sanctions are not against the government , they are against the people and it is the people of Albania who will suffer if there are economic sanctions .
Anyone who has any knowledge of Albania will know that the people of that country are suffering very much already .
The Council wishes to maintain and deepen relations with Albania .
We acknowledge the progress which has been made to date by Albania in reforming its economy and in seeking to move towards a multi-party democracy .
We consider it appropriate that this progress be encouraged further and assisted through closer contractual relations with the European Union .
The Union first established contractual links with Albania in 1992 and in due course the Commission will submit a draft mandate to the Council for negotiations with Albania regarding a new bilateral agreement .
This presents us with certain opportunities to pursue the line suggested by the honourable Member .
We wish Albania to understand clearly that the European Union will only be able to continue to develop its political and economic relations with Albania if progress on the introduction of democratic reforms continue to be made .
Mr President , I should like to ask whether it is not the case that the elections in Albania actually confirm the results of the national elections .
After all , the result of the municipal elections was the same as the result of the national elections , and the municipal elections were generally regarded as fair , so to that extent they confirm the national elections .
So I would like to ask you whether Albania does not differ from neighbouring states in this respect .
For example , consider events in Kosovo .
At the latest elections there , no progress was made .
I should be interested to know the Council 's view on this .
I must also ask whether it would not make sense to expand economic relations with Albania instead of cutting them back , as a way of giving further impetus to the process of reform in that country .
The honourable Member will understand from my previous answers that the European Union , and certainly the Council of Ministers , sees possibilities for developing relations with Albania and influencing it in that way .
In relation to the election results , as I have already said , we welcome the initial assessment but we will consider the final reports on the conduct of the elections from the international monitors before we make up our minds on the fairness or otherwise of the elections .
As the author is not present , Question No 10 lapses .
Question No 11 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0876 / 96 )
Subject : Women 's rights and the Intergovernmental Conference
In view of the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference and in relation to the work carried out and the proposals put forward by the Irish presidency , can the latter state in specific terms the contribution it has made to protecting women 's rights and to ensuring comparability , socio-political incorporation and equal treatment for women ?
In reply to the honourable Member 's question , I would like to emphasize that I am here as President-in-Office of the Council and that under Article N of the Treaty on European Union the Council is not party to the Intergovernmental Conference responsible for amending the Treaties .
The honourable Member will understand that it is for the Intergovernmental Conference alone to consider any possible amendment to the Treaty in respect of the areas referred to in her question .
However , speaking in a personal capacity , I would like to tell the House that the presidency 's suggested approach , which was the basis for discussion at the Intergovernmental Conference representative meeting of 15 and 16 October , was that the principle of non-discrimination should be strengthened by supplementing the Treaty with a general provision on non-discrimination on grounds such as race , sex , disability and age .
The presidency has also suggested the inclusion in the Treaty of a provision which would allow the Council to take the necessary measures to prohibit discrimination on such grounds .
As the presidency , we have also suggested that over and above this possible approach to non-discrimination , consideration should also be given to strengthening the principle of equality between men and women by including a general provision that this objective shall be taken into account in all Community policies and by strengthening Article 119 of the Treaty in a number of ways , such as broadening its scope and specifically allowing for positive action where appropriate .
We have also suggested the introduction of gender-neutral language into the Treaty .
Thank you for this reply , Mr Mitchell .
Am I to assume , therefore , that the text to be published by the Irish presidency on 27 November will record the position you have outlined ?
Could you be more specific as to whether this relates to the Treaty ?
My understanding is that it does .
Also , could you tell me whether you will accept or there will be any mention of , as seems only right to me , an equal role in decision-making ?
Mr Mitchell , I feel that the Irish presidency , which is to publish a text relating to the Treaty on the 27th , ought to include this position in the text of the Treaty because you will already be aware that , in this connection , experience has taught us to be cautious if not distrustful .
We are accustomed to seeing the show put on by every institution and political leader whereby , in their statements , they agree to everything but fail to follow this through in practice .
In my question , I asked for a specific answer .
Please tell me whether the text of the Treaty will include this text you have personally referred to .
I find it a little bit difficult when the Council goes out on its own on a personal statement and makes such a courageous statement , as I have done here today in relation to equality which I could not do on behalf of the Council , that it is not received with greater grace .
Secondly , I just want to put on record that there is no commitment to publish anything on 27 November .
Thirdly , in relation to the honourable Member 's question , I was speaking about draft Treaty texts .
So far as the presidency is concerned , we will pursue this in every way we can , but I would remind the House that there are 15 Member States .
We have produced draft Treaty texts which include the objectives which I have illustrated speaking on my own behalf in reply to the Member 's question .
Question No 12 by Glyn Ford ( H-0879 / 96 )
Subject : European extradition arrangements
What plans has the Council to bring forward proposals on extradition so that those UK citizens convicted of serious crimes such as murder , robbery or fraud who have escaped to live in other EU countries and continue to enjoy their freedom can be brought back to the UK to serve their sentences ?
The principal instrument which governs extradition arrangements between European Union Member States is the 1957 European Convention on Extradition .
This Convention , which has been ratified by fourteen Member States , constitutes an important framework for facilitating extradition between the signatory states .
Its provisions deal with offences which carry a prison sentence of at least one year and therefore serious offences such as murder , robbery or fraud would normally be expected to come within the application of the convention .
Moreover , the Council has recently adopted a new extradition convention .
When ratified by the Member States , this convention will further facilitate extradition arrangements between Member States of the European Union .
Thank you for the statement .
This is a matter of grave concern , not only in the United Kingdom , but elsewhere .
It is not only a matter that affects Cindy from Eastenders , it is also a matter that affects people like Robert Hamilton , who is currently in France , originally from Sheffield , who was convicted of murder in 1972 , escaped from Sudbury prison in 1984 and has spent the last 12 years moving around Europe constantly evading demands for extradition .
It seems to me that while people can literally get away with murder by fleeing elsewhere in the European Union , our current arrangements are less than fully adequate .
I am satisfied that the 1957 European Convention as supplemented by the new EU convention relating to extradition provides a very good framework for extradition arrangements between Member States in relation to serious offences .
It would not be appropriate for me to comment on the application of the arrangements in any particular case or cases , or by any individual Member State .
I can , however , confirm that the United Kingdom is one of the fourteen Member States to have ratified the 1957 European Convention and it is a signatory to the recently adopted EU convention relating to extradition .
I thank the honourable Member , Mr Cushnahan .
In relation to the first part of his question , the country that has not signed is Belgium .
In relation to the remainder of his question , each presidency would probably look back at particular issues it was particularly successful in advancing .
I am confident that by the end of the Irish presidency , in six weeks ' time or so , we will have made significant progress in the whole justice and home affairs area .
I think there has been a will on the part of Ministers and , more than that , a will on the part of the Heads of State and Government to make real progress .
I think by the time of the Dublin European Council we will see real progress .
I had a discussion over lunch today with the Commission and the President of Parliament .
This was one of the issues which came up .
I think there is general agreement that significant progress has been made .
I had better clarify the first part of my answer .
Belgium has signed , but has not ratified the Treaty .
Question No 13 by Alex Smith ( H-0880 / 96 )
Subject : Dounreay nuclear reprocessing plant cover-up
Reports of a cover-up of radiological contamination at the Dounreay nuclear power research fast reactor and reprocessing plant in Scotland , dating back over 30 years , became public in October 1996 .
Is the Council prepared to press the Commission and the United Kingdom Government to commit themselves to an immediate environmental audit - under Articles 35-37 of the Euratom Treaty - of Dounreay and other UK reprocessing plants and report the results to this Parliament ?
I would like first to emphasize that the Council attaches great importance to the health and safety of workers and the general public with regard to the dangers arising from ionizing radiation and , more generally , to any risk of radioactive contamination .
In this context , attention is drawn to the provisions of Chapter 3 of the Euratom Treaty and the consequent Community legislation .
In particular , it should be stressed that the recently adopted Council Directive 96 / 29 / Euratom of 13 May 1996 , laying down the basic safety standards for the protection of the health of workers and the general public against the dangers arising from ionizing radiation , has greatly reinforced the level of protection .
However , as regards the implementation of the provisions of Articles 35 and 37 of the Euratom Treaty , the Council would recall to the honourable Member that it comes within the Commission 's competences .
I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his reply .
I am aware that it comes within the competence of the Commission but let me tell you my misgivings about this , because it is a strange business .
In May 1993 , experts appointed by the Commission visited Dounreay and gave it a clean bill of health .
There are only two possible explanations as to why it was given a clean bill of health : one is that they were not given the appropriate and adequate information on which to form a judgment or , secondly , they were given the information but failed to act upon it .
I would like to ask the President-in-Office if he will investigate this situation in the light of the subsequent events which indicate a possible cover-up .
Will he investigate and establish which one of the two possible explanations is the true one ?
I will undertake to raise with the Commission the comments made by the honourable Member .
I might say that if there is any question of any need for safety measures then I have no difficulty with supporting the proposal for an environmental audit which the honourable Member outlines .
The Irish Government has used and continues to use every opportunity at all appropriate international fora , and in particular at the European Union and the IAEA levels and the Paris commission , as well as through direct representations to the United Kingdom Government , to highlight its concerns about such installations , in particular Sellafield ( Thorp ) , and I can see that the question raised by the honourable Member is one which is of concern to a large number of citizens of the Union .
In particular in relation to the installation he mentions , I will bring his comments to the attention of the Commission and ask if it sees grounds for taking any action .
I thank the President-in-Office for his full reply to my colleague Mr Smith 's question .
When he is raising the matter with the Commission could he perhaps consult the BBC Scotland programme ' Frontline Scotland ' , which highlighted an amazing cover-up of an incident which occurred some twenty-five to thirty years ago , at which time the then director of the Dounreay installation apparently withheld information not only from the British Government but also from the Commission and the Community inspectorate .
I would also suggest to him that this is not an attack on the nuclear installation programme , it is a question of health and safety which , as he quite rightly pointed out , is uppermost in the minds of the Council and of Members of this Parliament .
That means the health and safety not only of the workers but of the wider community .
So before he sees the Commission I would ask him to look at the programme called ' Frontline Scotland ' , which lasts about twenty minutes , and he can see for himself the horrendous exposé of the Dounreay health and safety inspectorate at that time and the cover-up which ensued .
Speaking on behalf of the presidency , we are aware that the health and safety provisions of Euratom are not sufficient for today 's world .
However , the Council is not part of the Intergovernmental Conference .
Whereas individual Members States may raise this issue , any Treaty changes would require unanimity .
I have a certain sympathy , which even borders on prejudice , so I had better be very careful not to go down the road too much in relation to the question raised by the Member .
Question No 14 by Veronica Hardstaff ( H-0883 / 96 )
Subject : Foreign lecturers in Italy
Is the Council aware that , despite Parliament Resolution B4-0968 / 95 , calling on the Commission ' to ensure that the authorities in Verona do not take unjustified and threatening measures against the teachers in response to their industrial action ' , not only has harassment of these foreign lecturers continued in Verona , but similar harassment is taking place in the Istituto Universitario Orientale , Naples ?
Will the Council act to remind all Member States of their obligations to comply with agreed employment practices for employees from other Member States , as agreed in Article 48 ( 2 ) of the Treaty ?

In response to the honourable Member 's question , I should like to underline that in accordance with Article 126 of the Treaty the Community shall contribute to the development of quality education by encouraging cooperation between Member States and , if necessary , by supporting and supplementing their action while fully respecting the responsibility of the Member States for the content of teaching and the organization of education systems and their cultural and linguistic diversity .
As a result , the organization of education in the Member States is a matter for the competent national authorities .
Under these circumstances the Council has no competence in the matter raised by the honourable Member .
However , the matter so far as it implies a Community responsibility falls within the competence of the Commission .
The task of monitoring implementation of the provisions of the Treaty is a matter for the Commission .
The Commission can provide the honourable Member with a reliable and up-to-date reply and I recommend that this question be addressed to the Commission .
Speaking on behalf of the presidency , I would add that I am aware of concerns in a number of Member States about this issue .
In the interests of fairness and justice I believe that this practice should end and that the spirit as well as the letter of the law should prevail .
Every influence that the European institutions can use should be used to ensure a fairer approach .
I put this question down to the Council because it is a Member State Government that is failing to ensure good employment practice in major public institutions , namely universities and centres of higher education .
Despite a resolution passed by this House on 25 September 1995 , on 5 December 1995 contracts of non-Italian foreign language teachers at Naples expired , amongst them one of my constituents .
For 1996 they were offered a cut of 30 % in their salaries in exchange for an increase of 240 teaching hours .
This is shortchanging not only the teachers themselves but also their students who cannot possibly be taught properly in the much larger classes and the reduced time available .
Highly-qualified professional university teachers - not foreign language assistants - are consistently being treated in Italy as unqualified temporary staff and I would ask again that the Council put moral pressure on Italian colleagues to ensure that this disgraceful state of affairs is rectified and that those teachers dismissed for protesting should be reinstated forthwith .
I am aware of the difficulties , as I said , being expressed by these lecturers , some of whom are from my own country , who have made representations to the Minister for Foreign Affairs , the Minister for Education and myself .
I shall be contacting the Commissioner responsible with a view to obtaining further information on this matter .
I wish to assure the honourable Member that I shall use any opportunity I have to raise this issue .
Question No 15 by Staffan Burenstam Linder ( H-0886 / 96 )
Subject : WTO ministerial meeting in Singapore
The WTO is intended to supervise the liberalization of world trade and work for the continuing removal of barriers to trade .
With the approach of the ministerial meeting in Singapore , there have been calls for ' social clauses ' to impose comprehensive social commitments on the poorer countries if they are to enjoy the liberalization of trade .
The developing countries inevitably have lower standards of social protection precisely because they are poor .
Is the Council aware that these social clauses will therefore act as purely protectionist devices and that barriers to trade make it harder for poorer countries to attain reasonable wage levels and social protection ?
Is the Council aware that social clauses introduce a considerable discretionary element into trade policy and will therefore give rise to international disputes ?
As part of preparations for the World Trade Organization ministerial conference in Singapore , the Council has proceeded to examine the question of the promotion of internationally recognized core labour standards in the context of the multilateral trading system on the basis of a communication by the Commission .
Such universal core labour standards include , in particular , the abolition of forced labour and slavery , the elimination of child labour and the freedom to organize .
In this respect , the Council has stressed that in addressing this issue the WTO ministerial conference should make clear that it rejects all attempts to undermine the competitive advantage enjoyed by developing countries in the matter of wage rates .
The conference should also stress the importance of positive measures to assist developing countries develop their institutional capacity to monitor compliance with core labour standards .
I would like to thank the Council for the answer to the question .
It is important , by means of a dialogue , to achieve changes to what we regard as unacceptable conditions in other countries .
But the content of what is meant by social clauses goes much further than what the Council & # x02BC ; s representative has interpreted as " core labour standards ' .
Intervening in trade policy to bring about changes in what can be broadly defined as social clauses is , in my view , the wrong way to go , for the same reason given by the Council representative in his answer on Albania , namely that " sanctions are against people . '
It is also possible to illustrate the problem in an other way : in Europe we may ourselves experience problems if certain other countries maintain that the high level of unemployment is socially unacceptable and by means of trade barriers attempt to bring about changes in European policy .
What position should the Council adopt to such an argument ?
A second question is : should we countenance European countries happily improving their employment situation by exporting , for example , aircraft to a country in East Asia from which imports are restricted by means of social clauses ?
I suppose we could all think of hypothetical situations to illustrate the difficulties posed by the level of unemployment in the Union .
But much of the reason for high unemployment relates to other matters , not just World Trade Organization matters .
In many countries , for example , there are payroll taxes which contribute to the level of unemployment .
On 29 October the General Affairs Council agreed that the basis of the EU approach on the subject at the Singapore conference would be the following : ' The EU considers that the Singapore conference should address the following issues : the role of trade liberalization in increasing living standards worldwide and , in this context , the importance that World Trade Organization members attach to the efforts of the ILO to promote the better definition and universal observance of core labour standards .
The conference should make clear that it rejects all attempts to undermine the competitive advantage enjoyed by developing countries in the matter of wage rates .
It should also underline the importance of positive measures to assist developing countries to develop their institutional capacity to monitor compliance with core labour standards and to increase the educational opportunities available to children . '
That was what the General Affairs Council on 29 October agreed as the basis of the European Union approach on the subject of the Singapore conference .
I think it is fair , balanced and comprehensive .
Questions Nos 16 , 17 , 18 have been withdrawn by the authors and as the author is not present , Question No 19 lapses .

Question No 20 by Clive Needle ( H-0899 / 96 )
Subject : Trade conditions between the EU and Burma
Why has the General Affairs Council decided not to remove favourable trading conditions between the EU and Burma despite the human rights abuses carried out by the government there ?
An investigation of forced labour practices in Burma in the context of the European Union 's Generalized System of Preferences has been under way since January of this year .
The investigation was initiated after a complaint lodged by the European Trade Union Conference and the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions .
This investigation is being carried out by the Commission and the matter has not yet been referred to the General Affairs Council .
Under the terms of Regulation 3281 / 94 the investigation must continue for at least one year .
The Commission has received submissions on the case and hearings have been held .
The report on the investigation is expected early in 1997 .
The Council of Ministers can be expected to take an early decision on any recommendations contained in the Commission report with regard to the continued application of the benefits of the GSP to Burma .
Thank you President-in-Office .
I just wish to say that had I been able to speak to your last comments , I would have very much welcomed them - they were very good indeed and I was delighted to hear that .
I am not quite so happy about the answer which I have just heard , although I understand that we are moving in the right direction .
I understand that this week the military junta in Rangoon has actually turned down the European Union 's proposed mission there on the grounds that there is no forced labour there .
I should like to say to the Council that I did not wait for an official mission - neither did my colleague , Mrs Kinnock - I actually went to Burma a couple of weeks ago on a tourist visa , under cover , and I saw forced-labour gangs working on the roads there .
The threat to Aung San Suu Kyi , which we heard about today , is just part of the repression from the government there .
We also saw evidence of severe deprivation .
Frankly , companies in the European Union , such as Total , have blood on their hands because they are supporting this repressive regime .
I understand the requirements of the European regulations but I make a plea that Council considers the earliest possible action and communicates its severe anger not only to the authorities in Rangoon but to the European companies which are supporting them .
I want to assure the honourable Member that the presidency will do everything it can to advance the sympathies expressed in his question .
I did meet with his colleague , Mrs Kinnock , earlier today and she gave me an up-to-date report on her visit there and I am also making a note of the comments he has made from his visit there .
The honourable Member will be aware that the common position reaffirms a number of measures already adopted against Burma , and I could read these out if the honourable Member wishes to see them , but I feel he will be aware of them .
I wish to assure him that the common Council position , adopted on 28 October , makes provision for further restrictive measures against Burma to be considered and in this context the presidency will continue to monitor developments , including the implementation of the common position , and report regularly to the Council on this matter .
I am a little alarmed at some of the reports I have heard to add to my concerns about the position in Burma and I certainly will ensure that the Council is kept up-to-date on any of these developments as they occur .
Question No 21 by Marie-Paule Kestelijn-Sierens ( H-0902 / 96 )
Subject : Anti-dumping measures
The Commission is planning to introduce anti-dumping measures for the import of cheap footwear from China , Indonesia and Thailand .
The proposed measures will have serious implications for European importers and distributors of cheap footwear from these countries , while the high levies will also have consequences for consumers .
Except in extremely urgent cases , the Commission generally consults the Member States before introducing provisional protective measures .
Have the Member States already been consulted on this matter ?
Does the Council consider that dumping is occurring with regard to footwear from China , Indonesia and Thailand ?
Is the import of cheap footwear from these countries damaging the Community , making anti-dumping measures necessary ?
Member States have been consulted by the Commission on the possible introduction of provisional protective measures on footwear from China , Indonesia and Thailand .
The Commission has not forwarded to the Council a proposal for a regulation concerning the application of antidumping measures to footwear from China , Indonesia and Thailand , consequently the Council has not taken a position on such a possibility .
I am grateful to the Council President for this information , because I had been told that the European Commission would be putting forward measures .
If it has not yet done so I am glad to hear it , since it will not please a number of Member States and more particularly my own country , which no longer has a shoe manufacturing industry but where a lot of people or companies make their living from the importation of cheap footwear from the Far East .
I think that Member States need to be sounded out first and that the Commission must first gather information . According to the Council President this will be done .
If I could repeat , the Council does not have any proposals from the Commission and the honourable Member may well obtain more detailed information on the up-to-date position if she places a question to the Commission .
So far a proposal has not come to the Council from the Commission .
Question No 22 by Vassilis Ephremidis ( H-0904 / 96 )
Subject : Arrest of the leader of the Chilean Communist Party for insulting General Pinochet
The recent arrest of Mrs Gladys Marin , the head of the Chilean Communist Party , outside the Central Committee buildings on charges of insulting the former dictator , General Pinochet , constitutes an affront for democracy , the struggle of workers , the people of Chile and the movement of international solidarity .
This unacceptable action represents a threat to the free expression and movement of ideas and the free activity of political parties in a country whose people suffered very badly at the hands of General Pinochet and the bloody dictatorship he led .
Does the Council intend to express its concern at these developments which have alarming implications for democracy , condemn the arrest of Gladys Marin , the Communist leader , and demand her immediate release ?
The European Union was prepared to take all necessary measures in order to express its absolute condemnation of this arrest .
However , the early resolution of the case and the dropping of all charges obviated the need for such action .
Mr President , we should appreciate the Council 's consideration of the issue and - though the representative did not say so - the possibility of its intervention .
However , we must also condemn the situation in that country , where Pinochet , who has for a decade been torturing , murdering and engineering the disappearance of citizens , still continues being able to order and impose the imprisonment of the leader of a political party who did no more than to speak about all that Pinochet has done during his brutal dictatorship , in an attempt to prevent the continuation of such a situation in that country and to establish respect for elementary human rights .
If Pinochet felt insulted , there were procedures for interrogation , trial and conviction , but not preventive incarceration .
As I have already said , the early resolution of the case and the dropping of the charges obviated the need for such action as we intended to take .
But we had been in contact with the Netherlands , which represent the presidency , and they were asked to investigate the matter .
On 6 November they reported that the Chilean Supreme Court had ordered Mrs Marin 's release within a day of her arrest and that General Pinochet had been persuaded that this was probably not the best way to approach this issue .
I can join with the honourable Member in expressing absolute condemnation of this arrest and arrests of this kind .
Question No 23 by Ioannis Theonas ( H-0906 / 96 )
Subject : Aid for cinematographic production in the Member States of the European Union
The steady decline in audiovisual - and notably cinematographic - output , especially in the less populous Member States of the Union and in languages which are less widespread , is jeopardising the cultural identity of the peoples of Europe .
This development is aggravated by the steadily increasing monopolization of production and , above all , distribution ; as a result , inferior cultural products imported from America and elsewhere dominate the market .
Will the Council say whether it intends to take measures to safeguard the multicultural nature of the EU , to protect and promote the production of audiovisual works in the Member States and to prevent the monopolization and exploitation of the audiovisual sector which has a very important role to play ?
The Council is fully alert to the importance of promoting the cultural identity of the peoples of Europe through the medium of cinema .
It recognizes that the richness and diversity of Europe 's cultural heritage is the basis for the distinctive qualities of European cinema .
On 10 July 1995 and 22 December 1995 two Council decisions on the MEDIA II programme were adopted .
This programme which came into effect at the beginning of this year clearly and expressly reflected this awareness at a practical level .
The purpose of the MEDIA II programme is to encourage the development and distribution of European audiovisual works and to implement a training programme for professionals in the European audiovisual industry .
Particular emphasis is given in the programme to small countries or regions with less widely-spoken languages and to actively support linguistic diversity of audiovisual works .
Another aim of the programme is to assist in the development of an independent production industry .
Article 2 of the programme states that the programme must work towards respect for European linguistic and cultural diversity , enhancing European audiovisual heritage , the development of potential in countries and regions with a low capacity for audiovisual production and / or a restricted geographical and linguistic area , the development of an independent production and distribution sector especially of small and medium-sized enterprises .
The programme allows for repayable subsidies for cinema distributors and video publishers of European films .
Television broadcasters are assisted in dubbing and subtitling European programmes and with multilingual productions .
Support is also offered for vocational training in these industries with a particular emphasis on regions where audiovisual production is low or where the geographical and linguistic area is restricted .
The exchange of students and professionals is facilitated through grants and placement schemes and through contributions to teacher-training .
Training in new technologies is also included under the terms of the MEDIA II programme .
The assignment of ECU 310m over five years to the MEDIA II programme represents a significant increase in resources over those assigned to the MEDIA I programme .
The Commission will present a mid-term review of the effectiveness of the programme to the European Parliament , the Council and the Economic and Social Committee .
The effect of the programme will be to provide the necessary supports so that , when combined with complementary national measures , the European audiovisual industry will be enabled to overcome problems of market fragmentation and foreign monopoly or domination of outlets for audiovisual products .
Particular results anticipated include the enhancement of the trans-frontier distribution of European audiovisual works , an increase in the screening of such works , and support for the development of new European production projects .
Finally , as the honourable Member will be aware , it is the Council 's view that in order to safeguard the important differences between the languages and cultures within and between Member States , the political direction in the field of culture must respect the principle of subsidiarity .
Consequently , the MEDIA II management committee gives both the Member States and the associated states a role in monitoring and providing inputs into the operation of the programme .
Mr President , I should first like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council warmly for the completeness of his answer to my question .
However , I would like to note , and I believe the President-inOffice will agree with me , that American cinema and television productions nevertheless account for over 60 % of the programmes broadcast by the most basic audiovisual media in Europe , and of course , of the films shown in Europe , particularly in the smaller countries .
This is a situation that many would say is unacceptable , because it tends to impose the American way of life and American culture on Europe , which has for countless years been distinguished for its cultural characteristics , a thing which must certainly be preserved .
We will certainly await the Commission 's report on the results of implementing MEDIA II and we shall certainly be wondering whether , among all those programmes , and indeed with action by the Member States , we are in a position to reverse the situation somewhat and protect European culture .
I appreciate the honourable Member 's kind compliment .
I can well understand the sentiments which he expresses .
If I may say so , the Irish cinema is 100 years old this year and our recent experience has been very beneficial .
More films were made in Ireland last year than in all previous years put together .
We have also launched this year Telefís na Gaeilge , an all-Irish-speaking television station .
I mention that particularly as someone from a relatively small state with a minority of all-Irish speakers , although the Irish language is not a minority language in Ireland and is the first official language of the country , with many people who have some words of Irish in general use .
Our membership of the European Union appears to have brought out in people a cultural and heritage need to promote and foster the language .
This is an interesting development .
I think there is unity in diversity and I would like to say that I feel myself very much a soulmate of the honourable Member in raising this question .
Question No 24 by David Martin ( H-0910 / 96 )
Subject : Human rights in Tunisia
Would the Council outline what is its attitude to human rights abuses in Tunisia : such as those alleged against Heidi Akouri and Jalel Maalej who are in prison in Tunisia for belonging to the Islamic party al-Nahda and have claimed they were tortured ; neither has ever used or advocated violence ; both have been adopted by Amnesty International as Prisoners of Conscience ?
I could hardly refuse to take a question from a close cousin across the water .
Tunisia is an important partner of the European Union . We are committed to deepening our relations with this country .
At the same time the European Union attaches great importance to the promotion and respect of human rights in Tunisia .
As the honourable Members will know , Tunisia was the first Mediterranean country to sign a new Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreement .
This agreement establishes a political dialogue which allows both parties to discuss openly a range of political issues , including human rights .
Furthermore , it includes a human rights clause which stipulates that bilateral relations as well as the provisions of the agreement itself shall be based on respect for human rights and democratic principles which guide their domestic and international policies and constitute an essential element of the agreement .
I might also recall that Tunisia has made a solemn political commitment to the Euro-Mediterranean partnership and the promotion of human rights and the development of democratic institutions are essential elements of the Barcelona Process .
The Council is aware of both the cases that the honourable Member has referred to , those of Mr Akouri and Mr Maalej who have been imprisoned on charges connected with alleged links to the banned al-Nahda Party .
On a number of occasions recently the Council has raised the question of human rights in its contacts with the Tunisian authorities .
The Council will continue to raise the question of human rights and fundamental freedoms both in general terms and with respect to specific cases in its contacts with Tunisia .
I wish to thank you again , Mr Mitchell , for your extremely full answers .
You have done your best to give as straightforward an answer as you possibly can in the circumstances .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.30 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Scope of the codecision procedure
The next item is the report ( A4-0361 / 96 ) by Mr Bourlanges and Mr De Giovanni , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on the Commission report under Article 189b ( 8 ) of the Treaty : scope of the codecision procedure ( SEC ( 96 ) 1225 - C4-0464 / 96 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have before us today a report on the opinion delivered by the European Parliament on a Commission document whose purpose is to define the conditions under which it might be possible to organize an extension of the codecision procedure , regarded by the European Parliament as a fundamental necessity .
This document proposes linking this extension of the codecision procedure to the definition of a number of objective criteria for legislative acts .
This document proposes that these criteria , once defined , should form a basis for clarifying those provisions and articles of the Treaty which might be the subject of extended codecision , those articles relating to what one might call the legal area .
Let me say , first , that I am confused .
I am confused because , in view of the stalled state of the negotiations taking place at the Intergovernmental Conference and the deterioration of the inter-institutional relationships between Parliament and the Council , I do not know what attitude I should be adopting towards the Commission document .
If this parliament decides to support the Commission document , it is clear that we would be compromising the Commission , and that if the Commission goes to the Council secure in the support of Parliament , it seems to me that , as things stand at present , this in itself would be an almost sufficient condition to cast suspicion on this document .
On the other hand , if I oppose the Commission document things are even worse , because in that case I shall be shooting it down , and it will be said at the Commission and at the Council and at the Intergovernmental Conference that the document proposed by the Commission did not even receive the support of Parliament .
So , not knowing whether I , and Parliament , should be supporting the Commission 's proposal or fighting it , I quite simply propose to you , Mr De Giovanni and I quite simply propose to you , that we should tell you what we really think of it .
What we really think of it is that this is a text which is a highly intelligent and interesting attempt to put the extension of the codecision procedure into context , but one that is subject to a number of limitations , which we regret .
It is undoubtedly an intelligent attempt because , for the first time in this extremely confused IGC debate , we have an institution - and I pay tribute to it - deciding to say : let us reject the idea of considering areas for the extension of codecision on a case-by-case basis , and let us instead suggest something systematic , something consistent , something which can be generally applied .
The second reason that makes this document consistent is that it is trying to put things in perspective on the basis of fundamental rather than merely procedural criteria .
The Commission could have said : we will extend codecision , for example , to all decisions taken by a qualified majority in the Council .
We could have said : we will extend codecision to all acts currently covered by the co-operation procedure pursuant to Article 189c . It could , at that point , have tried to be clever and settled for purely formal procedures and arguments .
The fact is , Commissioner , and I must give you credit for it , you are proposing something more ambitious , something neater , a partial attempt to create a hierarchy of standards , because what you are saying is that what must be covered by the codecision procedure is the law , and the law can be defined by a number of criteria which you list in your document .
In order for a text to be regarded as legislative text it needs to be a direct application of the Treaty , it needs to be general in scope , it needs to be mandatory , and finally it needs to relate to the essence of the action in question - to be an essential measure .
Four criteria which are common-sense criteria , perhaps debatable in some cases but common-sense criteria nonetheless .
Given this situation , we are willing to go along with you , but there are two observations we should make .
One is that your summary is a limited one .
Why is this ?
First , because your criteria are sometimes debatable .
For example , when you refer to essential criteria we do not know what essential means , and our view is that it is the law itself that must decide what is essential , what is a matter for the law and what is not .
Apart from that , we feel that , as regards the forms of application you propose , the interpretation is too restrictive .
I have not time enough to list all the measures which seem to us to be too restrictive , but they exist .
In conclusion , Commissioner , we will go along with you , but with our eyes open .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the attempt to define a new equilibrium between the institutions of the Union , and within that framework to conduct a struggle to increase the powers of the European Parliament , is an important political struggle .
Extending , or attempting to extend , the legislative function is a political struggle , taking account also of the fact - a fact which I must stress - that , contrary to what may sometimes be thought or said , the political balance of the codecision procedure is a very positive one , even as regards efficiency .
Let me give you a single example : the average duration of the codecision procedure is 480 days , while the average duration of the co-operation procedure has been and is 520 days .
This may seem a superficial fact , but it is a fact which should help put a stop to that old story about the inefficiency of the codecision procedure .
On the other hand , we must bear in mind that increasing the powers of Parliament really does mean strengthening the only institution which is truly and directly representative of Europe 's citizens .
I would be inclined to say , therefore , that extending the codecision procedure is something which also impinges on the area of citizenship , although the relationship may seem an indirect one ; but it is only indirect up to a certain point , because it means increasing the powers of the citizens by increasing the powers of the institution which represents them .
Our task , as Mr Bourlanges said a little while ago , was to evaluate the Commission 's text and not , for example , concern ourselves with other important matters such as the simplification of procedures .
As Mr Bourlanges said , the text is a good one , for one reason in particular : it acknowledges the need to extend legislation , to extend codecision to the entire field of legislation , and among other things it also emphasizes just what legislation is .
We have tried to make a contribution here which would take account of the special nature of European legislation , and we have extended it to place particular emphasis on the programmatic aspect .
I believe this is an extremely important point in our report .
We have specified the general scope , acknowledging that ' general scope ' in European legislation also involves taking the programmatic aspect into account .
Overall , then , a positive relationship between the European Parliament and the Commission in this area is a possibility .
I will not use the word ' alliance ' , for the reasons which Mr Bourlanges gave a few moments ago , but it certainly is an important political point : it is an important political point because it may mean that , together , we can make a contribution to the joint construction of a representative democracy .
There are , of course , a wide variety of obstacles .
I recall various experiences with the Council during the work of the conciliation committee - very difficult experiences , because the Council still tends to adopt an extremely bureaucratic interpretation of conciliation - I am talking about conciliation , which after all is closely linked to codecision - and we know , as Mr Bourlanges also mentioned , that there have been no positive signals in this area from the proceedings of the Intergovernmental Conference .
But we also need to have some measure of trust , because without trust everything falls apart ; so , as it were , we need to have confidence in the political struggle and in the objectives of the political struggle that we are pursuing .
I should like to devote the remainder of my speech to another point which we did not discuss in the report : the broadening of certain specific areas of the use of codecision .
We felt that the Commission 's work was limited in this respect , limited because there is no real link between the criteria and their application .
We noted a certain arbitrariness in this lack of association , and so we also undertook some analysis .
I shall single out three examples of the many I could quote .
First of all , economic and monetary union , a taboo subject as we know , and one on which I am bound to say that the Commission has been excessively cautious . We , this Parliament , believe that it is inconceivable for any progress to be made with monetary union unless , at the same time , there are also elements of democratic control of the representative institutions , at least in some areas - not day-to-day matters , of course , but in such matters as strategic choices and multilateral surveillance .
Next , we added to the list an area which the Commission had ignored , industry : industrial policy measures that are general in scope and have to do with coordination between industrial and macroeconomic policies which is another essential element in the development of a European democracy .
Finally , the last example I shall quote is research , a theme that is absolutely central to the development of Europe , which will not be able to develop unless research and culture also develop , so that the entire subject of the framework programme falls solidly within the spirit of codecision .
In conclusion , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that this struggle to enhance the legislative power of this unique institution , which directly represents the citizens of Europe , is a legitimate one .
I deliberately conclude on that note , because it seems to me to be a note that is fundamental for the construction of the European democracy .
Mr President , the report produced by Mr Bourlanges and Mr De Giovanni on the scope of application of the codecision procedure bears the austere , measured stamp of deep reflection , but it also reveals genuine political determination .
The heart of the problem is indeed the democratization of the European Union .
We have a lot to say about the rights of the citizen , his feeling that our activities are remote from his interest , the doubts he has about our role and that of the European institutions - in a word , about European policies in general .
In that light , the position of the Commission is essential , as is the position of the European Parliament , as indeed is our determination , even our fervour , and the fervour with which we shall seek - or at least we can hope- to impose our point of view on the Intergovernmental Conference .
The Commission has proposed to us an overall analysis of the application of the codecision procedure to the legislative area , bringing a much more consistent approach to this analysis .
Mr Bourlanges clearly expressed that , as he did his concerns about the weaknesses of that approach .
We believe that the overall approach is positive , but we do have a number of concerns , particularly regarding the criteria adopted , which need greater clarification , the definition of a law , which clearly contains a number of weak points , and the definition of the legislative area as derived from the implementation of criteria which , in some cases , are arbitrary and restrictive .
Fundamentally , though , what is our common objective other than a better , simpler and more effective mechanism ?
My own view is that the present record of the codecision procedure , in this respect , is a rather patchy one .
Of course , Mr De Giovanni referred to the attitude of the Council .
When we discuss things with the Council we are dealing with a presidency , but it is a paralysed presidency which , when the subject of codecision is raised , has to go ringing around the capitals of Europe to check the real position of the governments , of the ' European nonUnion ' .
In this sense , there is a real political problem as far as effective codecision is concerned .
Codecision does not necessarily mean democratization and efficiency when it is maintained in this way by national decisions and national bureaucracies .
Secondly , I also wonder about the attitude of the Commission - not you , Commissioner , you know how much sympathy I have for your wonderfully pro-active attitude in connection with the Intergovernmental Conference .
But I believe that codecision cannot really be a motor of European democracy unless the Commission itself plays the democratic game , unless it undertakes to be answerable to the European Parliament , and unless it accepts a duty to incorporate those amendments which this same European Parliament has adopted by a qualified majority .
How many times have we given an opinion only for it to be refused by the Commission ?
This , again , is the Commission 's real problem .
Mr President , my intervention will be somewhat at odds with what seems to be the prevailing consensus in this House , because I am not going to use the same kind of language or make the same kind of references as previous speakers .

I am not going to do so because those who believe in a Europe that respects national sovereignties will be opposed to the report by Mr De Giovanni and Mr Bourlanges , proposing as it does to increase the number of cases in which the European Parliament can take joint decisions with the Council on legislative matters , through the socalled codecision procedure , which in effect amounts to giving the European Parliament the last word by raising the spectre of its final refusal .
Suggesting the extension of this codecision procedure amounts to a tacit reference to a supranational institutional model , which assumes that the first step on the road to the democratization of the Union would be to extend the powers of the European Parliament .
But this issue has not been clearly presented to the public .
By thus adopting important guidelines , though without having clarified for all to see the principle that should dictate them , the European Parliament would itself be helping to give the public the deplorable , but unfortunately correct , impression that European affairs are negotiated in obscurity , under cover of technical decisions , without the public having any real knowledge of the ultimate effect of the apparently limited measures they are being asked to sanction .
At any rate , before embarking on a new debate on this matter , we really ought to make sure that the current model of the Union - an association of States primarily controlled by the Council and the national parliaments - is not working .
Well , great care is being taken not to establish that .
For our part , we demand that before codecision is extended an attempt should at least be made at an honest reform of the Union 's institutions on the basis of the current principles , which , once again , are the only ones that have been democratically approved hitherto .
We demand that a start should be made by bringing transparency to the actions of the Council and the Commission , that a clear hierarchy of European and national regulations should be established , that genuine control by the Member States over subsidiarity should be defined , and that the control of the Union 's policies by the national parliaments should be improved .
Once these reforms have been carried out , then it may be time to talk about something else , if by chance the reforms prove unsatisfactory .
But that is not all .
This matter involves , by implication , a clash between two concepts of Europe : the federal superstate , where the European Parliament , elected in accordance with a strict rule of proportionality to national populations - I am talking about the future , here - would take legislative decisions ; and the Europe of Nations , where the European parliament , representing various countries on a non-proportional basis , cannot be given important legislative powers , which would remain with the national parliaments .
The supranational model is unrealistic and dangerous .
Not only that , but those who are trying to push us in that direction are also involving us in another system , a hybrid system lacking in any logic , comprising a parliament which would not respect the fundamental principle of one man , one vote , and which would nevertheless have the right to take legislative decisions .
Mr President , we strenuously reject what from the democratic standpoint is a total heresy .
Mr President , despite the dilemma facing the co-rapporteurs and the fact that there is currently a negative climate prevailing at the Intergovernmental Conference , I would like to congratulate them because both Mr Bourlanges and Mr de Giovanni have , in my opinion , carried out an excellent piece of work insofar as their report is concerned and also as regards their methodology .
It is , in fact , an extremely fine piece of work which illustrates the high level of confusion and uncertainty that is affecting the Community legal order , and it also offers operative and constructive options .
The field of defining responsibilities has always been a most difficult and tedious one , but beneath all this terminological and procedural jargon lie nothing more nor less than the major political keys to Europe at the present time , i.e. the twofold need to make popular representation seem less remote to the average citizen , on the one hand , and to make the decision-making fields more democratic , on the other .
If we are losing our way to some extent , in today 's Europe , it is because we lack such links , this field of popular representation which we must bring closer both to European citizens and to decision-making fields .
As we make further advances in terms of European democracy , let us to an equal extent bring the field of decision-making closer to the direct representatives of the people . We have hitherto been able to do this at the regional and national level but are still unable to do so at the European level .
That is what concerns us .
The Commission has got it right overall , i.e. in extending codecision to the entire legislative field , but this kind of all-encompassing statement comes to nothing , as the co-rapporteurs observe , when we actually move on to definitions and specifics .
We then find that if we apply the criteria proposed by the Commission we move into a grey area and are faced with a choice which , as the co-rapporteurs state , is both restrictive and lacking in innovation .
It would therefore seem that , once again , the Commission has , when all is said and done , made do with issuing a statement which , when applied in operational terms , is not really a solution at all .
It is , once again , not possible to allay deep-seated fears that , at the new Intergovernmental Conference , the European Parliament will be given new powers of decision and have still others taken away from it .
By way of example , you should refer to the opinion of the relevant committee on this report .
It is my sincere belief that there is still too much caution and hesitation when what is needed , when it comes down to it , is a bold move on the part of the Commission .
Mr President , I should simply like to say what Fernand Herman would certainly have said if he was here , and give an answer , in particular , to my colleague and friend Mr Berthu .
I must say that it is not fair and not right to maintain that the project for which we are arguing is designed to strengthen an integrated Europe , to strengthen a Federal Europe .
You really should see that , in this matter , we are not proposing any additional extension or any modification of the respective powers of the Union and the Member States .
We are proposing one thing , an important thing : that the decisions taken within the framework of the European Union should be taken democratically , by agreement between the Council of Ministers and ourselves as the representatives of the European people , the European peoples .
That is all .
Mr Berthu , in opposing this report you are not being an enemy of federalism , you are not fighting federalism as you think you are - you are simply fighting democracy .
Mr President and fellow colleagues , I would like to begin by expressing my sincere thanks to the co-rapporteurs for the conscientious and detailed work they have put in in writing their report on the Commission 's document .
I would like to point out that the Commission has , in the past , submitted only a small number of reports to the Intergovernmental Conference , not many because we did not feel that this was in our remit .
Our function is discharged at the various sittings by attempting to reconcile different positions , but only when we felt a topic was of essential importance did we think it appropriate to submit a document .
We did so , on the one hand , within the terms of the mandate given us by the Treaty which makes reference to areas of jurisdiction such as civil protection , tourism or energy - where we had an obligation under the Treaty - and , in addition , in connection with two specific topics , namely home affairs and justice , on which we drew up an indepth report , and codecision , which we regarded as crucial .
This does not mean that our role cannot evolve over time .
We drew up an opinion before the start of the Intergovernmental Conference and , after it had started , we submitted this report .
This does not mean that we intend to disregard any contribution that Parliament might make , nor the results of our own deliberations in the future .
I would like to emphasize , however , and I think we are all agreed , that codecision as described in the Treaty has required a step forward .
We are seeing it applied every day and we know that the contribution that codecision represents , despite its limitations , is a significant advance over the previous version of the Treaty .
However , it has become obvious despite this that the procedure as it currently stands is imperfect , complicated and often off-target on certain points and is therefore a candidate for in-depth simplification .
But , above all , this is a procedure whose field of application was , in our view , relatively limited and somewhat inconsistent and this is why we were of the opinion that it was necessary to introduce a number of important and significant amendments .
Therefore , the topic we addressed was how to extend codecision whilst respecting two criteria : the criterion of democracy and that of efficiency .
For us , the response is a clear one : it should be done by means of full participation in the legislative process , on the one hand by the Council and , on the other hand , by Parliament .
When , on this subject , Mr Berthu referred to the fact that there are two concepts of Europe , I would certainly agree with him , but there are also , to some extent , two notions of legitimacy .
I support the idea of dual legitimacy , that of the States , represented in the significance of the role of national parliaments , and that of the peoples , represented in this House .
There are therefore two concepts , but these are part of what many of us feel constitutes this dual legitimacy , and we have to give it due regard .
These two notions of legitimacy are demonstrated in the two legislative branches , namely the Council and Parliament .
I would like to add that , when we tackled the subject of codecision , we perhaps did not get it quite right , but I would like to assure Mrs Izquierdo that the spirit embodied in the wording of this text was neither restrictive nor risky .
Moreover , I am much comforted by the fact that this was not the description given either by Mr Bourlanges or Mr De Giovanni , one of whom stated that it signifies an intelligent overview and has demonstrated the positive attitude of the Commission to this proposal .
At any rate , I would like to inform you that we are very pleased to accept any criticisms you may have because we are taking due note of them and intend to improve our own text on the basis of honourable Members ' various interventions -which we greatly appreciate - and , regardless of whether the opinion and criticism are positive or negative , we shall attempt to build on them .
We have attempted to arrive at a formula which does its best to avoid what could boil down to - as Mr Bourlanges rightly stated - the simple extension of codecision to fields where the cooperation procedure currently applies .
Nor do we think this justifies extending codecision to acts approved by qualified majority , and to use a case-by-case approach also seems inappropriate .
So what guided our actions , particularly those of us with a legacy of Roman law ?
Probably the establishment of a hierarchy of regulations , but those of us who were able to take a closer look at countries such as Anglo-Saxon countries saw that this terminology is not understood and , therefore , despite the fact that there is to a certain extent a kind of veiled hierarchy of regulations , we did not , strictly speaking , base our deliberations on the criterion of such a hierarchy .
What we did was to apply four criteria and we were told that these criteria can probably be supplemented and improved .
According to Mr De Giovanni and Mr Bourlanges , these criteria have their limitations , and that is undoubtedly the case .
The criteria we considered were these : that acts should be based directly on the Treaty , that they should be of a binding nature , that they should determine the essential elements of Community action in a given field , and that they should be general in scope .
Are these sufficient ?
Possibly not .
What we would like you to tell us , if you can , is what further criteria we can add .
What else can we do ?
We should not act on a case-by-case basis but look at the fields within which these various criteria are applied .
Therefore , whenever action is required to determine which field codecision applies to , we refer to these criteria - which it is possible to supplement with others - and we look at the extent to which they link up within the various fields .
That is the criterion on which we based our deliberations .
As regards concern about ensuring consistency between budgetary procedure and legislative procedure , we agree with the formula as expressed in the document you yourselves have submitted and I also agree that Parliament has an important role to play - this has not been referred to here today , but does appear in your document - in matters of justice and home affairs .
We are in full agreement on this point and have introduced this very criterion into the Commission 's document in connection with a subject area which we regard as of fundamental importance : everything which constitutes an attempt to apply a Community approach to the third pillar , especially some of its fundamental elements such as those relating to visas , asylum procedures , external border control , immigration matters and cooperation in customs matters . We feel that all this should be covered by a Community approach and this is where the Court of Justice and also , obviously , Parliament have a significant role to play .
As regards the unjustified restrictions in application - and I have taken due note of this - I would like to make three specific comments .
The first relates to economic and monetary union , which has been referred to here today .
The Commission has demonstrated its concern about this matter in the report .
We had serious doubts on this subject .
We doubted whether the codecision procedure was an appropriate one and , at one point , we wondered whether a different procedure should be used , such as the cooperation procedure .
However , if we were to use the cooperation procedure , we would upset the equilibrium achieved by abolishing this procedure , ending up with just a simple opinion , assent , and codecision procedure .
Therefore , making an exception in the case of economic and monetary union , by retaining the consultation procedure , seemed to us to be the correct way to proceed , and this is why we went down the path we did , although not without much hesitation .
Furthermore , I would also like to say that there are a number of criteria set forth in your most valuable document which have been duly noted and which I support and which will be included in our own patrimony .
Parliament 's argument concerning the right to vote in European elections is , I feel , completely relevant .
As regards new rights in the field of citizenship , I would like to stress the importance of Mr De Giovanni 's intervention when he mentioned the topic of codecision in connection with citizenship .
I think this is very important and I intend to take this criterion on board .
I entirely agree with him .
I believe that one of the fundamental objectives of this Intergovernmental Conference should be precisely that the citizen should resume his or her leading role , and one of the ways of doing so is through codecision , specifically on the basis of the dual legitimacy I referred to earlier .
Also , I find Parliament 's arguments on the subject of competence and , specifically , the most intelligent way in which they apply it to Articles 87 and 94 very convincing and I will therefore be including this amongst the Commission 's main criteria .
As for the Court of First Instance , I wonder whether it would not be preferable for assent to apply here , as this relates to the constitutional field .
Finally , regarding action against fraud , I also feel that Parliament 's observation is right on target .
It depends , naturally , on the negotiations which are being conducted on this subject .
I would like to make a final observation regarding the Euratom Treaty .
I believe , in fact , that it is logical to apply to this Treaty the same principles we wish to apply to the Community Treaty , but I wonder and would ask honourable Members whether the Conference will agree to initiate discussion on the subject of this Treaty .
To conclude , Mr President , codecision is a central factor in the Union 's democratic legitimacy and the approach suggested by the Commission appears to us to make it possible to consolidate this legitimacy whilst simultaneously achieving a simpler and more easily understood result .
In this way , Union citizens will , through this Chamber , take part in drawing up the rules which will have a direct effect on them and they will better understand the process whereby decisions are adopted within the Union .
We are therefore receptive to the ideas presented to us today and to those which will be presented in the coming weeks and months . We hope that one of the fundamental results of the Intergovernmental Conference will be further support for codecision and therefore the conferring of equal powers on the Council and this House , which the latter would like to see .
Mr President , I merely want to point out to the Commissioner that the quotation should not be attributed to me since it appears in point three of paragraph 3 of the Bourlanges-De Giovanni report .
There is also a further reference to restriction in paragraph 6 , but the comment which includes the words ' risky ' and ' restrictive ' may be found in the report which the Commissioner should have read .
Mr President , not only have I read it but , Mrs Izquierdo , I have made a point of underlining it . My comments , however , referred to the interventions we have heard today .
My hope is that you and I will not only have read this report but that you have also listened to what the co-rapporteurs have said in this Chamber .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 12 noon tomorrow .
Asylum procedures
The next item is the report ( A4-0315 / 96 ) by Mrs d 'Ancona , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the Council resolution on minimum guarantees for asylum procedures ( 5585 / 95 - C4-0356 / 95 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in June of last year the Council adopted a resolution on minimum guarantees for asylum procedures .
A resolution which had as its main objective to harmonize asylum procedures in all the Member States .
This evening the European Parliament is reviewing that resolution .
What is the substance of it , what is its legal status and against what political and social background was the text adopted ?
Let me start with the last question .
The nature of the refugee question has , for a wide variety of reasons , changed since 1951 , the year in which the Geneva Convention on refugees came into being .
Disasters and wars , oppression or famine , all these things have markedly increased the number of people who flee from their own countries .
UNHCR helps some 26 million refugees , and another 26 or so people have fled their homes but stayed within their own region .
The proportion of those 52 million who have asked for asylum in Europe , our own Western Europe , is actually very small , but notwithstanding this Europe too was faced with a sharp rise in the number of asylum-seekers in the late 80s and early 90s as a result of the war in Yugoslavia .
Member State governments were quick to react .
Residence requirements were tightened and expulsion was made easier .
These measures led to a 60 % drop in requests for asylum in Western Europe compared with the peak year of 1992 , but this did not lead to a less restrictive policy .
On the contrary , a tightening of policy in one Member State provokes the same response in the others , together with agreements on manifestly unfounded applications , the principle of the safe third country and the so-called safe country of origin .
This downward spiral of ever-greater restriction prompted increasingly loud calls for a common European policy on asylum .
The Council 's resolution in 1995 , aimed at harmonizing asylum policy , was thus a welcome move .
We are less enthusiastic about the way in which this resolution came about .
Once again Parliament was not consulted as it should have been , and that is contrary to Article K.6 of the Maastricht Treaty , whilst the Council also failed to honour the recommendations of UNHCR .
The legal status of this kind of resolution is also unclear .
The European Parliament has previously sought clarification on this point .
Precisely because this pseudo-legislation highlights the democratic deficit : neither national parliaments nor the European Parliament can exercise scrutiny when things are done this way .
A word or two on the substance of the resolution .
The first thing which strikes one is the contradictory nature of the text .
The resolution lists a number of basic principles of the right of asylum , but these are undermined in the same text by the granting of derogations .
Thus the principle of the safe third country puts pressure on the right of non-refoulement and the use of a list of safe countries of origin jeopardizes the individual 's right to have his request for asylum reviewed .
It is also worrying that the resolution confirms the practice that requests for asylum are increasingly processed at the border .
A good thing , I find it a very good thing , is that the Council resolution takes account of the specific position of female asylum-seekers .
But regrettably , here too the resolution is ultimately not good enough .
For example , there is no wording which establishes the right of a female asylum-seeker to request asylum independently of her husband .
The Council resolution we are debating today is disappointing .
It contains no binding legislation and allows Member States plenty of scope to use exemptions and derogations in their own national laws .
A minimum with exceptions is not a minimum .
Consequently my group believes that this resolution cannot remain as it stands .
Together with a resolution of the European Parliament , European Commissioner Gradin 's proposal for a speedy convention on asylum may help to bring about the change we would like .
Lastly , a comment on the amendments we shall be voting on tomorrow .
We shall be voting for some of them , but where the individual 's access to the asylum procedure is put in doubt and where the right of non-refoulement is put under pressure , we stand by the international agreements enshrined in the Geneva Convention and the European Convention on Human Rights .
Resolute adherence to these is also advocated by UNHCR and NGOs such as Amnesty International , Human Rights Watch and the European Committee on Asylum and Refugees .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , today 's debate on the resolution on minimum guarantees for asylum procedures comes a year and a half too late .
Asylum policy is one of the most important aspects of the third pillar , because it is closely related to human rights , for example the right to life and health .
Therefore , under Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union , Parliament should have been consulted before the Council resolution was adopted , and its views should have been taken into consideration accordingly .
Instead , we now have the opportunity , after the event , to express our opinion by means of Mrs d 'Ancona 's excellent report .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , however , is critical not only of the way the matter has been handled , but also of the fact that the Council has decided to bring in the harmonization of the asylum procedure by means of a legal act that is not binding in international law .
We , on the other hand , are demanding that certain parts of the third pillar , including asylum policy , should be communitized by revising the Treaty , because only in this way can Parliament exercise its democratic participation and control .
The present resolution essentially pursues the objective of guaranteeing the same procedures for asylum seekers in all Member States .
This step is , in principle , a welcome one .
However , if we look at the result , the Council resolution is merely a collection of guarantees that have been reduced to the lowest common denominator .
It contains certain general principles , which are open to interpretation , but apart from that it also contains a great number of individual exemption rules .
Because of these numerous exemptions , there is a risk of ' asylum dumping ' within the European Union .
Individual Member States could rely on exemptions which are contained in this resolution but which have not , in the past , been used .
It is absolutely essential that this risk should be removed .
There is a special problem caused by what are known as ' manifestly unfounded asylum applications ' .
This classification leads to a situation in which asylum seekers are not admitted to the asylum procedure .
I would ask all Member States to approve every asylum application individually , to pass it on to the appropriate competent central authority and to ensure that that authority processes it .
The concept of the safe country of origin and the safe third country results in asylum seekers being turned away .
In the case of the apparently safe country of origin , this may mean a danger to life and limb .
In so-called safe third countries , there is not always a guarantee that the asylum seeker will be admitted to the asylum procedure .
I would therefore ask Member States to obtain guarantees from the countries of origin , to the effect that there is no danger to the life , health or freedom of the asylum seekers , or to obtain guarantees from the third country , to the effect that the asylum seekers will be given a fair hearing .
Both types of guarantees must be provided in writing .
On the two important points that I have just mentioned , Germany has played an important role .
I should therefore have liked to ask the Council presidency , had it been present , for its opinion on the fact that the German Constitutional Court , in its asylum decision of 14 May this year , gave the Federal Government a considerable amount of discretion when it comes to determining which countries are safe countries of origin .
I am very much afraid that these powers of discretion will also be used to determine safe third countries as well .
So what does the presidency think of the fact that the Constitutional Court does not make it compulsory for the German Government to consider all the information and to take a comprehensible decision , when it is considering the question of whether a certain country respects and defends , de jure and de facto , human dignity and human rights , in other words , whether it can be regarded as free from persecution within the meaning of asylum law ?
Could I just make one more comment , on the fact that we are today celebrating children 's rights and the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of UNICEF ?
We have been talking , today , about children who seek asylum .
Unaccompanied minors are particularly in need of our protection , and they also need to be given an opportunity of submitting asylum applications of their own .
Mr President , I am of course very glad that the conclusions of the Committee on Women 's rights have been adopted , if not verbatim then at least in substance , by the majority of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
For example , the Committee on Women 's Rights welcomes the Council resolution on minimum guarantees for asylum procedures , because it represents an important step towards a definition by the Member States of common procedural criteria for the treatment of asylum seekers .
We are therefore moving in the right direction , towards the standardization of asylum policy in the European Union .
As I say , we are glad that our amendments have been adopted by the majority of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs - and I thank them for it .
I am also very pleased to find that , with one exception , Amendment No 7 , there are no amendments that would weaken the content of paragraphs 23 to 31 of the motion for a resolution , which summarized my conclusions .
And I thank the members of my group who , in their Amendment No 32 , have incorporated the second conclusion of my opinion , which does not appear in the text adopted by our committee .
You therefore see before you a very gratified draftsman of an opinion , who naturally hopes that the governments and parliaments of the Member States will take due account of these amendments when the time comes for them to apply the minimum guarantees for asylum procedures .
Because the right of asylum must be granted to women and girls who are discriminated against by reason of their sex .
Sexual violence must be recognized as a form of torture - for example , the use of rape as a weapon of war and the traditions of certain countries which amount to nothing less than sexual mutilation .
Women must be able to apply for asylum in their own right , and full legal status must be granted to women to prevent their losing their rights in the event of a husband 's death , or divorce or separation .
All this should be obvious , but it did require clarification , and I hope that this House will support us .
As far as the other parts of Mrs d 'Ancona 's report are concerned , I shall go along with my group , because I believe there can be no question , for example , of granting asylum to third-country nationals who are not the victims of political persecution in their own countries .
Mr President , that was what I wanted to say in my capacity as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights , and I hope that Parliament will support us and not forget women , who are just as entitled as men to minimum guarantees in the area of asylum procedures .
And , Mr President , I have been briefer than my speaking time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall start by thanking Mrs d 'Ancona , on behalf of our group , for her report , which was a difficult one , because it deals with one of the most complicated policy issues facing the European Union .
For that reason , I would also like to say that I do not share the attitude of courteous restraint that Hedy d 'Ancona has shown towards the Council .
I would like to say to you , quite clearly , that the Council , as far as the asylum debate in Parliament is concerned , has once again shown a completely unjustifiable arrogance towards Parliament .
Chapter 6 of the Maastricht Treaty contains the provision that Parliament should be consulted , admittedly only on the most important aspects of European internal policy .
But I ask myself , if asylum law is not one of the most important aspects , then what is ? .
Time and again , we find ourselves in a situation in which important internal-policy issues , which stir up strong feelings in people in our Member States , are causing political confrontations of a size never previously experienced .
The Member States ' governments , represented by the Council of Ministers , believe that they can treat with contempt the only institution of the European Union that is legitimized by being freely and directly elected , in other words us , the European Parliament .
To add insult to injury , the Council is not even represented here this evening .
I wonder where they can all have got to ?
It is rather late , so perhaps they are in the restaurant , but it is outrageous that the Council is not taking part in a debate such as this one .
I suppose , however , that it is only to be expected , given the fact that although the UNHCR was initially consulted about the first draft , after that a deaf ear was turned to all the advice offered by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees .
Somehow it all fits in , doesn 't it ? As does the fact that the Council 's Chapter 4 Committee , and its subordinate bodies , CIRIA and CIREFI , always meet behind closed doors .
Because asylum law , an essential policy issue for the European Union , is obviously nothing to do with the public , or with the European Parliament .
I do not think that we should put up with this any longer , and I think that we are going to have to make it quite clear to people just how the Council has behaved , in today 's debate and in the whole process leading up to the debate , including in committee , and in its attitude towards the d 'Ancona report .
As far as I am concerned , democracy is being trampled underfoot .
We must bear in mind the fact that , with this report by Hedy d 'Ancona , we have touched a raw nerve in European policy .
The question arises as to how the European Union , as a community that declares itself to be not only in favour of the completion of the internal market and unlimited profits for large companies , but also in favour of making basic rights a reality in the world at large , and indeed states that these are its objectives , intends in future - even if only at a very minimalist level - to handle a fundamental right that implies an obligation , on the part of national and also supranational authorities , to protect people from persecution and not to turn away from its doors people who fear for their lives and limbs , on the grounds of their origin , race , religion , skin colour , or ethnic origin , when the Union itself is bursting with wealth .
Yet that is precisely the asylum policy of many Member States , and it is also , apparently , if the Council draft is anything to go by , the objective of the European Union , or at least of the Council of Ministers .
Safe countries of origin are a very important point in the debate that we have to hold .
I am in favour of discussing the question of what a safe country of origin is , and Hedy d 'Ancona has formulated specific definitions .
We cannot have a situation in which safe countries of origin are defined only by the governments of Member States and only on the basis of their own individual tactical , domestic-policy or diplomatic considerations .
A safe country of origin must be defined taking into account the experiences of human rights organizations working on the spot , and also taking into consideration the experiences of the UNHCR .
Otherwise there cannot be any such list , and it must also be subject to democratic scrutiny , following the communitization of asylum law - if possible by the European Parliament .
I believe that as far as safe third countries are concerned , it must be possible to check that the minimum fundamental rights that we expect to be applied , in order to be able to call a country a safe third country , really are applied and really are guaranteed in that country . This checking could be done by us , for example by inserting appropriate contractually-binding clauses in association agreements .
The d 'Ancona report is not going to give us a brilliant European asylum law , Mr President , even if all Hedy d 'Ancona 's proposals are adopted .
But if the Council could possibly bring itself to take Mrs d 'Ancona 's proposals into consideration , then it would at least avoid making mistakes quite so serious as those it has made in the past .
It is quite true that we have something to complain about in the way the Council has involved us in this work .
As far as that is concerned , I would not contradict what Mr Schulz has just said .
Indeed I should like to associate myself with his comments , though not with his choice of words , and not with the loudness of his delivery .
But it will at least save me time , time that I can use to better effect by talking about something else , namely content , and this is , after all , the thing that really matters .
But what content are we talking about here ?
Europeans need a uniform asylum law , and there are three reasons why .
Since the Dublin Agreement , Member States have mutually recognized one another 's asylum decisions .
So an asylum seeker who is accepted as a political refugee in Germany is also accepted as such in France .
On the other hand , an asylum seeker whose application has been turned down in France will not be able to go through another procedure in Germany .
For us to be able to accept such a decision in Germany , we must , of course , also be able to have a say in the matter of the grounds on which a person is accepted or rejected in France .
In other words , ladies and gentlemen , we now need , in Europe , at least a harmonization of the essential features of both material asylum law and also of asylum-procedure law .
We also need it because internal border controls are being done away with and there is an increasing amount of freedom of movement .
We also need it because , as this debate has already confirmed , there is broad agreement to the effect that essential parts of the third pillar - and certainly asylum law - should be communitized .
If we accept , firstly , that this is a necessity , and if we accept , secondly , that we cannot achieve , in a single step , the entire objective of a fully harmonized European asylum law , which would be completely unrealistic , then the Council resolution on minimum guarantees for asylum procedures is definitely a welcome and reasonable move .
In any case , I , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , wholeheartedly welcome this Council recommendation .
It would be senseless to expect the ' finished product ' , as it were , when we have only just taken the first step .
It makes more sense to set out , first of all , in a non-binding recommendation , just how a Community asylum law might look , and leave it to individual Member States to incorporate it into their national legislation , and then sign a convention that would make it legally binding . It goes against all our experience , and also against every analysis of the political situation in Europe , to expect all this to happen at once .
In addition , ladies and gentlemen , amid all this criticism about the fact that the recommendation is not legally binding , we are completely losing sight of the fact that this Council recommendation does in fact already represent considerable progress , since it contains clear rules governing asylum procedures , and it also states that even in the case of manifestly unfounded asylum applications , it must be possible for applicants to appeal - which has not been the case , up to now , in many instances - and that independent bodies should decide on appeals . I could go on to give an even longer list .
Essentially , there are three concepts missing from the Council recommendation , namely safe third countries , safe countries of origin and the treatment of manifestly unfounded asylum applications .
There can be no doubt , ladies and gentlemen , that without the application of this legal instrument there can be no humane asylum law in Europe .
For this reason , we would be well advised to support these three concepts as well as the Council recommendation .
Mr President , Hedy d 'Ancona 's report is a reflection of the importance with which the subject is viewed .
It rightly calls for better guarantees for asylum procedures . And it rightly concludes that an approach based on minimum requirements set by the Council is not satisfactory .
So-called burden-sharing within the EU has not worked .
Member States pass the buck and so a move towards harmonization is inescapable .
The Commission 's initiative for a convention on asylum policy is a good idea ; a framework arrangement based on the Geneva Convention on refugees might be an interim solution .
A factor which remains very important in the implementation of asylum procedures remains the guarantees which the constitutional state provides .
In the Netherlands , for example , an asylum-seeker whose application has been turned down cannot appeal to a higher authority .
That is worrying .
It happened recently that a Surinamese asylum-seeker who had already been in the Netherlands for six years was used as an informer by the criminal investigation department and then expelled from the country .
Such things should not happen in a constitutional state .
I very much welcome this report , but unless the Member States draw consequences from it it will remain a pointless exercise .
The Dutch presidency will have to deal with the harmonization of asylum procedures in the near future .
Mr President , I have nothing against Commissioner Kinnock , but I do regret the fact that Commissioner Gradin , who holds the relevant portfolio , is not here for this debate .
The resolution now before us describes the Council decision on minimum guarantees for asylum procedures as ' a good starting point ' and then goes on the criticize it .
Like the rapporteur , the ELDR Group broadly agrees with the substance of the Council decision .
And we agree with some of the rapporteur 's criticisms , but not all .
So what is there to say about this Council decision ?
Procedurally quite a lot .
I agree with the criticisms made by Mrs d 'Ancona , Mr Schulz , Mr Nassauer and others .

We can support the broad lines of the rapporteur 's resolution .
Just one or two remarks .
As always , the Convention on refugees must be upheld when it comes to the minimum guarantees for asylum procedures .
Pacta sunt servanda . There must always be a right of appeal if the request for asylum is refused .
In general any such appeal must have suspensive effect , unless a request for asylum has been refused because it is manifestly unfounded .
But even in this case the judge must be able to test the implications of expelling the asylum-seeker if he is indeed to be expelled .
I have put down an amendment clarifying the resolution in this regard .
In my view the resolution before us is rather unclear on the subject of safe countries , which has also been raised here .
I have the impression that the rapporteur deprecates that concept and that would be surprising since this concept was introduced in her and my own home country by a government in which she was a minister .
It was accepted by the judiciary too , the German Constitutional Court , to name just one body .
So this aspect of the resolution needs to be improved and I have tabled an amendment to that end .
In any event there is an urgent need , on this question of safe countries , for Member States to agree a single European list of safe countries to be put to Parliament for our appraisal .
Not much progress has been made at European level to develop a true European policy on asylum .
It is thus important for us to have developed an initiative in this House which seeks to achieve one .
As rapporteur for the Committee on Budgets my fellow-member of the ELDR , Mr Brinkhorst , suggested that three budget lines be created for refugees , for displaced persons who have temporarily found refuge in the European Union and for refugee policy in general .
This is a signal that Parliament will not accept the status quo and I thus urge the Commission to develop a true common policy on asylum .
Mr President , the Council resolution on minimum guarantees for asylum procedure has prompted reservations and concerns on the part of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , the European Council on Refugees and Amnesty International .
The guarantees are indeed minimal ; not only that , the resolution allows for possible exceptions to the principles laid down .
This resolution , as we see it , does not include sufficient guarantees that individuals will not be sent back to countries where they are in danger of persecution .
The expulsions by charter flight that have taken place in France and elsewhere have , sadly , shown that this risk was far from purely theoretical .
The report by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs proposes a number of amendments which offer additional guarantees .
We particularly welcome the fact that it incorporates our amendment calling for the application of the Geneva Convention to persons at risk from certain groups when the authorities in their country are unable to provide them with protection .
This applies particularly to Algerian democrats of both sexes who are threatened with death by the fundamentalist commandos , whose abominable murders are continuing .
I must make the point that the report rightly opposes the establishment by governments of lists of so-called ' safe countries of origin ' , where there are reasonable fears that such countries do not offer adequate guarantees of safety for asylum seekers .
On the eve of the 21st century , at a time when so many countries are riven by conflict , tensions and atrocities , the acceptance and protection of people whose very lives , in some cases , are at risk , often because of the opinions they hold , are essential principles of civilization that this House has a duty to defend .
The particular situation of women , who in some countries are subjected to violence , mutilation and duress in violation of human rights , must be taken into account .
In contrast to a fortress Europe , inward-looking and perpetuating inequality and discrimination , our group defends the concept of a Europe based on solidarity , respect for human dignity and co-operation to drive back the evils of underdevelopment , poverty and barbarism !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen who are interested - and good evening , Mr Nassauer , I should like to say thank you , Hedy , for your excellent report , in which you have tried to define a liberal and human policy on refugees , though your and my definition of ' humane ' certainly differs from that of Mr Nassauer .
So , how can we actually bring into being a uniform European asylum procedure ?
It works like this : the countries of the EU , in other words the Ministers for Internal Affairs and the Ministers for Justice , all get together .
Each one of them takes the toughest asylum provision from his own country and slaps it on the table .
The provisions are pushed backwards and forwards across the table , and then any paragraphs that still look too liberal are taken out , and the rest is put together as a resolution entitled , ' Minimum Guarantees for Asylum Procedures ' .
All this takes place behind closed doors , as has already been mentioned , in the secrecy in which the representatives of the national executives turn themselves into a European legislative body .
The European Parliament is locked out , because democratic public scrutiny would disrupt this system .
The kind of minimum guarantees that emerge from this system will guarantee that very little refugee protection remains .
This is an example of how even EU refugee policy is attempting , by using quasi alternative conventions , to evade the conventions that are currently in force , such as the Geneva Convention on Refugees , or the Human Rights Convention .
This principle , which is always the same , can be regarded as a reduction to the lowest common denominator , or , to put it more dramatically - and more correctly - , it is a competition in stinginess . In this context , harmonization no longer means taking a liberal approach in order to give refugees greater rights .
On the contrary , it means depriving refugees of their rights , by adopting the principle of everyone washing their hands in innocence and passing the refugees on to the next country . Each country thinks that of course the other country will observe the refugee convention , so the refugees are pushed further and further away , until they end up in their country of origin , which is precisely the country that is persecuting them .
In my opinion this is not a European model of a liberal refugee policy , a real refugee policy based on human rights and fundamental rights .
Even for refugees , human rights must be indivisible .
Once again , Hedy , thank you for your report .
I am afraid , however , that when it goes to the Council it will once again fall on deaf ears .
Mr President , in my homeland , and probably not only there , it is usually asserted that it is an indisputable truth that any movement towards a harmonisation of refugee policy in the Union cannot but be stricter and more severe .
This is one of the factors that is usually mentioned when arguing that we are engaged in creating ' Fortress Europe ' .
If one reads this report , however , one sees that this will at least not be the case if the European Parliament gets its way .
The report contains clear demands for a concrete , humane asylum procedure which ensures legal certainty .
Providing we have these minimum guarantees I too believe that it could form the basis of a common asylum and refugee policy .
It is important here , however , as the report also says , that such harmonisation is inspired by greater ambition than simply to build on the lowest common denominator .
If the Member States of the Union are to have confidence in one another in respect of maintaining the free movement of persons it is essential that we achieve unanimity on the difficult distinction which exists between refugee questions and other types of migration .
Mr President , the events of recent years have only confirmed what many have long maintained , namely that without harmonisation the individual countries will simply try to underbid one another where refugee policies are concerned .
We will have a situation which spirals down towards ever meaner and more limited national legislation and application in the different countries which receive refugees .
In the same way , it is not harmonisation but rather the lack of it which will give rise to ' Fortress Europe ' .
This is why it is so important for us to carry on in the spirit of Parliament 's report .
Mr President , I should like to apologize .
I acknowledged only the two great matadors in this debate .
Far be it from me to fail to say hello to Wilmya , or to wish Anna good evening , or Ilona or Michèle .
Please forgive me , but I particularly wanted to reply to what Mr Nassauer and Mr Schulz had said .

Mr President , I would firstly like to thank Mrs Roth for having described me as a ' matador ' .
In Spain we would have said ' torero ' .
I would also like to join in previous speakers ' denunciation of the lack of respect which the Council has shown in not consulting this House when drawing up this resolution .
Similarly , the systematic absence of the Council when matters of such importance are being debated also disrupts inter-institutional equilibrium .
Is the Council not interested in what Parliament has to say ?
Is this why it does not consult us , at variance with the provisions of Article 6 of the Treaty , and is this why there is no member of the Council present here today ?
Mr President , I would now like to address two considerations .
The first relates to the debate on the ' communitization ' of the right to asylum .
Whenever the Council tackles questions relating to emigration and asylum , it demonstrates the deep contradiction which characterizes the entire European integration process in third-pillar policies because we are all , including the Council , aware that these problems affect everyone and can only be dealt with effectively from a common standpoint .
It is therefore difficult to understand the Council 's reluctance , apprehension and mean attitude and , once again , this House , when addressing resolutions such as that we are dealing with today , calls for harmonization , i.e. the adoption of acts which have direct consequences in legal terms and are binding upon Member States .
My second point , Mr President , focuses on the concept of ' guarantee ' as an element of legal security .
If Europe means anything , this would be , in Koshaker 's words , a legal tradition firmly based on the concept of the individual as citizen , as a focus of rights - rights which have to correspond with the guarantees which legislation establishes in order that they can be exercised since , otherwise , they would be no more than mere formal declarations devoid of content .
The wide-ranging nature of these guarantees is of greater importance , if this were possible , in cases where legal provision comes up against someone whose status is particularly insecure , which is the case of asylum-seekers .
Guarantees have to take priority , they have to be effective in protecting those whose application for the right of asylum is founded .
Founded , Mrs Roth ; founded , Mr Schulz .
However , they undoubtedly have to be applied strictly and in an identical manner to those who attempt to avail themselves of the system fraudulently .
The body of criteria which this resolution establishes regarding the three basic questions commented upon in earlier interventions - the safe third country , the country of origin and manifestly unfounded applications - is therefore a major advance whose importance it would be wrong to play down .
The leading role played by Europe , Mr President , in connection with this awful question of asylum is based on both a confirmation of human rights as the cornerstone of our culture and on the guarantees which our legislation provides in order for them to be exercised .
Mr President , the motion for a resolution on the right to asylum which is the subject of the d 'Ancona report is an expression of the Council 's willingness to lay down mechanisms to protect refugees .
This willingness has seen the formulation of supposedly equivalent legal bases of which the Member States may avail themselves to settle asylum applications .
All this is very laudable and I doubt that anyone could disagree .
The question is whether , despite our adhering to the content of the resolution , this is anything more than willingness .
With the resolution in our hands , we might ask : how can we guarantee appropriate protection which also has common support and respects the humanitarian traditions of this part of the world and the 1951 Geneva Convention when there are no binding legal provisions and , moreover , Member States are allowed wide-ranging recourse to exceptions under their national legislation ?
And as regards the substance - not only the content - we have no reason to congratulate ourselves .
We cannot accept the procedure chosen by the Council for application of the resolution , which has been removed from parliamentary and judicial control .
Moreover , the introduction of lists of safe countries of origin constitutes a breach of the duty to assess every asylum application on an individual basis , prevents detailed consideration of an applicant 's status and breaks with the legal principle that rights are individual in nature .
There are grounds for entertaining doubts as to the effectiveness of this legal instrument , and there are also hitherto unthought-of adverse effects .
When all is said and done , this instrument is no barrier in law against xenophobic prejudices .
What does , of course , merit full support , is Mrs d 'Ancona 's serious and meticulous report .
Mr President , defining the procedures for the submission of applications for asylum is a very pressing problem which certainly calls for careful attention by the Union .
The Council has adopted a resolution designed to create equivalent procedures in all Member States and procedural guarantees for asylum seekers .
The procedure selected clearly suffers from many defects . It seems to us to be unacceptable not only because the European Parliament was not consulted in advance but also because its application is removed from parliamentary and judicial control , and because it does not impose any obligation and its legal validity derives solely from the fact that it originates in conclusions reached by the Executive Committee of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees .
Our view is that applications for asylum which are denied at first instance must be subject to further appeal to a judicial authority , and that this appeal must be recognized as having a suspensive effect , though without prejudice to the requirement that the applicant must be able to offer a guarantee regarding his temporary residence and his whereabouts pending the final judgement .
Similarly , we are opposed to the drawing up of a list of so-called safe countries .
The assumptions are too great , in our view , and we are convinced that it cannot be made a standard since every application for asylum has characteristics and peculiarities of its own that defy any a priori classification .
Furthermore , the applicant must be able to enjoy the benefit of certain procedural guarantees which will ensure that his personal rights are respected , such as the use of a language he can understand , the application of an age limit and equal treatment for an application made by a spouse .
We are also firmly of the opinion that asylum must be granted to those women and girls who come from countries which use mutilation , rape or sexual violence as a weapon of war or follow a cultural tradition involving savage persecution on the basis of sex .
Mr President , we are talking this evening about the right of asylum , and there is a question I would like to ask : is asylum , today , still really a right at all ?
Let me quote two recent examples : a Zairean woman who had been raped and beaten in gaol in her own country , and a Tadjikistani Jew whose tortures included being tattooed with a Star of David by means of a lighted cigarette . These people were refused asylum in France , and refugees - as understood by the HCR - have even been sent back to their own countries .
This is an area where the threshold of the intolerable has been crossed , and I am well aware that France has no monopoly on such things .
Hence my question : in the European Union , is asylum still a right for the persecuted , and a duty for the Member States ?
In this context , the Council resolution on one aspect of the right of asylum , which concerns minimum guarantees , is well-meaning , but the many possible exceptions deprive it of meaning , and above all the choice of an instrument involving no legal obligation suggests that , once again , this is no more than a cheap sop to the conscience .
So what can the European Parliament do ?
The same as usual , not much .
The third pillar entails certain obligations , and Parliament will make its voice heard through Mrs d 'Ancona 's excellent report and the absolutely essential improvements it suggests .
But suggesting intelligent , constructive ideas is no guarantee of being listened to .
And there is a grave danger that , once again , this alarm call will fall on deaf ears .
The Council will be very careful to take no notice of it , since it is not legally required to do so and has long interpreted Article K.6 as meaning that it is not required to bother itself with the European Parliament 's opinion .
Other Members , especially Mr Schulz , have referred to this in no uncertain terms , and I shall not dwell on it .
It remains to be seen whether the IGC negotiators will decide to remedy this situation , and on that point , Mr President , I shall not be risking any bets on future events .
Mr President , I cannot begin my intervention without first congratulating Mrs d 'Ancona on her magnificent report .
The Council 's draft resolution , although well-intentioned , suffers from , I feel , a fundamental defect , making it worth no more than the paper it is written on , since the resolution contains no legal provisions binding on the Member States , thereby granting them recourse to exceptions under their national legislation .
I therefore believe it important to adopt the European Parliament 's resolution which is , in my opinion , an excellent point of departure and I welcome , with great satisfaction , the proposal to call upon the Commission to submit a draft agreement on asylum which harmonizes national legislation and which , in any case , guarantees easy access , legal aid , reliable investigation of the facts , assessment by specialized bodies , the opportunity to lodge an appeal and treatment which takes account of the special status of women .
Situations like that which occurred last July , when a number of asylum-seekers were expelled in breach of the most elementary fundamental rights , must never be repeated within the European Union .
I would also like to point out that the European Union should reflect on the contribution of its economic relations to the upholding of pseudo-democratic regimes , through economic aid and customs agreements , and to point out the paradox of a considerable number of asylum applications being lodged by citizens of such countries .
Finally , this House should begin to recognize the fact that the asylum-granting process faces a serious problem in the form of immigration on political and social grounds and must therefore opt decisively for a genuine Community foreign policy which can help to solve the basic problem we are all familiar with .
Mr President , if it is true that our culture in Europe is more or less in the JudaeoChristian tradition , it goes without saying that we deal very carefully with those we may call aliens , with those who are refugees , especially when they have fled for reasons of religious or political persecution , when they have in fact been driven to flight by racial or ethnic considerations .
The word alien is a word which we treat very carefully in our European tradition .
It is a great pity that public opinion often acts as if the asylum-seeker is actually a liability .
I think the report and our debate here in Parliament distance themselves from that view .
Because Europe has not , so to speak , been excessively plagued by great waves of asylum-seekers , as the extreme right sometimes claims .
Because , as we see of course every day in our papers , the majority of asylum-seekers and refugees are outside Europe and are accepted or rejected outside Europe .
So we should not exaggerate the European issue of asylum .
And I think it is important that Mrs d 'Ancona 's report , and indeed our debate here , should provide starting points for a thorough and objective approach .
Something does have to be done .
It is in itself a good thing that the Council has at least taken some steps towards a reasonable harmonization of asylum policy using the not very promising intergovernmental route .
That is most important , because it strengthens the legal certainty of the asylum-seeker in Europe , and that legal certainty is an extremely important thing .
It is of course true - and I agree with honourable Members who criticize the Council and the way in which it has dealt with this question - that all this has to be translated into binding law .
At present it can be binding law only at national level until such time as we have integrated the third pillar properly into the other Union procedures .
But we must be positive , and not assume that we are up against a bunch of rascals who want to combine really bad rules into a bad , minimal asylum policy for Europe .
I do not think that is the case , although as parliamentarians we are of course malcontents by nature , especially when we are in opposition and we are all in opposition .
I think Mrs d 'Ancona 's report is very positive , but like others too I do not like the fact that she is opposed to the lists of safe countries of origin .
I think it is very important , not least in order to shorten asylum procedures , that we should be positive about the potential value of having such lists .
Anyone who vets refugees ' stories every day knows how hard it is to assess their merits .
I hope that Mrs d 'Ancona will not , when we deal with the amendments , be too negative about the possibility of using these lists as a way of speeding up the procedure .
It is something which is very much in the interests of the genuine asylum-seeker .
Mr President , I should like to clarify a possible point of confusion which may have arisen from something Mr Wiebenga said .
It is true that as a minister I was involved in the introduction of the concept of a safe third country .
But it is apparent in practice , and the report makes the point , that this concept is at odds with a concept which is sacred in refugee law , namely the right of non-refoulement .
If that is so , one has a duty , Mr Deprez , you too , to reconsider such concepts and not only do I do that , fortunately so does Mr Wiebenga who formerly as a member of his national parliament embraced that kind of concept and who now , like myself , views the matter with a degree of detachment and is prepared to reconsider it on the basis of practical experience .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon tomorrow .
Consumer protection
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0355 / 96 by Mr Florio , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the Commission communication entitled ' Action plan on consumer access to justice and the settlement of consumer disputes in the internal market ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0013 - C4-0195 / 96 ) ; -A4-0354 / 96 by Mr Verde i Aldea , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on injunctions for the protection of consumers ' interests ( COM ( 95 ) 0712 - C4-0127 / 96-96 / 0025 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , this evening the House is considering a Commission proposal for an action plan on consumer access to justice .
In the opinion of your rapporteur , this is a very important plan in that it affects not only the sacrosanct rights of the consumers , which must be safeguarded at Community level , but also the destiny of the internal market . We are very well aware , and the point was clearly made in the Green Paper on the problem produced by the Commission in 1993 , that there are often difficulties , sometimes even insurmountable difficulties , in safeguarding consumer rights in the context of cross-border disputes and disputes between Member States , and these difficulties really are slowing down the progress of the single market .
To quote a simple example , it has been calculated that , to obtain compensation for damage in the sum of about ECU 2 , 000 , a European consumer today , involved in cross-border litigation , would have to face average legal costs amounting to ECU 2 , 500 , not counting VAT , and not to mention innumerable risks ; indeed , there is not even any certainty that , if he won his case , he would then be able to assert his rights , because it may well happen that when the time comes for payment the other , defeated party has disappeared or is no longer able to pay .
There is thus an obvious need to find a solution to the problem of small cross-border disputes , a solution which the consumer can see to be practicable and which will therefore not discourage him from entering into cross-border relationships and acting as a cross-border consumer .
The solution proposed by the Commission in its action plan , and regarded mainly favourably by the Committee on Legal Affairs , is a two-part one . The first part comprises an extrajudicial solution to encourage , as moreover is already the case in the internal legislation of every Member State , a settlement to such disputes which avoids the need to refer the case to a court or to a judge , with the necessarily more complex procedures involved in going through legal channels .
The second part , to apply where this attempt at an out-of-court settlement of the problem fails , comprises simplified access to legal procedures . This simplified access would essentially comprise of a form , printed in the various Community languages and therefore extremely easy to use and universally accessible .
This form would be sent by one party to the other , initially as an attempt to achieve a rapid and amicable resolution of the problem . Then , if no such rapid resolution were to prove possible , the same form could be used by the competent judge , who would thus already have a highly simplified summary of the dispute , which he could then resolve on the basis of simplified procedures .
The legal basis of the action plan is certainly Article 129a of the Treaty , which of course does not exclude the possibilities opened up by Article K.1 of the Treaty on European Union .
The committee proceedings have resulted in a favourable view of the Commission 's action plan , for which particular thanks are due to the Commissioner , Mrs Bonino , as the diligent and active sponsor of the plan .
, rapporteur .
( ES ) Mr President , as a result of the report Mr Florio has just submitted , we are faced with a specific application : the granting of a further right to consumers .
Admittedly , the legal framework for the defence of consumer 's rights , in terms of material or substantive law , has been expanding and , at the current time , is an important aspect of Community law .
However , the second part , i.e. procedural law , is lacking .
This is a difficult situation because it continues to lie with the Member States and therefore direct access , or a direct claim , will encounter a great number of obstacles .
The proposal for a directive we are dealing with at the moment is an important directive , despite the fact that its objective is or may appear to be limited .
The consumer is in a genuinely inferior position vis-à-vis producers and suppliers of goods and services .
Freedom of movement , the single market for the provision of services and circulation of goods , etc. has been virtually achieved .
However , consumers are finding that although this single , open market exists , the possibility of legal redress is limited to national legislation in the field .
Hence the importance attached to this proposed directive : despite its limited nature , I believe it constitutes a significant contribution to providing what has hitherto not existed , i.e. no more nor less than the opportunity to have one 's legal status actively recognized in a country where one is not domiciled .
And this applies not to individuals but to organizations representing defenders of consumers .
I therefore feel that the reasonable nature of the directive - because it is contained within a very specific field - is largely offset because it is an action which has entered into force and which required a little imagination and a certain willingness to go out on a limb , because it was not possible to foresee that this would be a way to open up access on the part of consumers ' representatives to justice .
I believe this is wide-ranging in scope and I therefore would like to congratulate the Commission on its initiative .
The work of this rapporteur and of the relevant committee was to support the directive , not attempt to create a new directive , and we restricted ourselves to the specific field of providing access to justice for representative or professional organizations for consumers and attempting to improve what it was possible to improve upon .
I would therefore point out that I restricted myself to three important points .
Firstly : which organizations ?
And , added to this , the possibility of Europe-wide organizations also having access to justice .
It may be difficult , but Member States are still those who draw up the list of organizations .
Therefore , although there may be many Europe-wide organizations in a specific field , this may provide a solution .
Secondly - something important Mr Florio also said - the possibility of solving disputes by means of conciliation or out-of-court procedures .
I believe this is important .
All the report did in this connection was to set a time limit on this preliminary claim , i.e. a preliminary claim has to be settled within a certain period .
And , finally , there was the obvious problem of which directives were to be incorporated into any such procedures and , above all , the problem of future directives .
I feel that the committee work in this connection has given a result and will henceforth make it possible for all directives on one and the same subject to be incorporated rapidly or virtually automatically into the field of action of the directive we are approving .
All that remains for me to do is to thank the Commission , because working with the Commission has been most agreeable .
I also feel that it has been fruitful and we should hope that this can be built upon particularly because the third pillar , relating to justice and home affairs , is in the process of being ' communitized ' .
This is the only way in which not only consumers in a specific field but also all citizens can have genuine access to justice within the internal market .
" Crooks exploit every loophole in European law ' . That was the headline that appeared in a magazine that is delivered free to more than 3 million German households .
Yet this was not an article by an opponent of the EU ; it simply described , in perfectly sober terms , the real position of European consumers .
The way the law stands at present , a normal consumer who buys something in another EU Member State can only hope that the product he has bought will not give him any cause to complain .
Cross-border consumer disputes are too expensive and take up too much time , the legal obstacles are difficult for individuals to overcome , not to mention the language barriers .
In their own country , consumers know their rights or else they can find out , free of charge ( or very cheaply ) from their nearest consumer organization .
In 1993 , the EU Commission , in its Green Paper , had already pointed out these problems and , after consulting all the interested parties , including the European Parliament , it drew up its conclusions .
So today we are discussing a proposal for a directive on cross-border actions for an injunction and also an action plan on consumer access to justice and the settlement of consumer disputes .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has already given its opinion on both these documents , in July and September respectively .
We welcome the Commission 's proposals and would like to thank the Commissioner and her colleagues .
In the opinions it issued , our committee asked the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights to take into consideration the amendments , and this they have largely done .
There is agreement to the effect that binationally qualified institutions must uphold , even across borders , the right to bring an action for injunction on the grounds of illegal trading practices .
We cannot have a situation in which a German company with an accommodation address in France causes harm to consumers by its misleading advertising , but the French consumer organization cannot bring an action for injunction , because the advertising originates in Germany , so the German consumer organization tries to bring the case to court but is told that an action for an injunction is not possible because no German consumers have been adversely affected .
I believe that this is not how the normal consumer sees European unification and the internal market .
We asked the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights to answer one question in particular , because we ourselves were unable to come up with an answer , and I should like to ask the Commissioner to listen to it .
The question was whether an action can be brought for an injunction against an enterprise if there has been a delay in the transposition of a Directive by a Member State such that the enterprise is infringing European law but not national law .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights says - no doubt with good reason - that the answer is no .
But perhaps the Commission could also answer the question , or else it could do something very simple .
It could check up on Member States to make sure that EU legislation is transposed within the required time limit .
The question would then be superfluous .
I am thinking here of the following examples : the delayed transposition of the Package Holiday Directive , the judgment of the European Court of Justice , and the Time-Sharing Directive which , if I remember rightly , has to be transposed by the end of May 1997 .
Unfortunately there is still a lot of abuse in this sector .
We fully and entirely support the proposed action plan on consumer access to justice and the settlement of consumer disputes , on which Mr Florio has drawn up his report .
We are also of the opinion that preference should be given to the out-ofcourt settlement of disputes , conducted on a transfrontier basis by means of a standard form and in collaboration with consumer complaints bodies nominated by the Member States .
This will save the consumer both time and money .
However , in-court proceedings should not be ruled out altogether .
Our committee is asking that the Commission should without fail take care to ensure that Member States only approve those arbitration or conciliation bodies that meet the minimum requirements set out in the action plan .
To put it more simply , these bodies must be independent and they must operate transparently .
In my own country , this has not been the case so far .
In addition , all types of product and service must be covered by clearing agencies of this kind .
This is not guaranteed throughout the fifteen EU Member States , but it is essential if out-ofcourt settlement procedures are to be successful .
Finally , I should like to make one more request to the Commission .
In-court procedures should not be ruled out , even in future , especially where the economic value of the dispute is high .
Can the Commission come to some kind of arrangement or agreement with the Member States on the question of how a consumer whose claim has been upheld in a court in his own country can make sure that that claim is enforced in another Member State ?
This is not a problem that I have just plucked out of the air . It is a fact , and we must find a solution if we want the consumer to have confidence in the internal market .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the citizens of Europe are first and foremost consumers .
This is particularly obvious at the moment , as the Christmas shopping period gets underway .
Now that the internal market has been completed , the barriers have fallen , and cross-border business transactions are increasing , together , of course , with all the problems associated with them .
This is a subject that is particularly important for the European Union , because it is only by pursuing an appropriate consumer policy that the Union can prove that its policies are of direct benefit to its citizens .
The fact that this need is recognized is reflected in Article 129 of the Maastricht Treaty .
This expressly makes it possible for specific actions which will support and extend consumer policy in the Member States .
This task is being performed both by the communication from the Commission concerning an action plan , which is what we are discussing at the moment , and by the proposal for a directive on injunctions for the protection of consumers ' interests .
Both of these proposals attempt to achieve optimum consumer protection while strictly adhering to the principle of subsidiarity , since they do not encroach upon the procedural law of individual Member States .
At least , this is what the Commission has expressly assured us , and it was this point that was central to the discussions within the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
In my opinion , we have been successful , in Mr Aldea 's report , in taking this aspect into account .
The report improves upon the Commission proposal in that it places more emphasis on the need to take into account the situations in individual Member States regarding procedural law - situations that are still very different - , without , however , losing sight of the objective of a uniform level of consumer protection .
As far as the Commission 's action plan is concerned , it was generally agreed that the European Parliament would not be satisfied simply with evaluating this action plan , but also wanted its own suggestions incorporated into the plan .
For example , we placed particular emphasis on the out-of-court settlement of consumer disputes , which would make it possible for people to resolve their disputes reasonably quickly and cheaply .
Impartiality , efficiency and transparency are the most important things here , and in-court proceedings must not be ruled out entirely .
Only an effective consumer policy will protect the interests of the public , and I believe that both of these reports meet this requirement .
Mr President , I will not repeat what the previous speakers have said ; but my compliments both to Mr Verde i Aldea and Mr Florio .
Luckily the reports were discussed by the two previous speakers , so I will not waste my time on their contents , but will speak on my amendments .
I will do so in my own language .
Mr President , I put down two amendments on two things about which I would appreciate the Commission 's views .
One reflects my insistence that , since the Commission has established a list of six minimum criteria , before an extrajudicial procedure is begun , both producers and consumers must be consulted on the way in which that is to be done and the criteria which must be met .
Mr Florio originally rejected that amendment but later accepted it .
That is why I tabled it again before the plenary . And it seems to me perfectly logical that this should be the rule .
My second amendment concerns the combining of cases , because the big problem is this : how and at what juncture can actions by different consumers against a single producer in the Community be combined ?
What we envisaged in our amendment is that when a number of consumers each initiate separate proceedings the consumer bodies can nevertheless combine those different actions and together select one place from which to pursue the action .
I should like to hear what the Commission thinks about this too .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all I should like to thank the Commission for its initiative in favour of protecting consumer interests in transfrontier disputes .
I should also like to thank the two rapporteurs for all that they have done towards the progress and further clarification of this initiative .
I hope this makes it clear that I am speaking in favour of both reports , as I did in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
I hope I may be allowed to make two critical comments .
These concern amendments , and the first one refers to Amendment No 16 .
In my opinion this proposal is contrary to the spirit and letter of EU law , which allows regulations to be tightened up in line with EU law , but must not go against this tendency by , for example , minimizing the opportunities for group actions .
The second comment is an emphatic endorsement of Amendment No 1 by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Limiting the legal basis of the draft directive to Article 100a would make consumers ' interests subordinate to the operation of the common market , whereas the reverse hierarchy is the correct one .
Therefore , in my opinion , Article 129 must be added , which interprets consumers ' interests in a wider sense , rather than merely in relation to the smooth operation of the market .
Consumers ' interests and consumers ' rights , Mr Florio , whether sacrosanct or not , are still citizens ' rights .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , it is truly an honour and a pleasure for me to begin by thanking Mr Verde i Aldea for his excellent work - excellent not only from an objective standpoint but also from a subjective standpoint .
I refer to the spirit of cooperation and comradeship which has prevailed throughout the drafting of this report .
Similar comments should also , by rights , be applied to the extremely valuable work carried out by the second rapporteur in this debate , Mr Florio .
I would point to the attitude of collaboration on the part of the entire Commission team regarding these two reports , which is no small thing .
On behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , I confirm the global vote in favour of the Florio report and , in connection with the Green Paper , support for all the amendments of the Committee on Legal Affairs , with the regrettable exception , Mrs Kuhn , of Amendment No 5 .
Naturally , we are all in agreement as to the basics but , in legal texts , by which I mean those which , unlike the one we were concerned with a few minutes ago , have a direct binding effect , it is necessary to assess the technical and legal weight of the words .
Nor can we lend our support to the supplementary amendments tabled by the Socialist Group , likewise on strict technical and legal grounds which are , however , indeed contained in the amendments tabled by my colleague from the Green Group and , generally speaking , drawn up by the Committee on Legal Affairs which , Madam Commissioner , I believe substantially improve the technical quality of the text while retaining its spirit .
And now , in this short time granted me by the absence of my colleague , Mr Añoveros , I would like to step back from my position as a representative of European citizens and speak to you , at this late-evening gathering which lends itself to confidences , as an ordinary citizen .
It is my belief that these two topics are important : both Commission action for consumer access to justice and this proposal for a directive .
I believe many of us are of the opinion that progress on to the third phase of monetary union is important , that the macroeconomic significance cannot be overestimated , that all economic matters in general are of singular importance , but we , as citizens , need to feel this closeness afforded us by Law , this closeness afforded us by access to Justice , this opportunity to unburden ourselves of our , albeit minor , concerns , to seek the protection of judges and the courts , and to be able to do so easily and smoothly even when lodging the claim before someone who is not a citizen of the same Member State .
Only when this has been achieved , when this has been established on the basis of a workable criterion , will we ordinary citizens have the impression that the European Union , Mr President , Madam Commissioner , is anything more than one enormous market-place .
I would conclude by saying that I have spoken as a citizen and not as a consumer , because I believe that the consumer is simply a market variable , buying or selling his capacity to work , and the citizen is this consumer assisted by the Law and protected by law and , for this precise reason , capable of having recourse to the courts in order to exercise these rights and to take advantage of the protection granted by this law .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must begin by thanking you for accepting the highly innovative spirit of these two proposals , which admittedly have only a limited ambition in this context but which I believe are innovative in their approach to the citizen and the attitude to the law they represent .
As I have said many times , I believe that the issue is not so much consumer protection , as if consumers were unable to protect themselves , but rather the regulations and the rights which consumers , as European citizens , can and must exercise .
In this context , even though it is a somewhat innovative concept and one which , perhaps , not many Member States will yet be ready to accept , I believe that the positive way in which Parliament , to judge from the course of the debate , intends to receive this approach will reassure the Commission after the difficulties it has undoubtedly encountered in making the other institutional partners understand that the novelty of this approach will not damage the relationship between the citizen and the European Union . Rather , it is based not on safeguards to be conceded , as if we were generously dispensing this or that favour every now and then , but on information provided by us in our capacity as legislators - as persons who lay down the ground rules for the market and the European Union to govern the interplay between the various actors in this forum .
My starting point is the action plan on consumer access , which was adopted in February last year .
It seems to me that there is one point I should add to Mr Florio 's excellent report : basically , I am trying to clarify a fundamental but uncomfortable truth . That fundamental truth is that although it is important to adopt good laws , it is not enough unless the citizens can make use of those laws .
This may be a truism , but the fact remains that when the time comes for the laws to be applied , the harsh realities come to the surface and all the problems arise .
All uncomfortable truths come to light slowly , and this one was no exception .
I am thinking in particular - if the Member States concerned will forgive me - of the discussions that began long ago in the Council on this difficult topic .
Fortunately , Parliament and the Commission had sufficient patience and tenacity , and among the many resolutions which you adopted I recall one dating from April 1994 , in the wake of the Green Paper presented by the Commission in 1993 , which encouraged us to continue along the lines we had adopted .
Today , for the first time , the European Parliament has the opportunity to give its verdict on a number of practical initiatives , and the report Mr Florio has presented represents an important step in that direction .
As a final point on this aspect of the matter , paraphrasing President Delors , as it were , may I also say that the European Union does not always succeed in providing itself with the resources to achieve its own ambitions .
I say this because , although I entirely endorse all the suggestions contained in the report , the fact remains that the Commission , and DG XXIV in particular , presently lack the resources , both financial and human , to implement them , although our attitude to a good many of them is one not just of agreement but of a degree of enthusiasm .
The fact remains that , as things stand at present , a good many of these recommendations are difficult to put into practice .
I say this in all frankness , so as not to arouse false expectations , and I also say it here because Parliament is a budgetary authority .
Parliament , despite its difficult relations with the Council , can try - and I am sure it will try - to increase its powers of action in some way : approving resolutions is all very well , and they certainly represent a step forward , but if we are then left with a budget which is 0.027 % of the European Union budget - and please don 't forget the zeroes , because they matter in this instance , so I repeat , 0.027 % of the European Union budget - well , miracles may always happen , but sometimes they do not .
Moving onto the second report , the one presented by Mr Verde i Aldea , I believe that his report has a clear value and clear limitations .
The value is that it lays down principles , in the hope that this will have an encouraging effect in connection with other subjects , other areas .
It certainly brings a fresh look to the relations between citizens and institutions , especially the legal institutions .
Precisely for this reason , I believe that the proposal made by the Commission has positive aspects : in that sense , I recognize both the value and the limitations of that proposal , as highlighted by the honourable rapporteur , and I shall return to them in due course .
As far as the amendments are concerned , the Commission is in such agreement with the spirit of the report that , give or take one or two formal amendments , it accepts virtually all of them ; specifically , 20 of the 25 proposed by Parliament .
I think I should , nevertheless , offer some explanation regarding the few amendments which the Commission feels unable to accept .
I refer in particular to Amendments Nos 5 , 6 , 12 , 19 and 25 , the only ones which the Commission feels it cannot accept .
In particular , with reference to Amendment No 12 , I would like , as a former colleague , to draw your attention to the paradoxical consequences which would result from acceptance of the amendment as presently worded .
Forgive my frankness , but to accept a situation where the legal remedies provided by this directive would apply - and I quote the amendment - ' in so far as the legal system of the Member State concerned so permits ' is , frankly , equivalent to completely destroying the sense of Article 2 , and hence of the directive as a whole .
If Parliament 's intention is to make it possible to do what can already be done , I think you would agree that there is no point in our producing a directive .
If it is possible to do what can already be done at national level , then perhaps a serious ambiguity exists .
However , on a careful reading of the dossier as presented , I feel I must make that comment , that remark .
I feel sure that the European Parliament has no intention of destroying the meaning of Article 2 , and hence of the entire directive .
I hope that you will give consideration to this appeal of mine , and take a closer or more detailed look at these aspects .
As regards Amendments Nos 6 , 19 and 25 , which relate to consumer organizations at European level , it seems to me that these amendments would introduce an obligation which would be incompatible with the principle of proportionality , or in the present case with the recitals of the proposal for a directive .
Moreover , in the absence of any definition of what constitutes an organization operating at European level - which is a somewhat vague expression - the acceptance of these amendments would create serious problems of interpretation .
I invite honourable Members simply to open the Yellow Pages of the Brussels telephone directory , but to save you the trouble I can tell you that my staff have counted 600 European consumer organizations there .
So I form the impression that the vagueness of the definition would be no help to us here .
As far as Amendment No 5 is concerned , it seems to me impossible to accept it because what discriminates against national organizations may be certain existing national legal systems rather than the case law which those legal systems are required to apply , in the absence of Community regulations capable of solving the problem .
Overall , subject to those reflections and despite a few discrepancies , the Commission is pleased to find itself in such agreement with the European Parliament .
Let me add just a few words addressed to Mrs Kuhn , who raised two specific problems .
First , the Commission believes that the European Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs was right in saying that , on the basis of European Court of Justice case law - the Frankovic judgement - failure to transpose a directive or delay in doing so can be grounds for complaint against the defaulting Member State : that State can then be required to compensate individuals for damage suffered because of such failure or delay .
This is a procedure which can and must be followed .
In reply to Mrs Kuhn 's second question , I will say that the directive is intended to ensure the application of existing Community law , and is therefore limited to the inhibitory aspects .
Regarding the compensation aspects , the Commission has at present proposed these in the context of the action plan and not of the directive .
It seems to me that , as things stand at the moment , this may be a very acceptable first step .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Biosafety
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :

B4-1217 / 96 / rev. 1 - O-0209 / 96 / rev. 1 by Mrs Breyer , Mr Lannoye , Mr Tamino and Mrs Ahern , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Commission , on biosafety and food security ; -B4-1220 / 96 - O-0239 / 96 by Mrs Roth-Behrendt , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Commission , on biosafety and food security ; -B4-1222 / 96 - O-0243 / 96 by Mr Eisma , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democratic and Reformist Party , to the Commission , on biosafety ; -B4-1223 / 96 - O-0244 / 96 by Mr Cabrol , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , to the Commission , on biosafety-B4-1224 / 96-0-0245 / 96 by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and Mr Florenz , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Commission , on biosafety and food security .
Mr President , first of all , a genetically modified foodstuff ( Monsanto 's GMO soya beans ) has been authorized for human consumption without any special labelling !
Consumers are being deprived of their right to decide , and in addition to this , the Commission 's constant invoking of the principle of transparency is just empty words .
It is quite right that this business should have caused a storm of indignation among consumer organizations and environmental organizations .
Not only has the citizen 's right to make a free decision been trampled underfoot : health protection has been given the same treatment !
The existing loopholes in controls and security , not only in the case of soya beans but also in the case of future applications to place GMO foodstuffs on the market , are disastrous and scandalous .
For example , it is now known that when these genetically modified soya beans were being bred , the new active substance was not tested at all .
Studies showing that glysophate produces substances similar to oestrogen were disregarded , as was the allergy risk .
This afternoon , Mrs Bjerregaard said that a ban on imports is possible if new information becomes available .
Hence our question : what are you going to do in the light of large amount of new information that is now available ?
Will you use these studies as grounds for introducing an import ban ?
How will you respond to the urgent desire on the part of consumers and the wholesale and retail trade to see these foodstuffs stored separately and given special labels ?
In answer to a written question , you have admitted that you have absolutely no idea , and will first of all have to assess the risks , for example the risk that genetically modified maize might be being imported illegally into the European Union .
Genetically modified soya beans are only allowed to be imported for further processing , yet there have been numerous cases of feedback from the inspection authorities of Member States which show that these inspections are just not taking place !
This means that these restrictions are not being policed .
So what measures are you taking to remedy this lack of control ?
If these specific questions remain unanswered , then we shall ask you to prohibit the marketing of genetically modified foodstuffs until the risks have been removed and the appropriate controls have been put in place .
Preventive measures to protect health must be given priority over industrial interests .
Consumers must not be downgraded to the status of guinea pigs ...
I am very sorry .
It is always a problem for those who take part in the last debate , but the Conference of Presidents in their wisdom have given me 30 minutes for this debate and 37 and a half minutes of speaking time .
I cannot fit everybody in if we carry on taking extra time .
Mr President , the principles of precaution and prevention regarding the environment in the European Union and the health of our citizens are enshrined in the Treaty .
This means that it is also enshrined in the Treaty that before genetically modified organisms , foodstuffs and plants can be placed on the market , tests have to be carried out .
So we must ask ourselves - and here I agree with Mrs Breyer - what genetically modified plants , organisms and seeds actually mean in the limited amount of space that we have here in Europe .
What influence do they have on the balance of nature and on biological diversity ?
And the most important question is what will it mean for wild species and for the plants of our continent if crosses occur , or are capable of occurring .
Are we going to have plants that will rampage like tanks over all the other plants , because they are herbicideresistant ?
And here I must say that as far as I am concerned , herbicide resistance in a plant is in itself a perversion .
If I shower a plant with pesticide , so that all other plants die , then that is certainly not the way towards the sustainable development of our agriculture and our environment .
The effects on human health , according to Directive 90 / 220 , are to be tested by means of long-term studies .
I wonder where these studies are in the case of the genetically modified soya beans that have now been approved . Where are the studies to determine what will happen when human beings eat genetically modified products over a long period of time , and whether there any knock-on effects when animals are fed with genetically modified feedingstuffs , thereby modifying the food chain ?
These questions would also have to be resolved by means of long-term studies , and the results would have to be made public .
Here I agree absolutely with the Commissioner , Mrs Bonino , that it is not a question of protecting consumers as if they were incapable , but rather it is a question of informing them and of creating a climate of clarity and openness .
I should also like to mention another point here .
In the United States , for some time now there has been a simplified testing procedure for genetically modified products and foodstuffs , thanks to legislation introduced by the former Vice-President , Dan Quayle .
I would very much like to have known whether this genetically modified soya produced by Monsanto might in certain circumstances fall within the relevant period of time , and whether the tests really are equivalent to those that have to be undertaken in accordance with our Directive 90 / 220 .
I am of the opinion that it is necessary to tell the public what is happening here .
I believe that it is absolutely essential to keep genetically modified products and traditional products separate , because otherwise the supporters of the free market will destroy consumer choice .
Mr President , what we must avoid in debates like this on biotechnology is allowing emotion to prevail over reason .
Biotechnology is not by definition a bad thing ; it actually offers much that is good .
But not without some dangers .
Those dangers must be contained by policy , or at least a case-by-case assessment is needed of the kind now being conducted over soya beans .
In the specific case of soya beans all manner of independent bodies have ruled that soya beans can safely be processed and consumed without danger to humans and the environment , and the pesticide to which they have been made resistant is less damaging to the environment than the agents currently used in processing soya .
But nevertheless it is a worrying development to see the chemical industry so deeply involved in biotechnology .
If crops are made resistant to pesticides it could push up consumption of them enormously , whilst resistance to diseases and pests would benefit the environment , so we are warning Monsanto , for example , because if they misuse the situation as it has developed , the European Parliament will immediately take action .
The environment and the consumer interest must be central to this debate .
For these reasons my group is in favour of labelling genetically modified foods , but only where the presence of genetically modified organisms can be identified .
Given that the oil from transgenic soya is chemically identical to that of conventional soya , there would seem to be no point in labelling this oil .
The European industry must use its influence to ensure that transgenic soya is supplied separately , because that industry is a very large customer and must be able to insist that the Americans , for example , send us the transgenic soya beans separately from the ordinary ones , because in this way the raw transgenic bean can be labelled .
The processor , for example Unilever , can then decide whether or not it wants to use this transgenic bean .
And if the consumer , for whatever reason , does not want this transgenic soya , or products of it , that preference must be accommodated .
We respect the wish of the individual consumer and that wish can be accommodated by labelling soya beans separately .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a pharmacist , I should like to express may opinion , in connection with these questions , on the protection of human health - something that has been mentioned frequently .
The genetically modified soya bean produced by Monsanto has been approved under Directive 90 / 220 on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms .
The aim of this directive is to protect human health and the environment , by means of strict approval procedures and environmental acceptability tests .
With regard to the health tests laid down by this directive , particular emphasis is given to the allergenic aspects of these products .
Scientific tests on the soya bean have shown that this product is harmless to human health and to the environment , and that it does not cause any increased allergic reaction , compared with the traditional soya bean .
The much-quoted problem of allergenicity can be traced back to tests on a different species of soya bean , in which a Brazil nut protein was introduced into the soya beans .
It is a well-known fact that many people show an allergic reaction to the Brazil nut protein , and this was also the case with the tests on the soya beans that had been modified in this way .
The tests were therefore halted , and those soya beans were never placed on the market as a product .
I should also like to refer to the point made in the resolutions that we are considering , with reference to the drafting of a novel-food regulation .
In March of this year , Parliament accepted six amendments .
In Amendment No 51 we clearly refer to genetically modified organisms , and not to genetically modified substances , which is what the resolution now refers to .
The word ' substances ' would also include dead matter , but this was not the intention of this amendment .
Secondly , I do not think that it is appropriate for us , by means of such a resolution , to anticipate the talks that are going on within the mediation committee .
If we want the public to accept modern biotechnology - and this is something that is essential - then in addition to providing factual information , we must talk about the risks .
It is not possible , in life , to eliminate risk entirely , but I believe it is irresponsible to cause people anxiety about fears that are scientifically groundless .
Mr President , can I just preface my remarks by saying first of all , as you pointed out yourself , that a period has been allocated for this debate which is shorter than the amount of speaking time allocated to the honourable Members who rightly want to intervene .
I understand that it is the convention that the Commission responds at this stage in the immediate wake of those who have put down questions .
I will certainly do that .
Five minutes have been allocated to me to respond to questions of considerable substance and complexity .
I therefore will take precisely five minutes and I will not get through the answers that I have here , but I will sit down then and provide the rest of the answer through the post of Parliament to the honourable Members who have asked the questions .
I also take this opportunity to say that the Commission wants to be accountable , but it is only possible to be accountable when the procedures allow it .
I hope , therefore , that there will be some further attention to procedures so that we can be accountable .
In answer to the questions , according to Article 4 of Directive 90 / 220 , Member States are responsible for ensuring that the competent authority organizes inspections and other control measures as appropriate to ensure compliance with that directive .
Consequently , it is the obligation of Member States to ensure , through appropriate controls or other measures , that there is adherence to the conditions of the consent granted for a genetically modified organism product in accordance with Directive 90 / 220 .
The directive stipulates that before a genetically modified product is placed on the market an assessment of the potential risks for human health and the environment should be carried out .
For all the products authorized so far the Commission has been satisfied that on the basis of the evidence provided , it is unlikely that any adverse effects on human health and the environment , as defined by the directive , can be expected .
The Commission is further reassured by the safety provisions of the directive , in particular Articles 11 , 6 and 16 which ensure that any new information which indicates the existence of any risks that were previously unforeseen will be forwarded and the consent will be modified or revoked accordingly .
In April this year , as the House will know , the Commission took a decision relating to the placing on the market of the genetically modified soyabeans for certain uses .
This decision allowed a consent to be issued to Monsanto Europe by the competent authority of the United Kingdom for the specific purposes , and I quote ' of handling in the environment during import , before and during storage and before and during its processing to non-viable products ' .
The consent issued does not cover the processed non-viable products derived from these soyabeans since these are not organisms and are therefore not covered by the directive .
It must , therefore , be pointed out that the assessment of the potential effects on human health which was carried out under the directive took into account the fact that the soyabeans would be processed to products that would eventually enter the food chain .
Furthermore , Monsanto , as the notifier , voluntarily submitted an additional dossier which included a full food assessment of the processed product which covered aspects which are not examined by Directive 90 / 220 , such as nutritional equivalents .
The Commission adopted its decision on the placing on the market of the Monsanto soyabeans following a favourable opinion by the regulatory committee established by Directive 90 / 220 .
Since the date of the adoption , the Commission has not been aware of any new information that would justify an amendment to the decision .
In its decision the Commission indicated that , according to the evaluation carried out under Directive 90 / 220 , there is no reason to believe that there will be any adverse effects on human health and the environment from the uses notified .
It was also indicated that there are no safety reasons justifying the segregation of this product from other soyabeans and no safety reasons which justify mentioning on the label that the product has been obtained by genetic modification .
The Commission has already recognized the concerns of an increasing number of consumers with regard to genetically modified foodstuffs by submitting a proposal for a regulation on novel foods .
This regulation , when adopted , will cover all the aspects that are relevant to the assessment of food and foodstuffs .
The remainder of the answer , which is comprehensive and thorough , Mr President , will be provided to all of the honourable Members who put down the original questions .
My five minutes are up .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your understanding about the time .
I think we share the view that the way the time is allocated is entirely unsatisfactory .
Mr President , consumers are extremely anxious about the food that they are being presented with in the shops .
In particular , they are very disturbed that soya bean protein from genetically modified plants is likely to become part of dozens of products they buy without any labelling whatsoever .
There are many arguments about whether or not these new genetically modified foods are desirable or necessary .
Some people are concerned about safety for our environment , some about health risks and whether scientists really know what they are letting us in for .
Some of the arguments about ethics and food safety have already been debated here in the passage through this House of the novel foods directive .
People have grave concerns at the moment because in the absence of the novel foods directive - which is not yet in place - we do not yet have a product-approval system of sufficient standing to deal with these products .
Quite frankly , it is astonishing that the Commission has seen fit to licence the imports of Monsanto soya beans so quickly , when the tests they have passed in the USA have been minimal .
Now we hear from the press that the Commission is about to approve a controversial strain of genetically modified maize , developed by Ciba Geigy , apparently to defuse a potential transatlantic trade war .
The production and marketing of these new products , which are at least , to some extent , being developed to be more resistant to herbicides - therefore encouraging even more use of dangerous herbicides in farming - is potentially massively dangerous to biodiversity .
Have we not seen enough damage from pesticides ?
Has nobody in the Commission read Rachel Carson 's The Silent Spring ?
Why the haste ?
Why do we have to bend over backwards in the face of serious consumer disquiet to licence these products just because they are there and just because industry is piling on the pressure ?
I refer to the questions tabled by the PSE Group and I hope the Commission has some real answers .
I have the greatest sympathy with the position of the Commission today on many counts .
We have handled our business very badly in Parliament .
But the bottom line in all this has to be labelling .
The most important thing is that people absolutely must have the right to know and to make their own choice about the food they eat .
How can the Commission even think about allowing these controversial products on the market without clear labelling information for consumers as to what they are ?
The present situation is completely unacceptable for consumers , potentially risky and flagrantly dangerous for environmental protection .
I must ask the Commission to reconsider its actions , take a closer look at all these products from every possible angle and ensure that all genetically modified food products are clearly labelled for the consumer from now on .
Mr President , the introduction of herbicide-resistant soya lends increased urgency to the question of genetically modified organisms .
It is normal that we should give proper consideration to current developments in the food industry .
The consumer has every right to be informed of any risks inherent in the new technology of genetic manipulation .
But information must be objective and not based on pamphlets or suitably slanted data from the industry .
It is unfortunate that the European legislation on novel foods and more specifically on labelling has not yet been approved and implemented , because that would have prevented some of the hoo-hah surrounding this subject .
Like other members of my group I do not agree with point 3 of the joint resolution that measures are needed to keep all foods containing genetically modified organisms separate from other foods .
Nor do I agree with point 8 about labelling .
I would like to call for the consumer to be better informed now and as a matter of urgency , through information campaigns .
Every time there is a debate on biotechnology or genetic manipulation the man in the street mistakenly thinks of that horrible picture of a mouse with a human ear grafted on to it .
Such misconceptions must be eliminated by means of clear and above all objective information .
Lastly I urge the Commission to concentrate on revising directive 90 / 220 to make procedures more transparent , both for the consumer and the industries concerned .
There is talk too of a green paper on food legislation .
Can the Commission also tell us when this will be forthcoming ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , consumers have a right to information about the use of genetically modified organisms in their food .
We should demand that those who produce and market food should provide comprehensive labelling .
The authorization of genetically modified foodstuffs must only be granted when very stringent scientific criteria have been met .
Genetic engineering is also a science of the future , and it is estimated that approximately 8 % of new future job opportunities could be created by this technology .
In medicine , for example in the production of insulin , this technology has been recognized for a long time .
It is now possible to save thousands of human lives using this technology .
In the food industry too , consumers must be guaranteed absolute safety , and all risks should be ruled out .
Special , controllable approval procedures form the basis for the harmless use of genetically improved foodstuffs .
For ethical reasons too , comprehensive labelling is absolutely essential .
Labelling provides additional security for the consumer .
He can decide for himself whether or not he wants to use the product that has previously been scientifically tested .
If market research findings are correct , i.e. that about 80 % of the population reject these products , then they will not be successful , and so they will automatically be withdrawn from the market .
It is only possible to place them on the market when they have been approved by the experts .
Allergies are a danger to consumers ; there is no doubt about that .
However , scientists tell us that they can be prevented by the proper use of genetic engineering .
We know that the use of genetic engineering can also help to reduce the amount of pesticides used as well as the use of fertilizers , and this in turn would bring environmental advantages , in the shape of improved soil and water quality .
Therefore we really do need to make a conscientious examination of this technology , and not simply condemn it out of hand .
Testing and labelling , however , are absolutely essential for European consumers in all cases .
I should like to ask the Commissioner , in all seriousness , whether he shares the opinion of Mr Bangemann on this subject .
Mr President , a few months ago the Commission agreed to the marketing of genetically modified maize , and only the reaction of the Member States persuaded it to retract .
The Commission gave its agreement saying , and I quote from the text of the agreement : ' there are no reasons to think that the introduction of the genes in question into the maize will have any adverse impact whatsoever on human health or the environment ' .
There is no reason to think so ?
Today , it would seem that there certainly is .
Mrs Bjerregaard called a press conference and announced that the scientific committees need more time to reach a decision .
If we refer to the text on soya beans , which also dates from early this year and which resulted in an agreement by the Commission , ' the introduction of the genes in question into soya beans will probably not result in any adverse consequences for health or the environment ' .
Is this not an identical process to the one that took place in the case of BSE ?
That is my question .
I should prefer not to have to wait ten years to get an answer , thanks to a committee of inquiry set up to examine what happened . I think we need a moratorium on the subject , and I think we need to make legislation more detailed and more strict .
We need to ensure the safety of the consumer by adopting a rigorous attitude , and - wouldn 't you say , Mr Eisma - not giving in to emotion but relying on reason .
Mr President , this argument has been much discussed in recent weeks , and I think our apprehension is not so much about the soya bean problem alone , I think the fact is that we realize that that decision opens the door to common problems .
It is no coincidence that mention has also been made here of the problem of the maize authorization applied for by Ciba , because , among other things , that application concerns not only imports into the European Union but also local production , so that it may give rise to additional complications .
I am not opposed in principle to the use of biotechnology . I believe that innovation is the spice of development , human as well as scientific .
Technology needs reliable guidelines , rules , not inextricable mazes .
On the other hand , an important change is taking place in the forms of consumption and production , and I believe that the discussion of biotechnology may involve definite advantages for the consumer .
It can be used to reduce the use of pesticides and herbicides and to make the nutritional and dietary aspects of food products more effective .
Even so , we do need to understand the anxieties of today 's consumers .
Their confidence in the safety of agrifood products has been shaken by the BSE affair , and I believe that , without abandoning the innovative and dynamic outlook to which I referred , it is right that we should be extremely cautious , since one false step may indeed cost very dear , and one may be enough .
The consumer has the right to information , and I therefore believe that we must identify every means , every instrument and every procedure to ensure that the consumer really does have complete control in the matter of choice , having been provided with all available information .
Commissioner Kinnock , if it is not felt necessary or possible to ensure separate labelling for the genetically modified soya bean , we should be told why , in clear , transparent terms .
Let all the information be disclosed to Parliament , let it be stated what inquiries were conducted by the national authority , what the opinion of the European Commission is and , possibly , what authorization procedures were followed in the United States .
Secondly , I believe it is very important to expedite the conclusion of the conciliation procedure on new food products or ingredients , which is still open , because I believe that this too may help to provide a very important framework of rules and procedures which are clear and transparent for all .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for a long time now the soya bean has been regarded as an ideal ingredient in organic and health food .
Whether it takes the form of a sandwich spread or a drink , its triumphant progress along the supermarket shelves seemed to be unstoppable .
Until now , that is .
The first consignment of genetically modified soya beans that arrived in Hamburg last week has slightly dented this image .
Are consumers ' fears really justified ?
I believe that we should put consumer protection first .
We should insist - and all the speakers have touched on this point - on the labelling of genetically modified foodstuffs .
We always talk about the responsible consumer .
The purpose of this newly developed seed is to limit the use of herbicides .
With genetic engineering , we now have , for the first time , an opportunity to implement biological pest control on a broad basis , and this will really help to solve environmental problems .
There are a great many highyielding crop plants , but I am of the opinion that the breeding of even better plants should not be abandoned .
It is urgently necessary in order to provide the world 's population with sufficient quantities of food .
In the last 40 years the human race has doubled in size , and food production has risen in the same proportion .
Forty years ago , if we had tried to combat famine by redistribution alone , which is what many people wanted to do at the time , and still want to do now , then we would have abandoned half of the world 's population to face death by starvation .
However , since the world 's population looks set to grow by a further 2.5 billion people in the next 30 years , bringing the total number to 8 billion , we are going to have to find ways of increasing the available food supply .
Since the world 's agricultural land is already being fully used , increased yields can only be achieved by means of better plant material and more efficient management of natural resources .
Genetic engineering creates a better starting point for the fight against hunger in the world , and therefore I believe that it is irresponsible not to take advantage of this opportunity but to leave it to others .
May I remind you , Mr President , honourable Members and the Commissioner , that all of us regularly eat oil and flour , and that we buy mayonnaise , bread , sweets , drinks , ice creams and biscuits .
These are all products in which we may easily find soya beans ; there are hundreds and hundreds of products that contain them .
Products for children , dietary products , organic products , for a consumer who requires a natural quality because he is sensitive to these problems .
But now , thanks to the Commission 's decision , we shall not know whether the soya beans are produced normally or genetically modified , because the labels won 't tell us , because that isn 't allowed .
So my question is : Commissioner , do you call this respect for the consumer ?
Do you think this will reassure consumers and give them confidence ?
What you have said to us is something we have heard before , ten or twenty years ago , when we were talking about nuclear security , and then we had Chernobyl ; ten years ago we were talking about the consequences of intensive farming , and then we had BSE .
Do we have to wait for another disaster to be caused by genetic engineering before we can argue more knowledgeably about these problems ?
I hope not , but for those very reasons I would like greater attention to be paid , I would like a real evaluation of the environmental impact - not by Monsanto , not by the United States , but in our own countries .
It is not just a question of health , it is also a question of safeguarding the future of the environment and the natural equilibria .
Mr President , there is still - as we have clearly seen today - considerable confusion due to conflicting reports of the risks of eating genetically modified food .
There is uncertainty over possible allergic reactions and over health generally .
After all , a gene is added to the food structure which has never before been a part of it .
In the case of soya , the new bean is resistant to the pesticide Roundup , which includes glycophate .
It is precisely this agent Roundup , which is added to the genetically modified soya to maximize the crop .
Glysophate is regarded as carcinogenic and has reproductive effects .
That is our information ; the Commission seems to have different information .
In addition to potential risks the immense repercussions on the environment are also referred to .
Large-scale use of the agent glysophate would infringe the European standards , which are stricter than those in the United States and are based on the principle of prevention .
So there too there might be a conflict .
As we have already seen , the pesticide Roundup , to which the new soya is resistant , certainly kills a lot of weeds , but it has been found in Australia that it also leads to resistant weed species which then have to be controlled in turn using different agents again .
The cost of this , one can safely assume , will be passed on to the consumer .
It thus defies comprehension that these new products which are so controversial should already be introduced on to the European market when talks on them between Parliament and the European Council are still ongoing .
That beggars belief .
Lastly - and I diverge somewhat - what a coincidence that this debate is taking place just as the United Nations Food Summit is starting in Rome !
After an interval of ten years the international community is once more discussing world food and the elimination of hunger .
Ten years ago they were also saying that world hunger must be made a thing of the past .
The situation has changed .
Is there not also an ethical dimension to these genetically modified products like soya ?
How far are we prepared to go in the further development and increased use of fertile land to produce a dominant product of this kind ?
And importantly too - the point has been made , we know - is there not a danger that traditional but extremely valuable varieties will be increasingly marginalized ?
Or to what extent will individuals in giant companies be in a position , through products like soya , to influence the dietary patterns of millions of people or , if things go wrong , to manipulate them ?
Mr President , when the Commissioner replies , I would just like to ask him very briefly to respond to three points , which might clear up some of the points raised by my colleagues .
In relation to the genetically modified soya that is coming into the European Union , could the Commissioner clarify that genetic modification in relation to this soya is a technique used in its production but that , in fact , no genetically modified organism is actually present in the final product , which does not differ in composition from ordinary soya - from non-modified soya ?
The controls that Mrs Pollack and others are asking for are completely impractical .
Secondly , would the Commissioner not like to comment , in the context of the World Food Summit taking place in Rome , on the possible benefits of new technology in the food sector , in regard both to increasing the availability of food to the starving - 840 million people in the world now - and to the availability of new products to consumers , such as ourselves ?
Finally , would the Commissioner not like to confirm that the controversy currently taking place over whether or not BT maize should be put on the European market shows the value of having the case-by-case approach which the European Union has adopted and which is , in fact , a great deal more rigorous than that in the United States , which may give us very controversial results ?
This certainly underlines the need for us as MEPs to be kept in touch with this case-by-case examination , which the Commission and the Member States are undertaking together ?
Mr President , I join you in expressing gratitude to the interpreters and regretting the lateness of the hour .
I will try to respond .
I will not pretend that my responses will cover all the interesting points raised , but I hope that by picking out a few , I will be able to relate to many of the issues that have come before the House tonight .
First of all , the question of labelling that was raised , amongst others , by Mrs Pollack .
The decisions adopted so far are in accordance with the provisions of Directive 90 / 220 .
Under this directive no specific labelling which mentions that the product consists of genetically modified organisms can be imposed in the absence of safety reasons .
The Commission recognizes the importance of labelling and intends to discuss the issue in the context of a proposal for a revision of this directive .
There were questions relating to allergenicity and the implications of particular products for human health .
I respond by saying the consent for the placing on the market of these soya beans has been granted in accordance with the procedures foreseen by Directive 92 / 220 .
The risk assessment carried out examined in particular the toxic and allergenic potential of the introduced genes and it was concluded that there was no reasons to believe there would be any adverse effects on human health in the environment from the introduction into soya beans of the genes coding for glysophate tolerance and the chloroplast transit peptide .
This means that the Monsanto soya beans are substantially equivalent to non-modified soya varieties already on the market and therefore there is no reason to believe they will represent any risks different from those already associated with other soya bean varieties .
The information supplied by certain Members of this House refers to the allergenic potential of soya beans in general .
But that is not a new element since it is well known that all soya beans can be responsible for allergies in some , individual human beings .
This information does not constitute new evidence of potential adverse effects from the Monsanto soya beans .
Furthermore , the Commission is not aware of any new information which provides evidence of potential adverse effects on human health from the release of the Monsanto soya beans .
The Commission is , however , following all the information on the subject so that it can act promptly if evidence of adverse effects comes to light .
In such a case , the safety provisions of the directive will be used to modify or revoke the consent .
Finally , on the point raised by Mrs van Putten , and indeed touched upon by others , relating to maximum level of herbicide residues , Directive 92 / 220 does not cover the effects on human health and the environment of the chemical herbicides that may be used on these genetically modified plants and consequently does not set maximum permissible levels of herbicide residues .
That is normally done under other Community legislation .
The Council Directive 96 / 32 of May 1996 has set a maximum limit of 20 ppm of glysophate residues on soya beans .
According to the examination carried out in preparation of this Council decision , the metabolic rate of glysophate in tolerant plants is the same as in non-tolerant , traditional soil varieties .
It therefore follows that the Monsanto soya beans can only be imported if they can meet this limit .
I regret the brevity of responses , but as I said , I will happily give the full answer which I had hoped to be able to give earlier to those Members who had set down the questions .
I have received five motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will be taken at 12 noon tomorrow .
( The sitting was closed at 12.15 a.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I just wanted to say that the Minutes are excellent with regard to my comment and that I hope that you ask the President to put my comment into action .
The Minutes are correct but I would request President Hänsch to act upon my point .
I am not sure if that remark was ironic but I will take it at face value .
I will pass your comment on to President Hänsch .
It was not meant ironically .
I am smiling because I am a happy person , because the Minutes are correct this time , not ironically , but in good humour .
I am very pleased about that !
Thank you .
I just wanted to say that the Minutes of Monday 's sitting are incorrect in that they refer to me , Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel as a speaker from the European United Left .
You can see that I am here in the Liberal centre and intend to remain so .
I trust the Minutes can be amended .
That brings a note of realism to the optimism expressed just now .
But thank you for that remark .
We will take account of it .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Mr President , as you yourself have said the voting may be continued this evening at 6 p.m.
I therefore request that we do not vote this morning beyond 1.30 p.m.
I think that would be wise and reasonable !
Energy Policy
The next item is the joint debate on the following :
report ( A4-0326 / 96 ) by Mr W G van Velzen , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the Commission 's White Paper on an energy policy for the European Union ( COM ( 95 ) 0682 - C4-0018 / 96 ) ; -report ( A4-0296 / 96 ) by Mr Scapagnini , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council concerning the Euro-Mediterranean partnership in the energy sector ( COM ( 96 ) 0149 - C40238 / 96 ) ; -report ( A4-235 / 96 ) by Mr Chichester , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the communication from the Commission on the European Community gas supply and prospects ( COM ( 95 ) 0478 - C4-0487 / 95 ) ; -oral question ( B4-1215 / 96 - O-0147 / 96 ) by Mrs Schierhuber and Mr Jacob , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , to the Commission , on measures to use biomass and biological fuels and renewable sources of energy .
Mr President , after debating the Green Paper ten years ago we are today debating the Commission 's White Paper on an energy policy for the European Union .
I should first of all like to express my sincere appreciation for the speed with which the White Paper was written .
But I am even more grateful that they have accepted 90 % of Parliament 's resolution on the Green Paper .
I should like to thank Commissioner Papoutsis and his staff very warmly indeed .
That makes for a meaningful dialogue between the Commission and Parliament .
It is therefore only logical that the European Parliament supports the broad outlines of the White Paper .
The White Paper incorporates a number of improvements on the Green Paper and the result is a much better balance between the three objectives : the environment , competition and security of supplies .
The White Paper has placed greater emphasis of the question of renewable use of energy .
I was also happy to see that these three objectives have been joined by economic and social cohesion as a goal .
The Commission also pays more attention to the role of the Members States in energy policy and to the role of private companies , organisations and the like .
That means that the principle of subsidiarity has been better implemented , which prevents the Union 's energy policy from becoming centralised .
After these words of praise one can only expect there to be some comments on the White Paper , particularly three points of the proposed indicative work programme of the Commission .
First of all the White Paper proposes that the share of renewable sources of energy should be increased in the total energy production and consumption within the European Union .
I am disappointed by that because the political will is present in many Member States to undertake positive action in this area , and to do so now .
That is why I also call in the motion for a resolution for more emphasis on a better integration of renewable energy in the whole of the European Union 's energy policy and for the Commission to be more ambitious here and to come up with more specific action .
With the Mombaur report at its side the Commission now has enough specific proposals , I would have thought .
That is why in the motion for a resolution we stress the following points : first of all developing possible substitutes for energy sources that are becoming increasingly scarce ; secondly improving the efficiency of energy use by creating stricter standards , agreements on labelling ; thirdly more emphasis on combined heat and power .
I invite the Commission not only to present proposals , but I eagerly await their communication on that subject .
We also call for the development of more profitable and renewable sources , such as solar energy , photovoltaic energy , biomass and the like .
Investment in renewable energy should be made financially attractive .
And finally we want to see energy and environment programmes included in the fifth framework programme .
In addition to that , Mr President , we mention improvement in the access to the electricity grid for renewable energy , for example by making the purchase of renewable energy obligatory , the ' non fossil fuel obligation ' as it is called in Britain , or a return guarantee of renewable energy produced on a small scale .
The Commission must also develop a financial programme together with the Member States to promote renewable energy , such as a study into the green VAT , tax relief on investments in the field of renewable energy .
A second point stressed in Parliament 's motion for a resolution where the Commission should take the lead is the international context .
This is an area where the Commission should clearly set an example because it has the added value which is needed in this sphere .
In the light of the European Union 's increasing dependence on energy imports we must conclude energy agreements with more countries than only Russia .
A third area in which the Commission must be more active is tackling the issue of unsafe nuclear power stations in central and eastern Europe .
We have been talking about this for more than ten years and still we are awaiting action .
The Commission must coordinate , bring partners together , match financial efforts and promote regional cooperation .
Once more this is an area in which the Commission can prove its added value .
The motion for a resolution points to very specific proposals in this field .
I shall mention but a few .
Organising regional energy conferences in central and eastern Europe to examine how their energy policy can be best supported and improved .
Developing a large package of energy-efficiency measures for these countries , as well as information campaigns on energy savings , encouraging the use of gas fired combined heat and power stations , speedy introduction of renewable sources of energy and coordinating financial efforts in this field with the international organisations and especially with PHARE and TACIS finance to enable private financiers and entrepreneurs in central and eastern Europe to produce an effective and efficient energy policy .
I eagerly await the Commission 's reaction to the specific points in our motion for a resolution .
The European Parliament agrees with a Commission indicative work programme on condition that it accepts additions from Parliament 's resolution .
I look forward to the Commission 's reply .
Mr President , there is a widespread view that with the advent of the new century , concern about energy and water will be added to the existing anxieties of European Union citizens .
Already in our century there will be demands which the European Union must respond to satisfactorily .
We recognize that Mr van Velzen has drafted an excellent and detailed report on the issue , but it has highlighted a certain lack of European Commission projects , especially as regards sustainable use of energy , combined heat and power , the specific characteristics of the gas market , the appropriate institutional and budgetary framework , as well as international cooperation .
My report focuses specifically on international cooperation .
The broad guidelines adopted by the European Council in Lisbon , Corfu , Essen and Cannes bear witness to the European Union 's intention to draw up a long term programme for its relations with Mediterranean countries .
The opening up to the east must be integrated with an ambitious policy of cooperation with the south , based on the conclusions of the Barcelona Conference of November 1995 .
The European Union and its Mediterranean partners are facing the same challenges and this certainly requires a coordinated response , possibly through the creation of a multilateral programme which embraces Europe and the southern and eastern Mediterranean countries - a Euro-Mediterranean Forum .
Renewable energy certainly represents one of the main instruments for successful communication of this kind .
Our objective must be to conclude renewable energy agreements with Mediterranean countries likewise interested in the development of renewable energy technologies especially given their specific geographic , political and strategic characteristics .
So we need to succeed in building our future in this sector both by developing those instruments which are already available to us today inside the European Union , and through - this is what Mr van Velzen was saying - a more open and involving energy charter .
Another very important instrument for achieving the objectives of the European Union is undoubtedly the creation of a trans-European energy network and this means promoting the drafting and adoption of agreements aimed at developing the networks and linking them with the countries of the Mediterranean basin .
The European Union , aware of the importance of trade in the energy sector , has already set out proposals to provide electricity to the various Mediterranean countries , including Morocco , Algeria and Tunisia .
The same applies to gas .
International actions have in common the fact that they are geared to the development of markets and infrastructure to meet the future increase in imports of gas into the energy markets of developed countries and , above all , of developing countries .
Here I would mention the importance of building the Maghreb-Europe and Algeria-Tunisia-Italy gas pipelines .
These links will certainly lead to full integration of the European and North African gas systems , especially with the opening of the new North-South trading axis , providing enormous potential for future cooperation .
This brings me rapidly to the conclusions of the Cairo Conference and the impressive totals for available projects .
The projects in the gas sector are worth about 20 , 000 million dollars and those in the electricity sector are worth 1 , 800 million dollars .
Naturally all this means we must neither privilege the traditional nor start concentrating only on the non-traditional .
To guarantee the spread of energy-related technology , in particular for renewable and non-polluting sources , there needs to be close cooperation between technicians and scientists in the countries concerned to provide a transmission mechanism for technological information .
In this regard , the importance of creating a Euro-Mediterranean Forum is stressed at the end of my report , to act as a catalyst for information drives and support functions for the institutions and for companies , preferably local .
Alongside this there is an important role for a training centre for specialized personnel , and especially to start up pilot projects .
Finally , Mr President , this cooperation between the European Union and the eastern and southern Mediterranean countries should include a transfer of technology and a system of investments geared to promoting projects of regional integration , social development and environmental protection .
All this needs to be done while maintaining the basic objectives of cooperation with a view to consolidating a lasting climate of dialogue in the Mediterranean .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am very glad that this oral question on renewable energy sources , i.e. , biogenetic raw materials , is being dealt with in the context of the discussion on the White Paper on the European Union 's energy policy .
Let me emphasize how important this matter is - the use of biomass and biofuels as renewable energy sources - in a few succinct words : nothing works without energy !
In a rapidly changing society with its new tasks and potential there will be an increasing energy demand in future too .
At present however , there is often a crass contrast between energy production and environmental protection .
That can and must no longer be the case .
Energy policy , like energy itself , must be life-affirming , which means sustainable .
That should be our motto for the future too when we talk about using energy .
Since the use of fossil fuels , we have seen an increase not only in the tempo and volume of production , but in pollution too .
We should not remain indifferent to that .
Even if fossil energy sources will still be available for another hundred years , assuming they are easily obtainable and taking account of present consumption , we may not be around for these hundred years .
For our major concern is , on the one hand , the rising need for energy and , on the other , the rise in CO2 emissions .
As early as 1990 the joint Energy and Environment Council therefore decided to stabilize CO2 emissions by the year 2000 at the 1990 level .
To achieve this aim , energy efficiency was to be increased .
That means , energy must be saved and energy sources must be promoted which produce less CO2 .
There is a practical way of meeting this aim and this need , namely the use of biomass and biofuels .
Unfortunately the Commission 's White Paper of December 1995 only devoted one and a half pages to this energy sector .
That is why I warmly thank Mr Wim van Velzen for giving so much space to bio-energy in his statement .
At the hearing on biomass in the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development of 6 May this year it was made clear how necessary but also how new this potential energy source actually is .
A sustainable energy policy is particularly urgent in relation to sustainable agriculture .
The right step would be to show the political will to pursue this , given also the requirements of agriculture which is in a state of upheaval .
New , realistic and identifiable areas of activity have to be found for farming and therefore also for rural areas and for the farmers whose livelihood is based in these rural areas .
The production and sale of renewable energy sources are regarded as a promising new market in agriculture .
A few decades ago up to one third of cultivated land was used to grow feedstuffs for our draught animals and therefore provide energy , which also prevented surplus production , but today these areas are set aside or used for growing cereals .
These set-aside areas could be used for planting renewable energy sources and if 10 % of the electricity was produced from biomass this long-term and continuous source of revenue could also reduce the need for agricultural subsidies .
The advantages of these innovations in energy policy are indisputably the following : positive effects on incomes , which also means the creation of new jobs in rural areas , independence from third countries in relation to energy , securing energy stability , improved air quality and therefore quality of life for all the people .
The Commission wanted to send out clear signals when it set up the ALTENER I and II programmes .
However we must check carefully whether these signals were in fact understood .
They must be followed by practical action , rather than mere declarations of intent .
That is why our questions represent a kind of definition of the position .
What has meanwhile been achieved and what is the current state of development , and in particular , how does the Commission see the future ?
Once again , let me stress the importance of bio-energy as a chance for the future of agriculture .
However , we must also create the appropriate framework conditions for such important forward-looking decisions , such as increases in the research budget and standardized European eco-taxes .
I am very grateful to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for taking up this question so vehemently .
What we need is more energy to create a sustainable energy policy .
Mr President , I thank the Commission for the forward-looking report it has submitted .
I have just three brief comments on the White Paper : in my view the plan for a common EU energy policy set out in the White Paper by and large responds to the energy requirements of the future .
But in very major areas the Commission is not being sufficiently concrete .
For instance , it is not enough , in order to safeguard supplies , just to call in general for an energy mix that includes renewable energies .
I think it is far more important to have a mix of instruments and to name specific instruments for saving energy , for instance in the form of taxes on house-building or transport .
I agree that it is an important task to create security of supplies in Europe by importing energy from third countries - and in particular by building up contractual relations with the main oil-producing countries in the Middle East - but here too I would like to add the criticism that in general the White Paper describes security of supplies in Europe too one-sidedly against the background of a rising dependence on imports .
We could keep our energy dependence more in check in terms of demand if we made a common effort to develop renewable energy sources , used energy more efficiently and helped the appropriate technologies to gain a foothold in the market .
Furthermore , in this context I believe it is extremely important to give precedence not only to environmental protection and security of supplies but also to external economic interests together with employment policy aspects .
At a time when , God knows , there is a shortage of innovative ideas on how to create new jobs , the technologies for improving energy efficiency and using renewable energy sources could represent an exciting export prospect for Europe , with a view to creating new , high-grade jobs in industry and trade .
Here we should make full use of all the trade and development policy instruments , acting in conjunction with all the Member States .
Otherwise we run the risk of losing out in the competition that already exists in this field with Japan and the USA and thereby wasting new chances to create jobs .
Mr President , the van Velzen report on the European Commission 's White Paper on an Energy Policy for the European Union is timely and coherent , and Mr Van Velzen is to be warmly congratulated .
It is timely and coherent in supporting combined heat and power production by co-generation , in advocating an EU external energy policy directed towards the countries of the Mediterranean or Central and Eastern Europe , in requesting a financial programme for the development of sustainable energy - also upheld by the Committee on Agriculture - or in recommending a reduction in pollutant emissions , the most flagrant example being CO2 , and , indeed , in asking the Commission to table a coherent R + D programme based on others such as SYNERGY , THERMIE or SAVE .
Above all , it is timely and coherent in asking the Commission to coordinate Structural Fund financial measures with energy policy priorities , since this was in fact the central issue for the Committee on Regional Policy .
The report was indeed enriched by contributions such as the following , which are , I repeat , linked to regional policy : we must move towards a true Community energy policy within the framework of a general discussion of European planning which ensures that sector policies are consistent and complementary , and reinforce economic and social cohesion .
The basic objective must be to promote harmonious development of the whole European Community , the Structural Funds must be the main source of Community financing for energy projects and the Commission must endeavour to coordinate structural action with the priorities of energy policy .
The areas of responsibility of regional and local authorities must be taken into consideration , and they must become essential partners in the development of an effective Community policy , a factor of vital importance .
And finally , Mr President , the aim of cooperation with regional and local authorities must be to ensure that energy policy guarantees efficiency , decentralization and , of course , respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
Mr President , I must say I am a little baffled by the procedure being adopted .
In this intervention I shall reply to the oral question by Mrs Schierhuber and Mr Jacob and later on I shall respond to the debate as a whole , including the reports by Mr van Velzen , Mr Scapagnini and Mr Chichester .
After reflecting on these developments it seems to me that if the official record of Parliament was a Bible , the Book of Revelations would come before the Book of Genesis , and we would find ourselves reading Exodus after reading Corinthians .
Nevertheless , the important thing is that Members of the House should be able to follow these proceedings , they are the important people here and I just hope the general public is never asked to understand what is going on .
I should like to respond to Mrs Schierhuber and Mr Jacob by making the point that if the White Paper on European energy policy does not explicitly mention biomass and biofuel this is simply because the authors of that White Paper regard these forms of energy as being covered by the concept of renewable energy resources .
Indeed , they represent a considerable proportion of such energy resources .
In answer to the questions , since 1993 when the ALTENER programme began 274 pilot projects have been financed , 60 of which related to biomass exclusively and another hundred of which covered several renewable energy resources including biomass .
Since the ALTENER business scheme is therefore closely connected with schemes for other renewable energy resources , it is difficult to indicate precisely the funds specifically allocated to biomass .
However , it can be estimated that at least a half of the ECU 38m made available to the ALTENER programme between 1993 and this year was allocated to biomass .
Turning to the question concerning the results achieved by the ALTENER I programme , when this programme was adopted the Council did not set precise objectives for the programme but instead set policy objectives for the Community as a whole for 2005 .
The progress made in recent years together with the enlargement of the Community has increased from 4 % to 6 % the share of renewable energy resources in total energy consumption .
By making additional efforts it is possible to foresee the achievement of the 8 % objective and the trebling of the production of electricity from renewable energy resources by 2005 .
However , the objective of a 5 % share for biofuels in motor vehicles ' total consumption appears to be very difficult to achieve , especially given the continuing uncertainty surrounding the tax treatment of biofuels and the availability of raw materials at an acceptable cost .
The ALTENER II programme should therefore continue the measures launched under the initial programme .
On the question of coordination between the different directorates-general concerned with biomass , as requested by the European Parliament in the Mombaur report which has already been referred to in the debate and as provided for in the energy policy White Paper , the Commission is now preparing a document concerning a European strategy for renewable energy resources , the aim being to arrive at a consistent and transparent framework for the various schemes to promote renewable energy resources .
The Commission therefore does not rule out the establishment of a coordination infrastructure within its departments in order to implement the plan of action accompanying the strategy .
With regard to Commission thinking on the use of biomass as a means of reducing carbon dioxide emissions , I report to the House that since biomass and energy from waste now account for nearly 60 % of production from renewable resources , biomass will play a fundamental role in increasing the contribution of renewable energy resources to our energy supplies and in efforts to combat the greenhouse effect which is essentially attributable to CO2 emissions from fossil fuels .
The Commission has encouraged research and provided support for the production of biofuels , in particular biodiesel .
It has also proposed a tax framework under the so-called Scrivener Directive which is still before the Council .
Last , but not least , the development of biomass in general and biofuels in particular would have a favourable impact on the structural problems of agriculture .
However , I emphasize that this will obviously have to be achieved in accordance with the rules of the common agricultural policy and the World Trade Organization .
The last question concerns the future of this sector .
As the House will know , the Commission recently started an in-depth analysis of the development of renewable energy resources in the European Union .
A first strategy document will be submitted to this Parliament very shortly , followed by a programme proposing the priorities for action on renewable energy resources , including biomass .
We shall shortly therefore have an opportunity to continue today 's debate .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I would like to remind you that you have the right to speak again after the various representatives of the parties have spoken .
Mr President , it is regrettable that we are having to discuss this White Paper in an inappropriate legal framework .
I deplore the inability of Member States to treat seriously the question of energy in the Intergovernmental Conference .
We are left with an anachronistic piece of legislation , the Euratom Treaty , as our main legal base for energy .
I ask Member States to look seriously at the framework in which we consider it .
I want to speak on two or three points , firstly energy efficiency .
I would like to highlight the scandal of the complete disregard of energy efficiency by the authorities concerned with building European Union establishments .
We are constructing new buildings where we could have used the highest standards of energy efficiency .
We are not doing so .
That is a scandal .
Equally scandalous is the attitude of the Council of Ministers towards SAVE II in its budgetary suggestions .
We cannot seriously undertake a programme on energy efficiency with the budget which they scornfully suggest as being appropriate .
I also deplore their attitude towards the Rational Planning Directive which is a piece of legislation which would allow us seriously to tackle the question of energy efficiency in the distribution sector .
We have given far too little attention to the transport sector and to the potential of cogeneration .
As far as energy from renewable energy sources is concerned , every foresight programme undertaken , including that in the UK , has identified this sector as being of tremendous importance , including wind energy , photovoltaic energy and , of course , biomass .
I want to turn now to the potential of the fifth framework programme of research and development in the energy sector .
It needs to be more balanced .
We need to have an illustrative renewables programme to counterbalance the illustrative nuclear programme which is produced .
We should look at areas such as transmission losses , potential in the transport sector and where energy is going to come from when other sources are exhausted .
I think the Fusion Programme has to be re-examined .
The potentially very good ideas with which we started the current programme have proved to be misplaced .
In a period of liberalization one area that suffers is research and development .
This has been proved in the United Kingdom with the near collapse of research in the gas sector .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have at present the honour of representing Mrs Estevan Bolea , who was appointed by our group to monitor these reports , and in particular that of Mr Scapagnini .
I should like to begin by supporting the entirely justified complaint we have just heard from the lips of Mrs McNally about the lack of any genuine willingness on the part of the Council , despite repeated efforts by this Parliament , and also by the Commission , to deal adequately with energy policy in the framework of the European Treaties .
I think that praise is due , and I offer it with pleasure , to the report of Mr Scapagnini , chairman of our committee , concerning the Euro-Mediterranean partnership in the energy sector as proposed by the European Commission .
It is a magnificent report , and we shall be voting for it , as we shall for the ten amendments tabled by four different political groups , which I hope the rapporteur will accept .
I take pleasure in emphasizing the interest displayed by the report in a chapter which I feel concerns me particularly .
The chapter on renewable energy sources , and especially recital c ) and paragraphs 5 and 12 , gives a succinct but clear description , which I would indeed call excellent , of the importance of such sources , above all in isolated regions .
If we think , for instance , of the large number of Mediterranean islands , we realize what it would mean to be able to provide them with their own non-polluting energy sources , which would generate jobs and be entirely indigenous and , naturally , clean .
This does not , of course , mean that I deny the importance of conventional energy sources ; I could hardly do so when Algerian gas is starting to reach Spain , and from Spain , Portugal and the rest of Europe , through so major a structure as the gas pipeline linking Algeria across Morocco with our continent and our Union , but of course I give a greater welcome to the emphasis which this report has placed on permanent and renewable sources of energy and on energy saving .
Just before the Barcelona Conference a special conference was held in Athens on the transfer of renewable energy technology from Europe to the central and southern Mediterranean countries .
I believe its conclusions should be borne in mind , although , and I deplore this , they received little consideration and I think the Spanish presidency at the time paid insufficient attention to the matter in the conclusions of the Mediterranean Conference held in Barcelona in the following November .
Mr President , the European Community has proposed sizeable resources , those of the MEDA Plan .
Let us use them in the most rational way possible to create a true Euro-Mediterranean partnership in the energy sector .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
I wish to congratulate all three rapporteurs who have produced well balanced reports .
The election manifesto of the European Liberals says , ' A sustainable environment knows no borders and can only come about by a genuinely international approach to the problem ' . I have already had occasion this week to state that this is inextricably bound up with the problem of energy .
The White Paper on energy includes increasing energy efficiency and the development of renewable sources of energy as one of its objectives .
It is particularly this last point that we want to highlight and it seems to be a real perpetuum mobile , as various Members have already raised .
The White Paper contains an excellent analysis of the future but remains very vague on specific measures needed to achieve these aims .
Even Mr Van Velzen 's report does not exude the political will needed for creating the favourable conditions for renewable sources of energy and for having an integrated energy and environment policy .
And although the rapporteur , I was pleased to hear , called this morning for more money to be spent on research into renewable sources of energy , the White Paper and the report mention nuclear energy as a necessary option .
Now admittedly nuclear energy does not emit any harmful substances nor produce any CO2 exhaust .
But , ladies and gentlemen , there is a problem of waste which can last over the next thousands of years , and in view of the scant acceptance in society of nuclear energy in many countries we need alternatives .
Nuclear fusion may well represent an inexhaustible source of energy but that development is by no means certain , as Mrs McNally already explained this morning , and it will also take too long .
That is why we must now opt for a non fossil , renewable source of energy .
And that , ladies and gentlemen , is the son with its various forms of renewable energy .
That is also the context of sustainable development in which my group wants to situate the whole problem of energy .
That is how my Amendment No 1 to Mr Chichester 's report should be viewed , that the Commission must invest in renewable sources of energy as an alternative and not in coal ; we shall also support the Greens ' amendment which speaks of inexhaustible sources of energy instead of sustainable sources .
The Union 's energy policy towards countries of central and eastern Europe is aimed almost exclusively at making the nuclear powers stations there safe .
That ignores the fact that these countries often possess relatively clean fossil fuels such s gas .
The Union must invest first and foremost in a clan and efficient use of fossil fuels which are present in great supply in eastern Europe. eastern Europe our environment ecu is still more valuable than in the Union .
The Union should not just promote the export of nuclear technologies but also of energy efficient technologies , such as heat-power co-generation .
We regret that my amendment to this effect was rejected by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
Mr President , our group is in favour , with some slight adjustments , of the reports which have been tabled , and generally agrees that there should be a European energy policy which will rationalize the use of energy as a scarce and essential resource ; it backs the basic parts of these reports , and the question put by Mrs Schierhuber and Mr Jacob .
There are , however , some areas of great concern to us .
First of all we believe that liberalization of the energy sector will mean an increase in consumption if prices are brought down .
An increase in consumption will also increase emissions to the atmosphere , intensifying the greenhouse effect and environmental concerns and going against the formal undertaking we have made to adopt a model of sustainable development which shows respect for nature .
Secondly we believe , in connection with such a model , that there must be discussion and a change of direction , since we cannot go on talking about respect for nature whilst boosting consumption and actually pillaging natural resources .
Thirdly , we think that rationalization of the energy sector is essential , since we must remember that if market operation on the basis of supply and demand is pushed to the limit , then liberalization will mean that sections of the population may go without , as it may not be profitable to supply energy in a particular area ; hence the Government would have to act , as a public service , for the good of the population .
Finally , there is one central question ; we talk of rationalization and the proper and efficient use of energy , but we are directly encouraging an increase in energy consumption , whether using it on individual or public transport , or boosting the manufacture of goods which , by their ephemeral nature , generate a continuous increase in consumption .
So people 's patterns of behaviour , whether individual or collective , would have to be changed to promote a global social policy of frugal austerity ; we should have to think it a good idea to change the car every two or three years , or replace goods after X years , always favouring tough and durable items which will produce a different society .
Otherwise the result would totally contradict what we are saying .
Of course this involves the following aspects : such a continuous increase in consumption forces us to rely on eastern Europe , or southern France , we are creating maelstroms of social and economic instability and we are seeking to introduce programmes which will make this easier .
The Scapagnini report is certainly very good , and we have no hesitation in supporting it .
But we have to note that the encouragement of sustainable development in the Mediterranean contradicts the need for continuous consumption .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left therefore believes that , when the Maastricht Treaty is revised , decisions must favour a model of sustainable development , an energy chapter with a responsible approach to the whole of Europe , renewable sources of energy and also the right focus for agriculture , since it is impossible to continue in this way promising everything to everybody .
Mr President , I wish to thank Mr van Velzen for focusing on the White Paper on an energy policy for the European Union in his report .
I would also like to state , and strongly reinforce , the difficulty that we have in the European Union on arriving at an energy policy within a proper legal base , without a proper legal base in the Treaty on European Union .
The van Velzen report emphasizes the importance of sustainability , which is not a strong enough focus of the Commission proposals .
Parliament has made clear , in a number of ways , the importance of renewable energy , and here I would agree with Commissioner Kinnock on the inclusive nature of renewable energy sources .
I must , however , clarify that the preferred terminology is sustainable development or sustainability requiring in environmental policy the promotion or focus on renewable energy sources .
The Commission falls very short of this in the White Paper .
Parliament has adopted amendments which define nuclear technology as unsustainable , and here we all need to clarify what we mean with regard to sustainability and the nuclear issue .
If Member States wish to continue with nuclear technologies , the industry as a whole needs to be evaluated to ensure that measures are taken within a programme which puts the principle of sustainability at the centre of decisionmaking .
Any further contamination , such as another Chernobyl-type of accident , will create an environmental deficit and liability for future generations that makes sustainability an impossible goal to achieve .
Nuclear energy is not sustainable and we need an intense debate on this in Parliament and with the Commission in the process of evaluating this technology .
With regard to energy efficiency , it is absolutely regrettable that the Council has not supported Parliament and the Commission on the SAVE II programme and that the Council has not adopted energy-efficient measures in the energy sector .
If SAVE II is not adopted fully , then we will have no energy policy in the European Union to combat global warming and this will have an absolutely regressive effect on our ability to create a real energy policy in the European Union .
We are not combating global warming ; we are not dealing with the effects of the CO2 problem ; we are not researching and promoting renewable energy sufficiency and we are complacent on the issue of nuclear technology .
Finally , if we are to deal properly with all these issues , we must have a proper legal base for energy policy in the European Union , and a first step towards harmonizing Community requirements on this issue is to ensure that the Euratom Treaty is fully integrated into the Treaty on European Union .
Mr President , I would like to join in the congratulations to Mr W.G. van Velzen on his excellent report and his speech introducing this debate .
I think it is encouraging to find so much consensus around the House on the objectives that we have set ourselves of improving the commitment of the European Union to sustainable development and to a more acceptable method of dealing with the energy needs of the future .
This commitment , in principle , is very important even if we have to forget , for the moment , some of the lapses in the past in carrying it into practice : for example , when we tried to improve the efficiency of refrigerators we found that a big lobby suddenly appeared the day before the vote and the promises of support evaporated on the day .
That was a matter of great regret to myself and to many others .
So I hope that from now on we will make a resolution to practice what we preach , in particular in two directions .
The commitment to renewable energy is emphasized in several excellent sections in the report : the renewable energy section in paragraph 2 of Mr van Velzen 's report , the research and development section ( particularly paragraph 32 ) and also the regional policy section ( paragraphs 37 and 39 ) .
There are a whole lot of excellent sections which I hope will be taken very seriously indeed .
But at the same time this has got to be matched by an attack on the over-commitment to the generation of nuclear power .
Not only is there , as Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel said , the problem of long-term nuclear waste , but I also believe that fundamentally this is a subsidized section which has no justification .
So how do we match the needs to decommission and get rid of the nuclear programme with the need for sustainable development ?
I believe this can be done .
It could be done , if you take , for example , the Dounreay Nuclear Plant in the north of Scotland , by a wholesale conversion of the energies of the scientists from the nuclear industry into renewables .
This could be done right through Europe and in many other places .
I commend this to the Commission as a conversion programme which would give the right signals to our citizens .
Mr President , the van Velzen report comes after the White Paper and the Green Paper , and is supposed to allow us to formulate an energy policy for the European Union .
In even more concrete terms , we shall , after a kick-start in 1987 , speak of the internal electricity market and particularly of Article 90 ( 2 ) on services in the common interest , on public services - even if some European leaders have a tendency to smile when speaking of ' public service ' .
In other words , Mr van Velzen , the main theme of your report is a plea for renewable energies , with a whole series of sympathetic measures , even if they are a little naive , like the green VAT , the CO2 tax .
And in the end , you have succeeded , you and your colleagues , in presenting a report on energy , on electricity , on light , and in plunging the whole debate into darkness .
In fact , there is a contradiction in this whole business between the overall aim of formulating an energy policy - and we are all agreed on the objective - and the philosophy expressed particularly on page 12 , paragraph 21 of the van Velzen report on the privatization of the energy sector , on removing the link between production , transit and distribution .
There is a contradiction between an energy policy and competition .
It is impossible to want both , i.e. to have both the possibility of allowing outsiders access to the networks and legitimizing distributors , giving a territorial community an opportunity to choose its distributor - which is the case in Germany and with 177 local authorities in France , which are somewhat on the fringe of the EdF monopoly - all this is contradictory and has three serious consequences : a loss of social cohesion , a loss of sovereignty and a loss of morality .
My first point : when electricity distribution is privatized , the law of profit leads to the abandonment of rural areas for the more profitable industrial areas .
In Guadeloupe , the production of electricity accounts for 200 units of cost , whereas distribution accounts for 100 units .
If privatization takes place , I have no idea how Guadeloupe will light its streets and houses !
Article 130a of the Treaty speaks of ' territorial , economic and social cohesion ' , and this is incompatible with the privatization of distribution .
Worse !
There is a loss of sovereignty .
When electricity distribution is subjected to the law of profit , the elected representatives of the people no longer fix energy policy .
Energy policy is fixed by transnational private groups on the basis of the profit involved !
In that case , the only electricity we shall have will come from gas-fired power stations .
There will be no wind power , no tidal power , there will be no renewable energies because it will be too expensive .
Europe will lose its independence as far as energy is concerned .
European electricity will be ' all gas ' and competition for distribution will destroy competition for production .
The public service monopoly in a sector of national sovereignty will be replaced by the oligopoly of a handful of multinationals .
Public life will then be corrupted because freedom for distributors will bring about trade wars in order to capture markets . And the markets will be captured through the corruption of local decision-makers .
A general electricity company will be formed in France and will buy the local elected representatives just as , in the case of water , all the socialist , RPR and UDF deputies now in prison were bought .
If the German Greens and the German SPD are favourably inclined to this situation , it is because private organizations in Germany ask it of them .
And at what a price !
What have you received , I wonder , for supporting that position !
If we want sovereignty , if we want social cohesion , if we want morality , let us not privatize the electricity ' fairy godmother ' because fairy godmothers are not for sale in the marketplace .
Mr President , let us get back to the point of the debate .
Starting with Mr Van Velzen 's report , we are looking at some good work - work which is encapsulated in the consensual style of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , pooling all possible contributions and resulting in bulky documents which I nevertheless see as positive and interesting .
Without in any way detracting from Mrs McNally 's in my view serious and objective criticism of the Council 's stance , I should like to point out that we , the Socialists , are firmly in favour of the document which has been put forward by Mr Van Velzen as rapporteur with overall cooperative backing .
In relation to Council practice , Mr Van Velzen 's report might well seem to represent a combination of options , since it offers a menu which is currently limited in the European Union : clear backing for renewable forms of energy , recording of an evident shortfall in the European Union 's performance , definite support for sustainable development - largely contradicting everyday practice - energy saving as a basic requirement in the face of relatively widespread wastage , because we have an enemy in the low price of energy , control of CO2 , which is difficult to implement , aspects of regional policy and the inclusion of local authorities .
I should like to tell a story about the first exchange of ideas and comments the committee held ; when we mentioned to Mr Van Velzen the need to include the cohesion factor required by the Treaty , his response was ' I agree ; but let 's see how to include it ' .
The result is not just a proposal , but a whole chapter designed as a reminder that the cohesion policy is an obligation not only when we speak of the Structural Funds and Cohesion Funds , but whenever we refer to the major defining policies of the European Union .
The energy sector has a heavy deficit , and it is fair to mention that Mr van Velzen has managed to incorporate in his report both the contributions of the Committee on Regional Policy and those of the actual Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy - and to incorporate local authorities in this process of energy creation , control , distribution and guarantee .
I think the Committee of the Regions ought to be satisfied , since some important suggestions forwarded to the European Parliament have in fact been included in Mr Van Velzen 's report .
I am sorry Mr Scapagnini is not with us on this , but his report also has the full support of the Socialist Group .
We fully appreciate the underlying need for the Barcelona Conference to achieve credibility at this precise moment ; there is little point in joining at a given point in time in a genuinely positive and meaningful event in Barcelona if it is not followed by any logical sequence of actions on the part of the European Union .
There is a strategic level to this Conference and to the contents of the messages of peace , stability and cooperation , but there is also , and why should we not say so , a need for mutual aid between the two shores of the Mediterranean .
We firmly support Mr Scapagnini 's position as regards the proposal for a Euro-Mediterranean Agency and Information Centre .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think I can say that very wide consensus is developing in this highly important debate , and I would just like to express a few thoughts prompted by the basic issues before us .
The principal issues relate to security of supply and technological efficiency in the use of available energy sources .
On the first point , security , there cannot but be agreement on the very important ideas contained in the speeches by Mr van Velzen and Mr Scapagnini .
Much greater determination is needed to confront the problem in terms of source and country diversification and the connected problem of a more effective external policy to overcome the piecemeal way Member States relate to issues like this .
The question of efficiency would , in my view , be better handled by greater stress on and greater conviction about the role of the market and competition in this most important sector , approaching the matter from the supply side .
Far greater plurality of individual players in the European energy market should be encouraged , as should faster and more efficient methods of linking the various countries together than at present exist . In a word , the whole subject of trade in energy inside the Union must be addressed .
It escapes no-one that the issues of plurality and intra-European trade in energy are closely linked to both the electricity market directive , which we will soon be dealing with , and the gas directive , but above all to the developments that should occur once these results have been achieved .
Naturally we also have to look at the problem from the demand side , which calls for greater cost efficiency to be able to compete better in today 's global economy .
The electricity directive , for example , only deals with the problem of firms in terms of large companies , totally ignoring small and medium-sized ones .
Consumers , distributors and collectives have not received the attention they deserve .
Finally , we are convinced that a market which functions better can only produce a greater stimulus to investment and technological research .
I shall restrict myself to mentioning issues that have already emerged : greater efficiency in converting existing centres , combined heat and energy production , and the promotion of new investment , including private investment , in this crucial sector .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as other members of my group have already spoken on the White Paper and on energy in the Mediterranean , I shall concentrate on the market prospects for natural gas and then on Mr Chichester 's report .
Community energy policy has three purposes as we have repeatedly stated : energy price competitiveness , security of supply and environmental compatibility .
The real difficulty is to reconcile the three objectives and rank them in order of importance .
In the case of natural gas , it seems to me that security of supply must be the predominant criterion because of the special characteristics of this sector .
Let us remember some fundamental facts already touched on : the expected increase in consumption , especially of electricity , the increase in dependence on external supplies , the concentration on imports from three countries , Russia , Algeria and Norway , where there is monopoly supply , the incidence of transport costs - as you know , transport makes up over twothirds of the price of natural gas - and the rigidity of long term ' take or pay ' contracts tying the producer firms to their suppliers outside the European Union .
Faced with these characteristics , the Commission 's guidelines must promote measures to develop productive capacity and transport , encourage cooperation and a set of common rules with extraCommunity countries and , then , press for the extension of the energy charter treaty - particularly to Algeria - to encourage producers and importers to abandon the rigid logic of ' take or pay ' when contracts are renewed , contribute financially to the development of interconnections and strategic stocks and , finally , encourage mutual assistance contracts .
More liberal hypotheses , like free access to the networks for third parties , do not seem feasible in the majority of European Union countries , above all in the area of external links , which are essentially point to point between fairly distant geographic areas .
It also seems to me that , internally , the approach to access of third parties to the network is of doubtful utility because of the shortage of potentially competing national producers and because the external producers export through a single company and do not have the financial resources to construct their own pipelines .
In the final analysis , the Commission should adopt measures for the natural gas market which facilitate the entry of new operators prepared to invest , while the option of access of third parties to the network should , in my view , remain a national decision .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . The White Paper warns against an increase in the CO2 emissions far beyond the 1990 level for which the electricity sector is responsible for 32 % .
The best support we can give to sustainable energy sources is a sober breakdown of all real costs , particularly in the electricity sector .
That includes a Europe-wide CO2 tax as proposed in the Van Velzen report .
What I find missing in the Van Velzen report is a breakdown of the real costs of waste and of the power stations .
Mrs Plooij has already gone into that .
Commissioner , in my country , for example , these costs are written off on the basis of 4 , 000 megawatt power produced , whereas there are only 400 megawatt .
Many countries have insufficient reserves for these costs and the risks of nuclear energy are then passed on to the population because they are excluded from insurance .
So we must produce an effective excise policy and create a level playing field between alternatives such as combined heat and power , biomass and the like .
We have known since the Delors White Paper that this kind of tax policy is also very beneficial to employment .
There can be a twofold advantage in the further development of biomass , for example .
The growth of trees and plants for biomass has a neutralising effect on the surplus of CO2 .
The report from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development should command our serious attention .
Mrs Schierhuber has illustrated the problem here in exemplary fashion .
Mr President , Commissioner , I know from experience as commissioner in a public utility that all alternatives are nearly all put aside in favour of large-scale energy production , and here the Commission has a major task of creating a level playing field .
Mr President , the Commission 's White Paper is an extension of the Green Paper whose priority objective was to adapt the energy market to the principles of free trade and competition by accelerating liberalization and deregulation without regard to the economic , social and regional consequences .
In the energy sector , as in those of transport and postal services , public companies are in the Commission 's sights because they form one of the most effective centres of resistance to the unrestrained free competition which is detrimental to the interests of employees and consumers .
Electricity , gas , no sector is spared by the directives , despite the absence of a common energy policy , and with public service obligations , which are reduced to a vague notion of universal service , providing only a minimum service for the most deprived in order to leave the most profitable niches to private enterprise .
From this point of view , I am pleased by the united trade union front created in France against the July 1996 agreement of the Council on electricity , which opens the market to competition to the exclusive benefit of large consumers , once again mainly industrial firms .
The report of the Committee on Energy deliberately understates this aspect and accepts the arguments in the White Paper , although it does ask for gentler and better controlled liberalization .
After expressing pleasure that the White Paper devotes more attention to the ecological aspects of energy policy , the report puts forward interesting proposals concerning renewable energy sources which enrich our debate on the issues involved in energy policies .
This debate is useful and necessary , particularly as regards security of supply , protection of the environment and service to consumers .
Cooperation , the coordination of national policies and the development of research must be encouraged , but I am not of the opinion that a common energy policy should replace all of these , as proposed by many Members of this Parliament and by the Commission .
Energy is not merchandise like other products .
It should receive special treatment .
It cannot and should not conform to the principle of free competition , which could call into question equality of access , equality of treatment for consumers , the energy choices made by each country and the long-term vision necessary to guarantee security of supply .
We are determined , in combination with trade union organizations and consumers ' associations , to contest the Commission 's ultra-liberal approach .
We wish to contribute to the defence and renewal of public enterprises so that they can properly fulfil their mission of public service by responding to the interests of consumers and workers and by allowing harmonious regional development , while encouraging cooperation within the European Union .
If one wanted to describe the EU 's energy policy one would have to use the following adjectives : it is half-hearted , it is not forward-looking and it is totally irresolute .
I can demonstrate that by the following points : there is something about renewable energy sources and energy efficiency in every report on environmental protection , the subject is always discussed volubly in them , but when it comes to allocating money , we spend 1 % on renewable energy sources and 99 % on dinosaur energy , namely the nuclear industry , although we all know what the consequences are .
As yet nobody knows what we are to do with the nuclear waste and we also know what will happen if we continue to heat up the atmosphere with coal-fired power stations .
Everybody also knows that the technologies of the future are definitely those relating to renewable energy sources , namely solar energy .
America and Japan have demonstrated that .
Instead of finally learning a lesson from that , we keep hearing about the reasons why we have to have all this and everyone says it is urgently necessary , yet we do not act accordingly .
That is why , so long as we continue to be so halfhearted in our energy policy we will never manage to establish a sensible energy policy that is also forward-looking , that is sustainable and that offers some prospects for future generations .

Mr President , I should first like to express my gratitude for the sound work carried out by the three rapporteurs , and to focus my comments on Mr Scapagnini 's report on the EuroMediterranean Energy Partnership , from which we may deduce that the European Union 's support for moves in the energy sector is of particular interest when directed towards the Mediterranean , including Community and non-European countries .
We are indeed all aware of the importance and considerable international repercussions announced in the objectives of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership , such as promotion of political stability in the region , creation of a free trade area and an increase in support measures for Community programmes associated with these countries .
Euro-Mediterranean cooperation in the energy sector helps to achieve these objectives , and we must , from the Union itself , strengthen the promotion and development of renewable sources of energy , like wind and solar energy , which embody different Community aims such as caring for the environment , improving the quality of life and also creating jobs , as well as helping to solve problems of water shortage , the most acute in the world , in the Mediterranean basin .
I believe it is essential for the European Union to promote various Community programmes for those Mediterranean countries which have a serious problem of water shortage .
Such programmes must be directed towards improving its collection , management and rational use .
The ultimate objective of the Euro-Mediterranean energy policy should be to modernize energy by promoting saving and rational consumption .
To finance this proposal we must make an effort to support programmes such as MEDA , by creating a line specifically for the energy sector and cooperating with Member States to push forward and modernize systems of energy production , with proper attention to the environment .
To conclude , Mr President , I should like to stress the important part played by the Euro-Mediterranean energy sector in the furtherance of economic , social , regional and international cooperation ; one of its main results has been the development of major activities in the industrial sectors .
We cannot fail to take advantage of this opportunity to bring together the peoples bordering the Mediterranean who are affected by and interested in this project , which offers great potential for the future .
Mr President , Braudel 's ' thousand Mediterraneans ' , the old and new civilizations on the African and European coasts , mistrustful of each other and often in conflict down the ages , put down the roots of a common future at last November 's Barcelona Conference .
According to the final declaration , that future will come through more intense political dialogue and the development of economic cooperation .
Although unfortunately unsuccessful politically , the conference has left us with a tangible sign of its existence : the Euro-partenariats . One of these relates to energy policy and the creation of suitable investment conditions throughout the Mediterranean basin .
Mr Scapagnini 's brilliant report , on behalf of the Committee on Energy , Research and Technological Development , emphasizes that - in view of the interdependence between the countries of the European Union and the Mediterranean , particularly as regards the development of the infrastructure , trading relations , environmental protection and energy supply - the energy partenariat would build strategic cooperation to take every advantage of environmental and demographic balance , but above all it could promote the development of a stable integrated geopolitical area involving the regions of coastal third countries .
The proposal to create a Euro-Mediterranean Energy Forum for common management of cooperation and a Mediterranean Agency to act as a catalyst , seems to us to be the practical application , at last , of what the Community has so frequently upheld with fine words alone .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to give warm thanks to the three rapporteurs for their contribution , which has enabled us to hold a very extensive debate here .
However , I must say that at times people are talking rather in the form of slogans and overlooking the real question .
I do not want to go into that in detail but merely say to Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz that it is simply not true that we spend 99 % of our funds on nuclear energy and only 1 % on renewable energy .
The ratio is very balanced , and that is partly thanks to this Parliament .
We have done a great deal for renewable energy sources .
But secondly I would nevertheless say that energy policy does not play the role in the European Union that it really deserves .
Many speakers have rightly pointed this out .
Perhaps this debate will help it play a more important role .
We must concern ourselves more with energy policy , for the geo-politics of energy are changing .
Mr Chichester and Mr van Velzen quite rightly pointed that out in their reports .
Whereas Saudi Arabia and the Gulf were for a long time the central oil supply region for the world , the balance is now shifting towards Central Asia and the Caucasus as well as other countries .
That has consequences , for this Union 's foreign policy too , and is not just a matter concerning multinational undertakings .
Anyone who looks into the history of energy policy will know that this could also give rise to conflicts .
That is why I call for close cooperation between our foreign policy and energy policy , not in the sense of financing it - we certainly cannot do that - but of establishing close contact , just as I think that energy policy and social policy need to be linked more closely .
We must not just talk about physics - that is not really the problem - but of the grey area between public opinion and technology .
Actually , that is something that has concerned us far more in this Parliament than many other questions .
We need only remember the debate we held and are still holding on nuclear energy and many others .
I strongly urge that we improve the dialogue on the objectives of technologies .
That includes the climate .
There is not a sitting here in the European Parliament at which we do not say something about CO2 .
Following the analogy with the Bible drawn by Neil Kinnock a moment ago , one could say that is our contribution to the Book of Proverbs .
We produce a great many words but not much policy .
By the end of this decade CO2 emissions will be 6-7 % higher than in 1990 even though we have always decided to do the contrary here .
But that is the reality .
I want to draw our attention to this real problem so that we can make a change of course here too .
I have a final comment on thermonuclear fusion , although I know that many here take a different view from mine .
In principle we have four energy sources : renewable energy sources , i.e. , the sun , fossil energy sources , nuclear fission and nuclear fusion .
Those are the four physical energy sources we have - we have no others .
On the other hand the energy demand we have in our world is enormous , and I would not really want to abandon any of these four .
It is also our responsibility to pursue a long-term policy .
That is why I would not want to give up the field of thermonuclear fusion , where we in Europe are the leaders ; but we will have to discuss that on another occasion .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in my view Mr Linkohr has once again marked out the overall framework , which is why I want to concentrate purely and simply on the question of renewable raw materials .
I am sure we agree with you when you talk about the sun , when you say that the sun also makes the plants grow .
When we in Europe discuss large-scale farming then I think the concern Mrs Schierhuber expressed here this morning , relating to renewable raw materials on set-aside farmland , becomes ever more important .
Products from non-food crops have considerable environmental advantages over conventional industrial , competing products .
Industrial raw materials produced from non-food crops are an indigenous source of renewable , sustainable resources which can also stand up to the competition with conventional raw materials or supplement them .
These products can also help the EU to honour international obligations such as those arising from the Rio Convention on Climate Change and can meet environmentally sensitive market requirements such as the use of biofuels , for instance in shipping .
I realise that the development of the non-food sector was promoted by the introduction of set-aside , especially in the case of oilseeds .
This has contributed to making the crops in question , which now produce better yields per hectare , competitive vis à vis conventional farm crops .
However , the constant reduction in the rate of set-aside from year to year has also resulted in less land being planted with nonfood crops .
Experience has shown that set-aside cannot be used as a reliable instrument for managing this sector .
The uncertainty it produces certainly does not promote a continuous commitment on the part of the producers or greater investment by processing firms .
That is why the Commission must give a clear signal , in order firmly to convince all the non-food sectors that this developing area has a viable future in Europe .
It is vital for both farmers and the industry for the Commission to introduce a specific support system for non-food crops and to that end I call for a separate system of support for these crops .
Commissioner , that would have the advantage of shielding the support system from fluctuations in the world market in cereals and would offer a form of stability that would be useful to both producers and processing firms .
Mr President , the European Union has supported studies , research , measures and other actions in the field of renewable energy .
Even so this support has to be even more significant especially in countries and regions where dependence on fossil fuels and other non-renewable energies continues to be huge .
That is why we agree with the joint motion for a resolution proposed by the Commission so that we should take greater action and show more obvious political will in the promotion of the use , above all , of biomass as an energy source , because this could help to lessen emissions of CO2 and also because , by extension , it could also mean that we make greater use of arable land which is not currently used for food production or which is completely abandoned .
On this subject , we should also be dealing with the development of a forestry policy in many Member states , especially in regions where little has been done so far , despite their special features and potential .
I should like to reiterate and emphasise , finally , some of the most important points of a genuine Community energy policy which might lead to greater and better application of renewable energy sources , such as biomass and biological fuels : better research in the field of energy , especially into renewable energies and energy efficiency ; better dissemination of demonstration projects , especially in the peripheral , ultra-peripheral and island regions of the European Union which use renewable energy sources ; greater financial support for public and private investment into the use of biomass and other less common renewable energy sources ; the concession of tax breaks for the production of energy on the basis , exclusively , of renewable sources ; greater technical and technological cooperation in the field of renewable energies and , also , in the rational use of energy between Member States , and between Member States and third countries ; stepping up information , education and public-awareness raising in various Member States about renewable energy ; lending open support to the creation of energy and environment agencies in European regions and third countries ; cooperation between action strategies by the European Union and other countries , even in other continents , in order to preserve a proper balance in our planet which relies , undoubtedly , on greater and more decisive use throughout the world of renewable sources for producing energy .
Mr President , I wish to speak briefly on the question of the role of fiscal instruments in the energy sector .
We know , obviously , that where they have been tried they have worked well - the tax differentials on leaded and unleaded petrol are a classic example .
The derogations that some Member States have under excise duties for different tax treatment of high and low sulphur fuels , again , exhibit the power to influence behaviour through fiscal incentives .
In the area of environment energy , and particularly emissions-related tax incentives , I have one observation and one question for the Commissioner .
The observation is that we should not make the best the enemy of the good , which is to say that there are many here who would like to promote the CO2 tax , but it has run aground on the unanimity requirements of Article 99 .
We should not allow that debate to get in the way of a consistent policy-setting and policy-targeting framework .
But what is clear in tax , is that Article 99 is the area where all these proposals run aground .
I wish to ask the Commission : is it prepared to use Article 100a to set a consistent set of emissionsrelated targets , which are non-optional , to set within that a menu of tax options available to states to be chosen through subsidiarity , consistent with the integrity of the internal market and , in that way , to actually find a policy mechanism to promote what we all say we want based on a recognition that the current procedure of always falling back on Article 99 leaves us adrift ?
Mr President , Mr Scapagnini has presented a report on strong cooperation on energy between the EU and the Mediterranean countries .
This report is very good as it contains several paragraphs on renewable energy sources .
The amendment I made in committee concerning solar energy and its potential as a source of energy has also been included in the report .
At the same time I am forced to conclude that the energy policy pursued by the EU , or to be more precise the research policy pursued by the EU , unfortunately does not emphasise renewable sources of energy in the same way as the Scapagnini report for example .
It seems as if it is extremely easy to lecture other countries on what form their energy policies should take but that when it comes to the EU 's own energy and research policy it is much more difficult .
Research is concentrated primarily on nuclear energy and fusion , with only crumbs going to renewable energy sources , despite the fact that at the UN environmental conference a couple of years ago the EU said that it was sustainable development that we should be aiming for .
Fine words are not enough .
Action is also needed .
I therefore hope that the Commission will include much more about renewable energy sources in the Fifth Framework Programme of Research .
It is certainly true that solar energy may not be applicable in the Member States of the EU but there are other renewable sources of energy .
For example , biomass and biofuels should be exploited .
The experts in this field say that the technology exists - it is the political will that is lacking .
The question is where the Commission is when these issues are debated .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the author of the report on the energy White Paper and to make some general comments .
In global terms consumption of energy continues to increase every year .
Most of it is fossil fuel : more coal , more gas , more oil .
Yet 40 % of the present world population does not have access to a commercial energy supply .
On top of that the world 's population is continuing to increase .
As I look at it there are no obvious signs at all that total energy consumption will decline this side of the 22nd century .
There is no shortage of fossil fuel and only political interference can interrupt the supplies .
More coal , more oil , more gas leads inevitably to more carbon dioxide , as Mr Linkohr has mentioned .
All the energy saving and all the energy efficiency measures have not halted , still less reduced , overall energy consumption .
In the more advanced economies decreases in the industrial , commercial and domestic sector have been overtaken by increases in the transport sector , so it is not inappropriate that we have the transport commissioner taking part in this debate this morning .
I would like to stress three points which need to be addressed if any energy policy at Community level is to have any success at all .
First of all , we should look at the emission objectives and rigorously define them in terms of human health rather than the emotive and somewhat imprecise talk about sustainability and the environment .
Second , Parliament needs to look at its committee structure and the competences , to allow a coherent approach to emerge : energy links to the environment , to transport , to regional policy , to research , to trans-European networks and to international collaboration .
Within the Commission similar notice needs to be taken .
Energy issues are spreadeagled over the field : DG XVII , XII , XI , XVI , I. Have I missed any out ?
Who is coordinating all this at Commission level ?
Thirdly , energy more and more becomes a high technology industry .
Efficiencies in the production , distribution and consumption of energy will more and more rely on information technology .
The coalminer 's shovel has been replaced by the microprocessor .
These are the lessons that we have got to learn if we are going to make sense of our energy strategy .
Mr President , much has already been said .
The experts have spoken , but I would now like to add a word from an ordinary citizen observing , with great sympathy of course , these innovations which augur savings and greater returns .
I want to add a brick to the edifice built by Mr Jacob and Mrs Schierhuber as regards the positive repercussions of these initiatives on agriculture and rural affairs .
Certainly farmers are directly interested in recycling any waste left in the fields which - we have already heard in what form - could become renewable energy and an incentive to saving .
The technical tables show that biomass is the number one source of renewable energy and in less than thirty years , in liquid , gas and solid form , could become highly competitive with traditional forms of energy .
There is also a study showing that if 10 % of electricity was produced from biomass , farmers ' incomes would rise and their turnover would increase by around ECU 20 billion per year .
We are all enthusiastic about these ideas .
Now what can we do to achieve them ?
First of all , we can give scientific research more substance , make the farmers in this case , but all European citizens too , understand where we want to go and how we will get there , and above all promote knowledge of this scientific research .
The saying goes that men 's ideas advance on men 's legs ; the ideas of the Commission and the European institutions advance on finance , above all .
So the programmes being proposed in this field need to be given more substance .
If ALTENER II is no longer sufficient other programmes must be launched and more substantial sums of money made available .
Finally , the existing structures and services must be brought up to date and the countries planning to join Europe involved , so that we do not find ourselves having to solve the same problems tomorrow .
Mr President , the energy policy of the future must be based on sustainability , recycling and renewable energy sources .
Nuclear energy and fossil fuels do not meet these requirements and must gradually be phased out as forms of energy .
Nor should we invest billions in research into fusion energy .
The large proportion of the EU 's energy research funds which goes to fusion research as part of the JET project can therefore be reduced or eliminated .
It is also unacceptable to invest more resources in new nuclear energy .
The use of certain EU funds to build new reactors in Ukraine must therefore be rejected .
The obsolete Euratom Treaty must be converted into a treaty for the development of energysaving renewable forms of energy using environmental taxes , selective purchase taxes and tax changes .
More resources are needed on the other hand for research , development and practical projects which support renewable energy sources such as bio-energy , solar cells , wind energy , biofuels , energy-saving products and processes and new energy-efficient and environmentally friendly fuels such as ethanol , methanol , hydrogen gas , rape oil etc .
In this connection , Mr President , the white paper must be considerably amended .
The Commission must also produce immediate proposals on how carbon dioxide emissions are to be reduced . A recommendation on a carbon dioxide tax must therefore be drafted as soon as possible .
Mr President , can I say that I welcome any discussion about the possibility of making a greater use of biomass in the production of energy .
Earlier this year I went to a conference in Sweden organized by the Council of Europe at which there was discussion about the use of biomass , using trees , crops , all sorts of plants .
I must admit the more I heard the more convinced I became that biomass offers an enormous opportunity for us to produce environmentally friendly energy that can be used in the whole of Europe for the betterment of our environment and our society .
I may add one other point , and that is that the development of biomass produces a reasonable alternative form of non-food production in the countryside .
I have many farmers who are ready to produce crops for biomass use and I would urge this Union and this Community to work as hard as we can , as speedily as we can , to make sure that we use these crops .
Mr President , I too shall restrict my comments to biofuels .
I share the enthusiasm shown by Mrs Schierhuber and fortunately many others in this House .
There are , however , a few unanswered questions .
The Commissioner 's reply was at first sight satisfactory , but I should like to put a few supplementary questions , first of all on taxation .
There is stagnation in Europe itself at the moment because the Council cannot come to a decision .
Yet at the same time we see certain countries managing to take certain tax measures .
How can that be ?
Is it possible or not ?
Secondly I would strongly urge the use of another instrument , namely legislation .
Many parts of Europe have environmentally sensitive areas .
In these areas it would be very useful to use biofuels , such as biodiesel .
Is the Commission willing to develop directives to make the use of biofuels compulsory in certain environmentally sensitive areas ?
Then we will have the best of both worlds , as so many have already said today : we shall be protecting the environment and finding a new market for agricultural products .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Schierhuber for her proposals on producing energy from biomass because I believe we in this House should not just declare our support for the development of renewable energy sources but also follow this with practical action .
I regard the production of electricity or district heating from biomass as a most important contribution to the development of sustainable energy supplies in the EU countries .
I would just add one thing to what Mrs Schierhuber said : especially when larger areas are planted with energy crops , it must be ensured that the choice of plants and the way they are cultivated are compatible with local environmental conditions .
In this context let me also point out that we once had an EU research project aimed at developing plants which , firstly , could decontaminate the soil , which would be particularly important for industrial land and land near motorways , and secondly , could later be used to produce electricity in special turbines .
But biomass is only one part of a sustainable energy policy and we should not let our concern with biomass make us forget other possibilities , in particular the natural heat of the earth and hot springs , which can make a very major contribution to energy production .
Here it is particularly a matter of producing for local supply since one could then avoid the need for high-tension power lines and the associated losses .
However , renewable energy sources can only become competitive in a developing single market in electricity and subsequently in energy if additional instruments are made available , such as perhaps an energy tax or instruments such as those Mrs McNally proposed in her report on Monday .
I hope more Members will be in favour after a second reading of this report .
Mr President , I welcome the broad degree of consensus in this House on my report on the White Paper .
I must admit to a certain surprise on the only dissenting voice I have heard in this House , which was from the Liberal Group .
I would just like to make two points .
First of all the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy adopted my report unanimously , including support from the Liberal Group .
And secondly the Liberal Group has not tabled any amendment to the report .
I think quite honestly that their criticism has little to do with policy and is really rather cheap .
So I hope the Socialist Group will not lend its support to the amendments from the Greens because that would break the consensus we had reached in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
In conclusion I wish to thank all Members for their great support .
Mr President , I find the procedures of this Parliament often intriguing , especially as someone who was a parliamentarian for twenty-five years .
Earlier today I was given ten minutes to make an intervention on behalf of the Commission .
Since I only had to reply to an oral question , I took up only five minutes .
Now I have to reply to three very substantial and worthwhile reports compiled by Members of this House , the products of very great efforts by them and I have been allocated only five minutes .
So I hope , Mr President , you will allow me some ' injury ' time , though I hope it will not be so long that we have to decide the match on penalties .
My colleague Mr Papoutsis is sorry to be absent from the debate but he is obliged to attend the Industry Council being held this morning .
I should like to thank the members of the Committee on Energy , Research and Technology and in particular the rapporteur Mr van Velzen for the work they have undertaken on the Commission White Paper on energy policy for the European Union , especially since that work has been done in a spirit of fruitful cooperation and consultation .
In the short time available I cannot deal with every point on the resolution before the House , but the Commission is carefully evaluating all the issues raised .
The rapporteur has naturally posed the question of whether we can reconcile our policy objectives with the budgetary provisions and the only realistic response to that is that it will not be easy .
It will be the challenge of implementing the White Paper .
A number of points are raised in the resolution concerning competitiveness and in particular the internal market for electricity and gas .
The common position of the electricity internal market directive which is currently under discussion in Parliament has accommodated most of the amendments tabled by Parliament during the first reading .
The Irish presidency has recently presented a draft compromise to the Council regarding the internal gas market and the Commission hopes for rapid progress in this matter in the Council on 3 December .
On environmental aspects , the report from this House acknowledges that the White Paper has given a lot of attention to the issue of sustainable development while still offering the criticism that not enough is being done .
The White Paper on energy policy can of course only give the general orientations and objectives for energy policy leaving the detailed aspects to be developed .
I hope the House will take that into account - I am sure it will .
As announced in the White Paper a strategy for the promotion of renewable energy resources is under preparation .
Drawing on the recommendations of the Mombaur report from this House , we drafted a Green Paper on the issue which will soon be presented to this Parliament .
I can see the excited anticipation on the faces of honourable Members already !
The Commission will produce legislative measures where necessary on other environmental issues such as standards , energy efficiency labelling , voluntary agreements and co-generation .
However , we will also try to implement voluntary agreements where they can be a management tool for efficient production .
We fully agree that co-generation contributes to energy efficiency and we also recognize the importance of this technology for combining electricity generating and sustainable development .
Consequently we are preparing a specific strategy on the issue .
The Commission very much welcomes most of the suggestions concerning international cooperation , in particular for the countries of central and eastern Europe .
Finally , on Mr van Velzen 's report , and in the IGC context , we should like to thank Parliament for continued support on the inclusion of an energy chapter in the Treaty on European Union , a development which we believe to be necessary to provide a clear and direct legal base for energy policy actions .
Turning to Mr Scapagnini 's report on the Euro-Mediterranean energy partnership , I am glad to note the consensus on the energy partnership issue as shown in the draft report .
The Commission is fully in agreement with the objectives specified for the partnership .
I have some brief comments to make on the means envisaged by the draft report .
The energy forum is now being set up and it will be a flexible instrument for ensuring cooperation between all the countries involved as well as industry and the banking sector .
Commissioner Papoutsis has asked the Commission services to manage the secretariat of the forum .
That will avoid creating a new instrument and it obviously demonstrates to the industry that we want to avoid the creation of additional bureaucracy .
The forum is scheduled to meet every two years at ministerial level and this House will be kept informed of all developments , so people can rest easy about that .
With regard to the concrete proposals contained in the draft report , the launching of a demonstration project ' ENERMEDVILLAGE ' is an interesting idea which we will examine .
Of course this type of action has to be considered together with the Mediterranean countries when implementing the indicative programmes .
The draft report before the House suggests setting up two institutions - an agency and a Euro-Mediterranean institute .
The objectives of such institutions are valuable but we should , however , like to ensure that the creation of new institutions should not , if possible , produce new bureaucracy .
We will , therefore , have to consider how the activities of an agency and an institute could be covered by existing institutions .
On the final report produced by Mr Chichester - an excellent report if I may say so on the equally excellent communication on gas supply and prospects - as the House will know , the objective of the communication which is naturally consistent with the White Paper on energy is two-fold : to provide a basis for debate and to examine the issue of security of supply .
The communication looks at the present and prospective European Community demand and supply outlook to the year 2020 , at external relations and at certain market developments with reference to the possible impact on supply security and the security measures currently available to the gas industry .
The external dimension is obviously crucial since more and more of the Community 's gas supply , as Mr Chichester pointed out , will come from third countries .
In external relations , therefore , Community solidarity can produce significant dividends .
The communication also examines several other issues with which Mr Chichester will be familiar but I will not go on at length about those to the House , avid though its attention is .
The communication argues that security of supply should not be seen exclusively in a national context .
The synergies , the interdependence and the complementarities of Member States ' gas systems may achieve in order to reduce the overall EU cost of security supply should obviously be further studied .
Cross-border approaches to meet security of supply plainly need to be produced .
As the House will be aware , the Energy Council last May gave broad support to the ideas I have just outlined and in the conclusions of the Commission 's communication , the Council gave an explicit mandate to the Commission to examine in depth the various relevant issues .
This mandate from the Council will obviously constitute a basis for Commission work on gas supply and security in the coming months and we will launch as soon as possible a major study which will cover the main aspects of security of supply at European Community level .
We will start discussing these issues with the Member States and the gas industry in the next few months and I am absolutely certain beyond any shadow of doubt that this House will maintain its active interest in the issue and continue to pack into the pews when I next make a report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken during voting time , which now begins .
Votes
Every year the European Union produces more than 2 billion tonnes of waste of all kinds , some 30 million tonnes of which are dangerous , and it is incomprehensible that there should still be no clear Union strategy on this matter .
The best policy for bringing waste management into line with the principle of sustainable development is to minimize waste .
This is equivalent to a principle of prevention and also implies a limited use of packaging materials , and above all their re-use and recycling .
Waste management should meet the same requirements throughout the Union , in order to prevent any malign potential ' tourism ' in an area without frontiers .
For this purpose the principle of proximity should be applied .
Grading at the place of origin and selective collection must be accepted and enforced if necessary , although local and regional authorities have to be relied on for this purpose ; without them , no waste management plan will work .
This is the reason for my amendments along these lines , and for my vote in favour after their acceptance .
I cannot conclude without reminding the Commission of the urgent need for submission of the new proposal on dumps .
The Galician case provides a dramatic illustration .
Kittelmann report
The report before us contains a series of excellent considerations which clearly emphasize the need for a strengthening of the international competition rules within the WTO .
It shows that the ground already gained in the OECD and UNCTAD , for instance , and the bilateral cooperation agreements entered into by the EU in the area of competition policy , represents a valuable , albeit far from adequate , contribution to the stabilization of international trade .
It also rightly makes the point that the introduction of internationally binding competition regulations will gradually reduce the need for the implementation of anti-dumping measures .
This is an important observation - not least when seen in the context of the very negative economic disturbance of the market that follows both dumping and implementation of anti-dumping measures .
Moniz report

Mr President , I should like to give a brief explanation of the ARE Group 's vote in favour of Mr Moniz 's report , since the future of the textile and clothing industries in the Community is certainly greatly at risk if we allow the World Trade Organization 's forecasts to stand , anticipating as they do the creation of new agreements concerning the Customs union with Turkey , free trade with the countries of central and eastern Europe and bilateral agreements with Pakistan , India and China .
Such developments could have very serious consequences for our industry , if we take account of the real effect of dumping by countries such as India or Pakistan .
The European Union 's policy should be directed towards global and effective liberalization of the market , and from that position we must work to ensure that trade agreements with India and Pakistan lead to an opening of their markets in the textile sector and that Community requirements on the environment , welfare protection and intellectual property are met .
Let us hope that , by action of the kind we have approved today , the European Union will be taking the necessary steps to see that a strict and effective framework is established at the forthcoming ministerial conference in Singapore for the creation of a code of minimum social standards in international trade .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is not very often that we are able to vote in favour of a report dealing with international trade .
Mr Moniz 's report has the great merit of lucidity and we are voting , have voted , in favour of it .
In fact , even though it is not clearly stated , it is the only report I have seen in this Parliament which establishes a link between internationalist free trade , relocation and unemployment , which criticizes the fact that there is no effective access for European textiles to third country markets and which demands the greatest resolution in the fight against fraud and for the protection of a major sector in the European Union , still employing 2 million people .
In fact , it denounces - in veiled terms because it is only concerned with textiles - what we have been denouncing here for many years : the ideology of internationalist free trade that is fatal to our economies , this commercial game in which the European Union is alone in applying the rules in the name of dogma .
The Commission is always amplifying and accelerating the globalization process by signing free trade , association or other agreements with the rest of the world , without ever really studying the harmful consequences for whole sections of our industry .
In this way , it is sacrificing the jobs of hundreds of thousands of Europeans , the industrial fabric of entire regions , and even the economic and social systems of our nations , all to the ' golden calf ' of world trade .
It is not from the WTO that salvation will come , it is from intelligent protection of our markets and strict application of the principle of Community preference in all fields .
Mr Moniz has not yet gone far enough along this path . We can only regret that .
The debates we have had this morning on the implications of international free trade for the textile industry in Europe seemed to me rather unreal and somewhat far from the practical consequences of these agreements as experienced by our citizens .
As the Mayor of Luçon in the Commune of the Vendée , whose main industrial activity was textiles and clothing , I can only count the enormous human cost of this policy .
How can I explain to the highly skilled workers in the New Man factory in Luçon who are now unemployed that in 1994 the textile agreement between the European Union and China decided on an increase in the volume of Chinese textile exports to Europe without China being forced to lower its customs duties which , in this sector , amount to between 70 and 100 % ?
How can I explain to a family with both parents unemployed because of the relocation of their company , that Sir Leon Brittan does not wish to impose a social ' diktat ' on newly industrialized countries ?
I fear , Mr President , that these families , that these workers will be demanding an explanation from the Commission and from all the elected representatives who have encouraged or allowed such a programmed dismantling of our industry .
We all know how much international trade agreements have affected many industrial sectors .
The textile and clothing industry is a perfect example of this , and it is right that the Commission and the Council are studying the case .
I should like at this point to pay tribute to the work done by our colleague , Mr Moniz , and to congratulate him .
In the face of the communication from the Commission , which in several places makes no bones about mentioning future sacrifices of jobs in this sector under the pretext of adaptation to the international structure of trade , the report by our colleague seems to me constructive and a better guarantee of the defence of the textile sector and employment in it .
It is abundantly clear that the textile and clothing sector has suffered from a lack of preparation for international competition and that its development must be based on its technological and qualitative assets , which it has neglected for too long , perhaps considering them to be unimportant factors compared with the low production costs of its competitors .
To do this , however , as emphasized in the report of the Committee on External Economic Relations , conditions allowing fair and genuine competition must be guaranteed at international level .
The textile industry should therefore not be the sector sacrificed on the altar of free competition and the world market .
The fight against fraud and counterfeiting must be actively pursued .
A watchful eye must be kept on excessive relocation resulting from speculation by certain entrepreneurs who thus destroy whole rafts of jobs in the Union : my region , Nord-Pas de Calais , is often a victim of this .
Lastly , and confining myself to only a few aspects of the problem , social clauses must be incorporated into international agreements .
I repeat this , since I have already questioned the Commission and the Council on the matter : it is possible to circumvent the most favoured nation clause of the GATT by introducing a social and development tax on textile imports , making it possible to guarantee welfare entitlements and employment for the sector in the Union and to use it in the context of our policy of cooperation with , and development towards , those countries with low labour costs .
GATT resolution
The conclusion of the GATT agreements barely two years ago and the related effects are now certain .
That is why the Committee on Agriculture calls on the Commission to give its position on export refunds in the context of the new situation .
As we know , the Community controls export quantities through a rigid system of licence allocation , which , however , has different effects on different sectors .
In the cereals sector the Commission is in a position to control them exactly .
For that reason the Commission should now determine how to transfer the GATT quantities that have not been fully utilized to coming years since it is already apparent now that additional quantities will become necessary in future .
In the milk sector , however , the situation is more critical .
In the case of butter and skimmed milk powder there have hardly been any price fluctuations in the past months .
In the case of cheese , however , the price policy has led to constant price falls via the refund adjustments .
This instability , resulting from the irregular allocation or denial of export licence applications impedes the sound operation of the market .
It is urgently necessary for the Commission to change its course here .
In the beef and veal sector an analogous situation has occurred .
The almost unpredictable way licences are granted is destabilizing the market and making producers feel insecure .
The Commission must introduce a more flexible system so that it can react better to market changes .
The beef and veal quantities bought into intervention stocks will also put a strain on the market in the near future .
Mr Fischler , how are these quantities to be sold and over what period ?
High stocks also exert heavy pressure on the market and therefore on prices .
We must all realise that the beef and veal market has already suffered greatly and must not be disturbed any more .
The next crisis could cause it to collapse totally .
Has the Commission worked out any ways to resolve this yet ?
If so , what are they ?
Colajanni report
There is no doubt about the concern felt in the European Union over recent events in Israel .
The peace process following the Oslo accords opened a door to hope and to Arab-Israeli peace .
The harsh reality of Rabin 's assassination to some extent presaged later uncertainty , well reflected by Netanyahu .
Nobody doubted the complexity of the process , or its intricate tangle of political , economic and religious factors , but the process must continue , since this is the wish expressed by the inhabitants of both Palestine and Israel .
I am not endorsing various sections of this report because I do not believe they advance this process ; but I do believe that the present Prime Minister must clarify and define his position , and this is the reason for the vote cast .
I completely share the report 's view that we are adopting a position in favour of peace , not siding with either the Israelis or the Palestinians .
The criticism of the new Israeli government 's way of operating , including its decision to resume the policy of establishing settlements in the occupied territories , is also especially justified .
I would , however , warn against the reasoning adopted in the report concerning the EU 's future role in the peace process .
I believe that the Member States of the EU should take action through the UN Security Council in order to achieve peace in the Middle East .
I do not consider that there are any arguments in favour of the idea of creating a permanent EU ' special envoy ' to the area .
It is through the UN that we should act to resolve conflicts in the world .
The EU cannot begin to busy itself with sending special envoys to different areas of conflict throughout the world .
It is very well-meant but there are other bodies which can take action on these issues .
Voting time is suspended and will resume at 6.00 p.m.

( The sitting was suspended at 1.25 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Incorporation of ECSC into budget
The next item is the report ( A4-0302 / 96 ) by Mr Colom i Naval , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the incorporation of the ECSC into the budget of the European Union .
Mr President , I have no desire to be grandiloquent , but the Committee on Budgets unanimously believes that its report on the ECSC 's budgetary future should begin by paying tribute to the pioneering role of the ECSC in the building of Europe and its undoubted contribution to peace in Western Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Paris which inaugurated the ECSC was not only the first , chronologically , of the Community treaties , and hence preceded the Treaties of Rome which created the EEC and the EAEC , but also set out a series of requirements which unfortunately were not included in the later Treaties .
The ECSC achieved a high level of institutional supranationality .
It was financed by a fiscal form of revenue , in short by a tax , which is the most genuine form of own resource entering the Community coffers .
It had a preset expiry period , and last , but not least , it provided for the development of a sectoral industrial policy which went hand-in-hand with social and regional measures .
Politically , its role in Franco-German reconciliation is beyond question , but so is the evidence that advocating an active sector-based policy is well-founded .
The ECSC is proof positive of the value of Community action which involves the social partners , as opposed to those who advocate blind market forces and deregulation .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are well aware that the adjustment of European coal and steel did not take place without cost , but do you believe that our steel industry would now be competitive without the research undertaken by the ECSC ?
Can you imagine what the social consequences of coal industry restructuring would have been without the ECSC 's welfare measures ?
The competent decision-making bodies have resolved not to extend or renew the ECSC Treaty when it expires on 23 July 2002 .
Although this date seems distant , the Union 's budgetary authority is required , because of the importance of the ECSC , to take an interest in its fate here and now .
Our discussion has been based on two fundamental factors : on the one hand , that expiry of the Treaty does not necessarily mean that all action currently taken under the auspices of the ECSC should cease in 2002 .
On the other , and to some extent as a consequence , we have to provide for a budgetary structure to cover those activities which it is felt should survive the ECSC itself .
This can be done by incorporation in the general budget or by some ad hoc structure .
My colleagues will give the views of some committees which are particularly affected , but as general rapporteur I should like to put forward our main conclusions : firstly , the European Parliament , as legislative and budgetary authority , should be associated with the whole process of incorporation .
Secondly , the equivalence between phasing out and phasing in must be respected ; in other words , the transfer of ECSC activities to the general budget cannot involve a loss of finance for these activities .
And this is a complaint we hear about both regional and , above all , social measures .
The Commission on Budgets believes that incorporation should entail the development of a specific industrial policy against Category Three of the Financial Perspective .
I have mentioned competitiveness , and we must therefore consider the matter of research .
The general view is that the Fourth Framework Programme , which already absorbs 61 % of Category 3 of the Financial Perspective , would be hard pushed to include most of the present ECSC research programme , including the social research already in progress .
We must therefore see what guidelines we should set for the Fifth Framework Programme .
Finally , the ECSC is involved in lending and borrowing operations extending in some instances to the year 2019 , which raises the matter of the famous reserves .
Our view is that these reserves should revert to the Union and should be managed either wholly or in part - this can be discussed - by a decentralized autonomous body . The Commission on Budgets does not wish at present to state an unambiguous preference for a foundation or an agency , but feels that this body must be under the budgetary and legislative control of Community institutions , and its remit must be , Mr President - and here I conclude - to further the steel , coal and social research essential to the survival of these two major European sectors .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Colom i Naval for his excellent report which several other committees have contributed to .
The major thrust of the Colom i Naval report is to ask the question : how can the EU continue the excellent work of the ECSC when the Treaty expires in 2002 ?
The most important requirement for us on the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy is that those areas which are heavily dependent on coal and steel production should not lose the advantages and benefits that currently ensue from the current ECSC Treaty and that Europe should continue to aid those areas in restructuring their local economies at a time when coalmines are being closed and there is an over-capacity of steel production in the world .
The report asks the Commission to undertake several activities .
The first one , which we on the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs support , would be the creation of a satellite agency .
What we believe in , firstly , is that the funds remaining from those ECSC reserves when the Treaty expires in 2002 should be put into such an agency because they are the Union 's own resources .
Secondly , that when such an agency is set up , it should be looked at very carefully in terms of its transparency and accountability to this Parliament for its budget and structure , and there must be discharge given by the Committee on Budgetary Control .
The second area of activity that this new agency must take on is the capacity for research which is going to be very important if we are going to remain competitive in these sectors and resources must be made available for areas with a declining coal industry , for training and rehabilitation .
We support the establishment of such an agency to regenerate local economies .
Mr President , the European Coal and Steel Community was a landmark in European integration and has shown itself in many respects to be more supranational than many other recent additions to the European Treaties .
It is to be regretted that later treaties did not come up to its standards in those ways .
Sadly it expires in 2002 and we must incorporate it into the Community budget .
This report starts the process and points out many of the problems and poses many questions to the Commission .
It is a good report .
Congratulations to the rapporteur .
The Committee on Regional Policy considered the report and finds that most of our conclusions are incorporated in the resolution .
But I want to emphasize a couple of points .
Firstly , the sectoral format of the European Coal and Steel Community and its direct involvement with employers , trade unions and other institutions is a great strength .
Incorporating this into existing instruments will be very difficult but somehow it must be achieved , perhaps in the ways that have already been mentioned this afternoon .
Secondly , there is the problem that the European Coal and Steel Community has a direct impact on employers and employees whilst the structural funds are much more general .
That problem needs to be addressed .
Phasing-in cannot be achieved satisfactorily without an adjustment of the structural fund implements and without an increase in the resources , greater participation of the partners in decision making and much more clearly focused measures .
Finally , in all the decisions we must all remember that these two industries are highly regionally focused .
In many of the areas there are very few employment or investment alternatives .
Devoting resources to unfocused training and woolly business advice , as I am afraid happens with some of the structural fund payments , is not the answer in this case .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the excellent report by Mr Colom i Naval on the incorporation of the coal and steel budget into the budget of the European Communities will have the support of the UPE Group .
In fact , by giving it a historical character and making it exhaustive as well , Mr Colom i Naval has , for the foundation which will remain at the end of the fifty years existence of the ECSC , mapped out a future with great benefits both for Europeans and for these two basic sectors of the European economy .
The Treaty of Paris will thus have , in 2002 , an end of which we can feel proud and happy .
I shall remind you , for the record , that at the first reading of the budget we approved an appropriation of ECU 5 million for setting up this body , but have not so far taken any decision about either its name or its legal form .
In my opinion , this is a fundamental question and I have no hesitation in stating that the UPE Group is in favour of a foundation and not in favour of an agency .
Although the agencies set up three years ago with the aim of funding their development themselves are in fact managing to achieve this very effectively , particularly the Alicante agency , I do not think that the agency system , related as it is to a concern for profitability , is compatible with what we want for coal and steel .
A foundation , on the other hand , which rules out any idea of profitability , corresponds much more closely to the concerns of the founding fathers and to the wish to make provision for the public interest .
Research , still an indispensable tool in making progress , is intimately connected with the future of coal and steel .
That is why , since this report calls on the Commission to carry out a study with a view to the establishment of a foundation or agency , the possibility of a foundation should be carefully examined , with a cost-benefit analysis of the two formulae .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to thank Mr Colom i Naval very warmly for this report and especially for beginning the report with an appreciation of the value of the ECSC Treaty , the foundation stone , as he writes , of European integration .
As a German Member I would like to give very warm thanks to him for emphasizing this aspect for it was indeed extremely important to Franco-German development and the later development of the Community .
That is why I would also point out that I especially support the incorporation of follow-on activities into the European budget , for in my view that is the only means that will allow us to evaluate what funds we want to make available for the coal and steel sector in future , in relation also to the other priority tasks we have in the Community .
By incorporating the ECSC into the budget we have a good basis for making a sound judgment on this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all may I congratulate Mr Colom i Naval on the clarity and , I would add , the rigour of his report , and also express my appreciation to the Committee on Budgets for the work it has carried out .
As you know the Commission took its final position on the expiry of the ECSC Treaty back in 1993 : at that time the Commission adopted a working paper updating its last communication to the Council on the future of the ECSC Treaty and the financial activities in particular , in which account was taken of the trend , on the one hand , towards reducing the levy and , on the other , to releasing the reserves due to diminished borrowing and lending activity .
In addition , in a communication of the same day on the future of the ECSC Treaty and the borrowing and lending operations , the Commission provided the Council with information on a possible EIB takeover of certain ECSC financial activities .
Finally , in June 1994 , the Commission took note of the agreement reached in the Industry Council on the adjustments to the borrowing and lending policy with a view to the expiry of the Treaty , and decided to limit the term of new ECSC loans to 23 July 2002 , with the possible exception of loans guaranteed by a Member State .
I also want to remind you that the other institutions as well as the Commission have been concerned about the expiry of the ECSC Treaty and its consequences and for the record I would just mention the memorandum from the German delegation on mineral and iron metallurgy research in the European Union , the memorandum of the ECSC consultative committee of June 1995 , and certain positions taken by Parliament , in particular during the budgetary procedures , for example , the recent Giansily report on the draft operational ECSC budget for 1997 .
In reality , the Commission substantially sees two problems in what comes after the ECSC : the first is to ensure a good outcome to the budgetary operations , including both the liquidation of the commitments undertaken up to 2002 , and the financial operations relating to loans still in being in 2002 . This is a first part of the problem .
Secondly , decisions must be taken on the ownership of ECSC property , essentially the reserves and their possible later use for financing specific research activities .
In the opinion of the Commission , the heirs , as it were , of the ECSC are obviously the Member States : it is up to them to decide , by common accord , how to manage and allocate the ECSC reserves , taking account of the rights of creditors .
In other words , the Member States are required to guarantee the good outcome of all financial operations still in being in 2002 .
For this reason the Commission has recently confirmed its willingness to approve , in 2002 , an adequate reserve corresponding to 100 per cent of the loans in being at that date not benefitting from the guarantee of a Member State .
In summary , then , the Commission needs to make a series of proposals to the Member States guaranteeing a good outcome for operations in progress , but it must also decide whether or not to maintain the specific features of the ECSC as regards research in the sector in a form still to be defined .
The Commission has taken careful note of the rapporteur 's request to the Commission to look into the appropriateness of establishing a European coal and steel foundation or agency .
In this connection the Commission undertakes to prepare a communication for the Industry Council meeting of 2 February or 17 April 1997 .
I am sure this communication will deal with the question of the utilization of the residual reserves from the other activities .
Coming now to the institutional form that Mr Colom i Naval has suggested , the Commission believes formulae other than the establishment of a European foundation or agency should be considered .
The nature of all the possible formulae needs to be studied . In any case , the structure chosen to finance research of proven validity after 2002 , must guarantee , in the Commission 's view , control by the budgetary authority and efficient management in the spirit of Article 55 of the ECSC Treaty .
In this respect the Commission entirely understands the proposal put forward by Mr Hughes , draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , to make the Commission responsible for the funds in question within the scope of the general budget of the European Union .
But whatever the formula finally accepted , it is clear that the Commission will defend the principle of budgetary unity and will examine the extent to which an exception to the principle of universality of that budget can be justified with the greatest care .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have tried to set out briefly the current state of the Commission 's ideas , but obviously the debate is not over and I am sure we will have other opportunities to discuss these questions again .
In conclusion , I would just like to express satisfaction , on behalf of the Commission , at the climate of cooperation that has accompanied the work of the two institutions , because the deadline for the proposal that the Commission has to present to the Industry Council at the beginning of 1997 is rapidly approaching .
Thank you , Mrs Bonino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Protection of animals during transport
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions to the Commission :
B4-1219 / 96 - O-0238 / 96 by Mr Funk , Mr Böge , Mrs Redondo Jiménez , Mr Goepel , Mr Provan , Mr Virgin , Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert , Mrs Klaß , Mr McCartin , Mrs Schierhuber , Mr Mayer and Mr Sonneveld , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on implementing the amended Directive 91 / 628 / EEC on the protection of animals during transport ; -B4-1221 / 96 by Mr Fantuzzi and Mr Görlach , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on implementing the amended Directive 91 / 628 / EEC ; -B4-1225 / 96 by Mr Tamino , Mr Ripa di Meana , Mrs von Blottnitz and Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on animal transport conditions .
Mr President , I think what has shaken all of us here in recent weeks were these dreadful pictures we all saw of the loading and transport of live animals .
It is not the first time this has disturbed the people and us politicians too .
It now turns out that we were right to amend the directive , when we emphasized the need for speed and submitted even more stringent proposals than those which were eventually agreed .
We all know that there are several aspects to the transport of live animals .
Of course the first aspect is animal ethics , respect for the living creature .
But there is also respect for a valuable product , for we humans all happen to be eaters .
I think it is degrading even for the producers of valuable beef and veal from the animals from which they make it to see what happens to the product they have produced with care .
It is also terrible for the consumer .
The beef and veal market is already laid low by the BSE problem , and on top of that we now have conditions such as these !
But there is a further aspect and it resides in the structure of our large slaughterhouses with their overcapacity .
For of course if overcapacity is to be exploited , that means transporting over long distances .
This realisation too has finally led , thank God , to a change in policy on regional slaughterhouses .
If these slaughter capacities and slaughterhouses are used , the distances can be reduced .
Fourthly , and we should not hide the fact , another aspect is our method of subsidizing .
Of course , when it is done correctly , the transport of live animals is more expensive than that of frozen or dead meat .
But if the system is exploited in such a way that people can make more money with the subsidies and treat the product meat in this way , things are going wrong !
My last observation is that we should not all point the finger at particular Member States .
These pictures came from Trieste , but in this case Trieste could be anywhere !
Mr President , I also turn to the Commissioner , Mrs Bonino , here present , to set out , with great sorrow , a situation which has been deplored for years , because I realize many colleagues , like many citizens of the Union , have been shocked to learn certain things and see certain pictures .
Unfortunately , we have been denouncing these events for years .
The transport of live animals involves incredible suffering for the animals who are kept shut up for hours and hours at the frontiers .
Usually there are no suitable places at these frontier areas for looking after animals , which have to stay in cattle trucks in the sun , or in freezing cold in the winter , and in the majority of cases they are not given enough food and water .
Obviously the animals suffer .
We have been shocked , but the Commission has been getting questions on this problem for a long time .
Just recently I denounced not only the case already mentioned , at the port of Trieste , but also the case , not far from Trieste , of transport through customs at Gorizia and Fernetti Prosecco , where there has likewise been full documentation of the utterly unacceptable conditions animals are left in .
I would like to add one thing : at Gorizia there were only two vets compared with the planned 14 and the premises for treating animals , financed from Community funds , are not yet operating , as of today .
The animals also suffer ill-treatment from electric goads and sticks used to load and unload animals being transported .
These situations are extremely serious .
The Commission has commitments ; we want to know how far they are being respected and how they will be enforced .
It is essential to ask the question of what sense there is , most of the time , in the transport of live animals .
We should try to make sure animals are slaughtered as close as possible to the places they were reared .
Even the problem of BSE would have been less serious in extent if this choice had been adopted .
It would have been easier for us to control it , it would have been easier to prevent what happened .
Finally I want ask something else : how many complaint reports have come from the States for violation of current directives ?
For what violations , with what sanctions ?
Which and how many importers and exporters from third countries have undertaken in writing to respect the provisions of the directive ?
Because we want the directive reviewed , as much to eliminate the exceptions to the maximum of eight hours and reduce it to four hours , as to guarantee proper inspection and encourage slaughtering where the animals are reared as much as possible .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to say why we are holding this debate here today .
Animal protection organizations , the media and the public in general are rightly appalled and deeply moved when these monstrous pictures of the transport of live animals are shown , as recently happened on television .
As stock-keepers and breeders of valuable animals the farmers also feel discriminated against when unscrupulous profiteers treat animals like unfeeling merchandise .
In face of these events we need not wonder why an increasing number of young people in particular are giving up meat in order to dissociate themselves from these intolerable happenings .
For years I have been fighting for the transport of meat to be promoted and given preference over the transport of live animals .
To date we have received little support from the Commission .
It kept pointing out that it was indispensable to transport live animals because the female animals continue to be used for milking and further breeding in the countries of destination and because different slaughter rituals are used in several regions from those in the European Union .
It is for these reasons that it is urgently necessary to ensure that live animals are treated and transported in the same way as working animals and breeding animals .
There is enough evidence that it is possible to transport animals properly , in line with the requirements of animal protection and species protection .
All the directives , regulations and resolutions we have discussed and adopted are not worth the paper they are written on unless the necessary controls are carefully carried out .
Here we must of course work together with the Member States .
However , even in the case of serious infringements the Commission continues to give money towards this kind of transport .
It should not do so !
It should not give any more money to transport operators who do not comply with the regulations , the animal protection rules !
From my own experience I happen to know that the European Union makes careful inspections at my farm and that it freezes the animal premiums or reduces the aid per hectare in the event of even slight infringements .
Inspections can evidently be carried out there , but not in the case of the transport of animals .
If find it incomprehensible that different yardsticks should apply to controls on animal transport than in the case of other controls .
I would ask the Commissioner to put a stop this , and to do sooner and in a better way than in the past .
We call on the Commission not to pay any more export subsidies to transport operators who do not observe the animal protection provisions as the most urgent measure .
Payment must be made conditional on the transport being carried out in accordance with the legal provisions on animal protection .
Let me also say that the people in the countries of destination have a right to good-quality meat .
But you cannot get that from animals that are tortured and arrive in the country of destination half-dead .
That too has to be made quite clear !
That is why there is no more excuse !
We called in 1995 for a budget heading and it was approved .
But although money was available - ECU 2.5m - no controls were carried out !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to give a general reply or , rather , a single reply to the three questions that have been put , and then deal with more specific points which have been raised during the debate .
The conditions of animals during transport to third countries , which have been discussed a great deal over the last few weeks , are of particular concern to public opinion , as honourable Members have said here .
The Commission is following the situation very closely in order to guarantee proper conditions for the transport of animals in third countries .
In this connection the Commission has intensified contacts with more third countries to find a solution and examine the possibility of having specific rules for the transport of animals out of the European Union .
But I must stress the special difficulties characterizing trade with third countries in that , obviously , the directives of the European Union cannot be applied directly to them .
In any case , Directive 91 / 628 , as amended by Directive 95 / 29 , contains provisions intended to guarantee observance by operators transporting animals out of or into the territory of the European Union of proper welfare conditions for the animals .
As honourable Members know , the basic directive was amended in 1995 , thanks to the considerable support of the European Parliament and the majority of the measures adopted must be incorporated into national legislations by 1 January at the latest .
Measures relating to additional criteria for vehicles used for the transport of animals by road , for journeys of a duration of over eight hours , and minimum criteria for stopping points will be in force by 1 January 1998 .
It is expected - at least the Commission hopes so - that the implementation proposals will be presented to the Council very shortly .
The amended directive contains stricter rules to guarantee that operators in the sector - Mr Funk made particular mention of this - respect proper welfare conditions for the animals during transport .
For example , the authorities of the exporting Member State must guarantee that the animals are fit to undertake the planned journey , that the appropriate provisions have been made for them to be looked after during transport and , in the case of export , on arrival at the destination .
A Member State must be in a position to guarantee that import-export hauliers are required to respect the provisions of the directive during the whole journey , which must be carried out in trucks and ships designed for the purpose .
However , given the complaints that have been made , the Commission intends to intervene again with the authorities of the Member States involved in the recent incidents mentioned in the questions put here , particularly Germany and Italy .
If it should emerge from investigation of these cases that the incidents were caused by inadequate application of the directive on the part of the authorities of the Member States , the Commission will consider the possibility of starting infringement procedures under Article 169 of the Treaty .
To increase the level of protection of animals transported in third countries , the Commission 's services are examining the possibility of revoking the export repayments to those exporters who have not fully respected current provisions on the welfare of animals during transport , which seems to me exactly in line with Mr Funk 's proposal in this debate .
The Commission wishes to warn honourable Members that this procedure is very complex , as some are aware . In fact , veterinary inspections have to be organized not only at the point of departure from inside the European Union but also during transport , outside Community territory , and at the point of arrival in the third countries .
I think honourable Members are aware at least of the organizational complexity because all this has major practical and legal implications .
I do not think I need to explain the problem to honourable Members .
But the Commission is pleased to tell you there has been progress in the matter and the proposal for a Council regulation has a good chance of being presented next month .
Mr Funk , you asked for details on the application of the directive .
The Commission can say that the day to day application of the directive is , as everyone knows , the responsibility of each Member State .
The Commission 's Veterinary and Plant Heath Inspection Office ran a programme of missions to the Member States in 1995 and 1996 , to examine the adequacy of the implementation measures adopted by Member States and check the conditions of transport of animals at markets , abattoirs , collection points and frontier posts .
To come now to the question of the allocation of the ECU 2.5 million in the 1996 budget - an issue which has been raised here - I must say that this amount simply does not allow the Commission to take on extra staff to post to inspection but we have been considering how to use the sums available in the optimum way .
The Commission would like to draw Mr Tamino 's attention to the fact that the directive does not include an obligation on Member States to inform the Commission of how many inspections they have carried out , what failures they have discovered and what sanctions they have imposed .
So the Commission is not in a position to give the full information that you requested , Mr Tamino .
Finally , as regards specific inspection projects , the Commission is considering further options , which might perhaps improve the inspection of animal transport .
It is a question of systematic verification of transport conditions for a given period which must be carried out by independent bodies .
This is a possible option , which could include inspection of animal transport at frontier control posts , using and strengthening , for example , information and training for those with direct responsibility in the sector , and collecting data on the legal application of the measures by Member States whenever infringements of the rules on animal welfare are observed .
All these points need deeper examination , but the Commission would like to confirm here that despite the complexity of the organizational , financial and legal situation - which is different but important - both in the States of the Union and especially in third countries , it will continue to present proposals intended to improve conditions for animals .
We hope that , as all honourable Members are aware of the difficulties , the Commission and Parliament can join forces to bring forward these particular initiatives .
Mr President , I am very pleased this debate is happening .
As everybody knows the question of animal transportation was a matter of great concern throughout the European Union and when the new rules were agreed last year there was some hope that some of the worst aspects of the trade would be ended .
When the Council agreed the new transport rules in June 1995 reference was made to the importance of extra veterinary inspectors to be taken on by the Commission to enforce the directive .
In spite of the fairly encouraging response given by Mrs Bonino , I got a much less encouraging response when a year after the directive was passed I asked both the Council and the Commission in written questions what had been done about this and specifically whether proper financial provision was made in the budget for additional inspectors .
The Commission answered that there were no available resources and no plans to recruit any more inspectors , which appears still to be the case .
The Council simply passed the buck back to the Commission and its answer showed a total indifference to the problem and no concern at all to ensure that EU law is enforced .
So to this day , as I understand it , there is still only one veterinary inspector charged with monitoring the implementation of the transport directive .
He is a fairly busy man and it is no wonder that it continues to be flouted .
Elsewhere the situation is even worse .
For instance the directive on standards of battery hens requires the Commission to carry out checks in the Member States .
That directive was passed in 1988 and so far not one inspection has been carried out .
Frankly , if the Commission is not prepared to enforce EU law , and the Council apparently does not care , we are wasting our time here .
I was encouraged by Mrs Bonino 's reply to the extent that the Commission is continuing to take steps to try to ensure that the directive is enforced even if without extra veterinary inspectors .
I think veterinary inspectors must be appointed if we are to take this seriously .
I also hope that the Commission will appoint responsible NGOs in the Member States to enforce the law if it cannot do so itself .
Mr President , it is always nice to see the Commissioner in the Chamber and , on this occasion , we are very fortunate to have her as the Consumer Affairs Commissioner but also , if I might say so , as Fisheries Commissioner , because in her portfolio on fisheries she also has an inspectorate who has to ensure that Community law is applied properly .
This is the very subject , which Mr Spiers has just referred to , which is vital .
There is no sense in making laws and passing regulations unless we can actually enforce them , and this is at the nub of the problem .
I recognize what she says , as Commissioner , that it is up to the Member States .
But the Commission has a responsibility under the Treaty of Rome to ensure that the management and the regulations are applied equally and properly throughout the European Community .
It is there , it is a responsibility of the Commission .
I submit to her , as most of my colleagues have today , that it is up to her to ensure that the Member States do that .
If that means employing extra people to go round the national capitals to ensure that the rules are applied properly , so be it .
But there are other ways because , in animal welfare generally , we have a vast population of people throughout the Community who are intensely interested in animal welfare .
They would happily be involved , one way or another - whether it be through subscribing to voluntary organizations or whatever - to ensure that the law was applied .
I would have thought that the Commission could usefully look at the opportunity of putting out to contract to voluntary organizations the opportunity for them to monitor what is happening and perhaps report back to the Commission as to how they find things on the ground .
I am not suggesting they should apply the law , because that would be going beyond the brief of a voluntary organization .
The reason why we are having the debate today is because of a television company that has sparked this fire that is now rampaging through Germany as a result of the animal transport rules not being applied properly .
It happened in Britain several years ago .
I worked for a voluntary organization for five years which raised the biggest petition ever in the European Community regarding the transport of horses .
I hope that the Commissioner will find a way - because she is a very practical , competent and capable person - of ensuring that the rules will be applied properly .
Mr President , Commissioner , I did not think I was coming here today to have to defend Italy on a subject I feel has been brought into the debate .
I am certainly not going to defend the government , and I will not defend the Italian character on something so banal .
But I do want to defend Trieste and its whole region , a crossroads of civilization , a classic crossroads of central European values , from the shadow that has been cast over it , certainly in an exaggerated way , if not absolutely gratuitously .
An episode , while serious and certainly to be condemned , has become the subject of debate in the European Parliament and been grafted onto a working method , onto relations between states , onto relations between producers and consumers of an animal product , and I do not think things in Italy are any different from other states .
Certainly , when it comes to the transport of live animals many factors come into play ; everything seems cruel , every touch seems a torture and perhaps that is really the case .
I agree with Mr Tamino when he says no to electric goads , no to those who do not respect the journey times , no to those who do not respect the shifts for giving these animals food and water .
But beware too of demagogues and speculation .
Not everything is torture and not everything is the search for truth , and that is the case here .
I do not think the port of Trieste is so different from other ports , other centres for collection and sorting out live meat and slaughtered meat .
But right now the port of Trieste is in the eye of the storm because at a moment of overcrowding and congestion - that is the explanation I was given when I telephoned - someone was present and filmed certain episodes - we know the place will be full of cameras now - and the episodes have been transformed into a general rule .
Italy also took an immediate initiative with this letter from the Ministry of Health , which many Italian colleagues will have to hand , sent on 12 November , two days ago .
The response was immediate .
Vets and officials from the German Länder arrived , were welcomed and taken to the collection centre at the port of Trieste to inspect the facilities .
In the end a protocol of understanding was drawn up , an agreement which has produced results .
Many things will be speeded up on the bureaucratic side , with faxes instead of letters , and telephone calls instead of insults from a distance , but above all the port of Trieste has undertaken to engage more staff to manage the facilities .
But all this is being used to demonize Trieste .
If we were to carry out identical inspections elsewhere , I think we would probably have to be defending some other European port next time .
Mr President , every week 2 , 000 horses are transported from eastern Europe to the European Union .
The shocking Dutch film has confronted us with the appalling suffering of horses during transport at the Italian border .
Fortunately the animal welfare inspectors from the Netherlands showed - it was not fortunate , but it is a good job that they forced us to look the hard facts in the face - that of these 2 , 000 horses per week may cross the border dead or with broken bones or other wounds .
That film showed only one lorry but simple arithmetic proves that between fifty and a hundred dead horses every week are the result of this kind of transport .
While we are speaking here and now there is one horse dying as a result of this inhumane treatment .
Are we prepared to tolerate that for the sake of a slice of salami in our sandwich ?
And that is not to mention the other animals which are transported ! How these animals suffer during transport , what we put them through !
I have listened to Commissioner Bonino .
The Commission 's plans do not appear too bad , but I do have one question .
The implementation regulations of the 1995 directive should have been published in the middle of this year .
I have not seen them .
Can the Commission tell me where I can see them , where they have been published ?
Does the Commissioner still believe that the 1995 directive can still come into effect on 1 January 1997 ?
And finally a plea to my colleagues , particularly my German and Italian colleagues , that they urge their own national authorities to make border checks more effective .
Mr President , on a point of order and a personal statement .
The honourable Member who has just spoken twice insulted my country , the Netherlands .
I shall not go into detail , but I wish in the strongest terms to contradict what he has just said in such derogatory terms .
Mr President , I share the view of Mrs Maij-Weggen that the previous speaker , I have often thought , inhabits a rather sad and black world .
He has certainly confirmed that with his views this afternoon .
Back in the real world , if we measure the real concerns of the public by the frequency with which issues appear in our postbags , I suspect that many Members would admit it is not the EMU or the IGCs but animal welfare , and specifically the transport of animals , which is comfortably ahead .
And that public concern has not gone away with the decisions of last June .
Given recent distressing media coverage of animals suffering stress and deliberate cruelty it is highly appropriate that this Parliament should insist today that the Commission and Member States take urgent and effective action .
I suspect that if they did so it would do more for the European Union than all of its publicity budgets put together .
The fact that it takes non-governmental organizations , such as the RSPCA in the UK , or the media to expose continuing ill-treatment of animals shows two things : firstly , that the Commission and Member States are failing even to begin to implement agreements and , secondly , that the public pressure will not evaporate .
Nor should it .
There are too few proper checks and pitifully few prosecutions either of cruel transporters or ministries who fail to act .
I support colleagues who argue that NGOs like the RSPCA could help overcome the budget restrictions which the Commissioner spoke about .
Meanwhile , criticism mounts from all sides : from pig breeders concerned about confusion at staging points ; from farmers faced by prohibitive definitions of a journey ; from animal welfare experts who see a lack of properly trained supervision and a shortage of inspectors as crucial shortcomings .
Those specific points should be specifically tackled by the Commission .
I appreciate the remarks from Commissioner Bonino today .
But the greater need remains to progress towards a carcass trade rather than sustaining live exports for slaughter .
With export subsidies available of up to ECU 400 per head , it is hardly surprising that both honest and unscrupulous traders are hardly rushing to take up alternatives .
Farmers and hauliers need to make a living and the BSE fiasco has not helped .
Thus the clear message today has to be that the Commission must reform a system which unintentionally sustains cruelty .
The European institutions have to be economically serious about encouraging local slaughter by removing those export subsidies .
Finally , a real commitment in the Treaty to include sentient beings would be best of all and I suspect that in the long run the public will eventually demand nothing less than that .
Mr President , this House has a good record on animal welfare .
On 15 December 1993 this Parliament almost unanimously adopted my report to limit the overall journey-time of animals destined for slaughter to eight hours .
It is these animals which are destined for slaughter which are subjected to the worst neglect and the worst cruelty : cattle going from Germany to Lebanon , British and Irish cattle and sheep going to North Africa and , most recently , horses imported from Poland to Italy for the salami trade .
These animals are subjected to long journey times , bad conditions , few opportunities for feed and less for water .
When they arrive they are always in a pitiable state .
Too frequently , in fact , these cruelties are not exposed by officials of Member States but rather by private citizens and the media out for a good story .
I welcome Mrs Bonino 's statement this afternoon to the effect that she is determined to amend the directive , but there is one suggestion I should like to make to her .
I would welcome even more the Commission itself taking powers to monitor and prosecute those Member States which do not bother to supervise their own inspectors , and certainly both to monitor , inspect and , if need be , prosecute those companies which transport live animals and subject them to the most cruel treatment .
I do not think this trade is necessary .
With modern chilling techniques we can now deliver animals even to those Member States with large populations of Muslims and others who require a ritual form of killing .
We can deliver what people want and should aim for what I asked for many years ago , namely the slaughter of animals at the nearest point of production or farming .
Mr President , we are lucky to be able to deal with this resolution with Mrs Bonino present , because she is the Commissioner responsible for some of the issues involved , but above all because we appreciate her well-known sensitivity and down-to-earth attitude .
Directive 29 lays down precise criteria for the transport of animals so that they do not suffer and also to ensure product quality when meat intended for human consumption is involved .
The problem , as always , is one of application and certainly the dates must not be exceeded , as the resolution states .
We trust the implementation regulations will soon be published , as Commissioner Bonino has already said .
As regards the episode several speakers have referred to , we know very well that the news often highlights facts for reasons other than those stated and , of course we understand that these reasons often hide interests less noble than those stated .
As regards Trieste , we all know inspectors made a spot-check of the veterinary facilities and they were passed as suitable .
We also know , as Mr Santini mentioned just now , that on 12 November there was a meeting between Federal and Länder vets and the Italian authorities , and on that occasion the installations were visited , found to be in optimum conditions and there was even a draft protocol in which the Italians asked for special guarantees , strict guarantees of the quality of the animals when they leave the country of origin .
Italy then undertook to strengthen the manpower at the Trieste offices and supply the necessary resources , as already provided for by a national law .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I just want to clarify one small point .
I do not see Mr Provan in the Chamber but perhaps other Members can pass the information on .
I want to return to the problem of inspections and budgetary restrictions .
I just want to repeat in this house that this house is a budgetary authority , along with the Council , and the Commission is certainly hoping to increase the funding if it ever gets a chance .
But honourable Members are well aware of the budget drama and the whole debate you yourselves have had .
The second point relates to the proposal to use civil organizations .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are talking about an area of the Treaty covering relations between the Commission , the Member States and , of course , these organizations .
In addition , the Commission is responsible for verifying that an adequate inspection framework exists and that this framework is uniform across the Member States .
We certainly cannot use the non-governmental organizations to ensure this , but instead they could be used by the Member States for more in-depth inspection on their own territory : specifically the Member States and not the Commission which , obviously , will check up on the non-governmental associations .
It seems to me that , legally , a solution like that could involve a series of obstacles , but I believe I am talking to excellent lawyers so I do not need to expand on that point .
A short note for Mr Morris because , as I already said in the introduction - but perhaps it is as well to repeat it - from 1 January 1997 , Article 18 of the amended directive provides that , in cases of repeated violation of the same , the Member State can take a whole series of initiatives , including suspension or withdrawal of the operators and hauliers licences .
I hope that , with your help , this can be rigorously applied by the Member States .
Thank you very much , Madam Commissioner .
I have received four motions for a resolution pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Topical and urgent debate ( part two )
The next item is the second part of the topical and urgent debate on subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-1257 / 96 by Mr Bertens and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ; -B4-1280 / 96 by Mrs Lenz and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on support for the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ; -B4-1286 / 96 by Mr Pasty and others , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ; -B4-1303 / 96 by Mr Cohn-Bendit and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the transportation of nuclear material by air ; -B4-1313 / 96 by Mr Pettinari and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ; -B4-1319 / 96 by Mrs Hoff and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the international criminal tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ; -B4-1324 / 96 by Mr Dupuis , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the functioning of ad hoc tribunals .
Mr President , we must now forget that ' time heals all wounds ' .
When such expressions are used in respect of the situation in the former Yugoslavia it does far more harm than good .
If the scars felt by the many people who have been affected by intolerable suffering in the form of genocide and other war crimes are to begin to heal , immediate action is required .
The war crimes tribunal in The Hague is doing useful work .
It is dealing with serious war criminals .
If it is to be completely successful and able as a result to serve as a model for a future permanent war crimes court it must have two things .
First , it needs money so as to be able to carry out the on-the-spot hearings and investigations into crimes which are required .
Second , it must have access to those who are suspected of bearing primary responsibility for the war crimes .
It is a disgrace , Mr President , a disgrace for justice and the rule of law in Europe , that it has not been possible to capture these people , the primary suspects , and bring them to trial .
In its resolution today Parliament demands changes in both these respects .
The war crimes tribunal in The Hague must be given the necessary resources by the European Union and its Member States .
Serbia and Croatia must be persuaded to keep the promises they have made ; the EU must obviously increase its pressure on them so that they realise that this is in their own interests too .
Ifor and the follow-up forces must be given instructions - orders if you like - to arrest those whom the tribunal in The Hague wants to see prosecuted .
Parliament 's demands , Mr President , are not founded on a desire for revenge .
Our aim is simply to facilitate the healing process in the former Yugoslavia .
This in turn clearly means that we must lance the festering boil left behind by the war crimes which have been committed .
Mr President , on 30 and 31 October the Subcommittee on Human Rights held a hearing in Brussels on the question of impunity and the need for an international answer - a really difficult question .
Antonio Cassese , President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , gave a very impressive speech in which he discussed the difficulties facing the Tribunal , together with the highly sensitive question of impunity for political crimes .
This matter is now being discussed in every continent .
President Cassese clearly described the powers and powerlessness of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , whose success or failure depends , he said , on the value states attach to the principle of morality in foreign policy .
Genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes also occur in other regions of the world today , for instance Rwanda , and they must not go unpunished .
In this sense impunity can become a threat to law and order , especially in unstable democracies .
The activities of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda will also be modelled on those of the Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia .
If we want to find a new international system of laws governing this worst form of crime , the Tribunal in The Hague must be able to function efficiently and in fact become that model .
Our states can have no excuse for shirking their duty to enable the Tribunal to function successfully , nor must the states of those regions have a chance to shirking their obligation to cooperate .
If we here in the European Parliament who have called for it on several occasions , want to have a standing International Tribunal for crimes of this kind and if we take our own human rights demands seriously , then the European Union and its Member States must now immediately be serious about enabling the Tribunal to function and give us the necessary support .
Mr President , it was less that a month ago , as Mrs Lenz has just said , that we listened in this House to various international authorities speaking on the consequences of impunity on how citizens cope with a society in which crimes against humanity go unpunished .
Mr Kalanosh came specially from my country to Brussels to that sitting .
He weighed 38 kilos when he escaped from prison during the 1956 Hungarian uprising and fled to the Netherlands .
For fourteen years after that he worked day and night to bring the perpetrators of those crimes to justice .
That shows that throughout history people have not rested until they see justice being done .
Impunity is an obstacle to re-establishing public confidence in the state .
Impunity is an obstacle to lasting peace .
Impunity is an obstacle to the building of a democratic state .
On the arrest of war criminals in the former Yugoslavia it is a complete mystery to me when the wish of this Parliament and many national parliaments is not put into practice .
The European troops within IFOR form the largest part of the force , or could it be the lack of a joint European foreign policy , as in the Middle East , that is really the cause of inactivity ?
Now is the right time to table this kind of motion for a resolution .
Because if we are not careful we shall soon find ourselves with no accused and no finances before the tribunal .
I fully support this motion for a resolution and hope that Parliament will endorse it completely .
Mr President , crimes like genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes must not remain unpunished ; if they are not punished a genuine peace process is unthinkable .
That is what has happened in former Yugoslavia , that is what Professor Antonio Cassese said to us at the hearing , but our former colleague Elisabeth Rehn also said it time and again in this house and in committees . I salute her and hope that her work in this area will be crowned with success .
Although she is no longer a colleague , I hope she will still come here as a guest of the European Parliament so that we can do useful work together .
We have often been updated on the position and we all know that UN Security Council Resolution 827 obliges states to cooperate fully with the tribunal which , has no executive and has to rely on the states in order to operate .
We also know that many people charged by the tribunal , for whom arrest warrants have already been issued , are free and the states they are living in are doing absolutely nothing .
In particular , we know that in the Serbian Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina , the information services have been able to contact criminals already sentenced .
We know that Serbia has not adopted the implementing legislation allowing it to cooperate with the tribunal and has declared that it does not intend to do so .
We know that while Croatia has done all that , at this moment it is not taking any positive action as regards Bosnia-Herzegovina to ensure that those stained with these crimes in the Croat ethnic community are brought of justice .
Mr President , we are asking that no reconstruction aid or guaranteed rights to join international organizations should be granted , as long as these states fail to respect the provisions of the UN resolutions .
Mr President , penal law has two functions .
Firstly , it is to punish the guilty and , secondly , it is to deter others from criminal activity .
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia is doing neither .
The guilty are not only free but continue to exercise influence in the region and nobody , but nobody is being deterred .
It is vital for the future safety of mankind that international humanitarian law is respected and that transgressors know they will be punished .
I have no doubt whatsoever that if the perpetrators of war crimes in Bosnia had known that there was a likelihood that they would be found out and punished we would never have seen the descent into the sort of barbarism we have witnessed .
The War Crimes Tribunals after the Second World War also fulfilled another function .
They brought all the horrors out into the open and that allowed a line to be drawn under events so that society could move on .
If the Hague Tribunal cannot do the same , then the former Yugoslavia and indeed the whole Balkans region will never move on and peace will never be guaranteed .
The international tribunal is in danger of being written off as a sop to the conscience of the very international community which stood weakly by while the horrors went on .
Meanwhile we will have given a green light to barbarism in any one of a hundred trouble spots currently around the world .
War criminals in future will be able to take comfort from the belief that realpolitik will guarantee their future safety .
The guilty of Bosnia - and I mean all the guilty , not just the Serbs - must be arrested and brought to account , not just for the sake of the dead and the dispossessed , but also for the sake of the future of civilization .
Mr President , I am particularly pleased to be able to speak today in the presence of the Commissioner , Mrs Bonino , whose commitment to the tribunal for former Yugoslavia and also to a permanent tribunal is well known to us .
In my opinion , the resolution we shall , I hope , be adopting presently is a good one .
Unfortunately , in some ways it covers things we have already asked for and we could , I believe , have gone further ; we could have made other suggestions , addressed in particular to the President of the tribunal in The Hague , in particular telling him of an idea which I and my group are keen on : that of introducing trials in absentia .
For as long as this remains impossible , I believe we shall be forced to continue expressing pious hopes that we have already expressed several times , without being able to bring the war criminals in the former Yugoslavia properly to trial .
We know that this is not the best solution in absolute terms , but we know that the in absentia procedure also makes it possible to reopen a case when the accused or the convicted person is arrested .
I therefore think that Parliament should proceed along this path and take this additional step as quickly as possible .
Mr President , when the Tribunal was set up it struck me that it was meant as a smokescreen to avoid really effective action being taken to end the war in the former Yugoslavia .
But the setting up of this Tribunal persuaded me that it is an extremely useful instrument for international peace and for preventing other large-scale crimes .
The dedication of the people working there is impressive and I think that they deserve all our support , including specifically financial support from the European Union .
As Mr Cassese said it is as if the Council created a Frankenstein monster that happily goes his way to intervene and operate wherever he can .
But the expected arrests have not taken place and crime and impunity permeate the whole of society , particularly the Republika Srpska and also the Croatian part .
So it is extremely important that we strongly urge the arrest of the criminals involved so that they may be brought before the Court and put an end to the lethargy of members and ex-members of the Council .
Mr President , the international community sets out principles and ends up seeing that they are not applied .
The disappointment caused by the way the international tribunal for the former Yugoslavia operates is the most recent example of this .
Neither Croatia , nor Bosnia , nor the Serbian sector are really contributing to the satisfactory functioning of this institution .
The refusal of the known war criminals to appear before the tribunal , helped by the complicity of the political leaders of each of their camps , is flaunting a challenge to authority .
Let us not ignore the obvious !
If we really want to encourage the advance of international law and ensure respect for it , if we fervently wish that the indescribable crimes committed during the war in the former Yugoslavia can never again be committed with impunity , the international community and particularly the European Union will have to use all its weight in economic and political relations with the successor states to the former Yugoslavia .
The price that Europe is willing to pay to have international law respected will in this case find its expression in the pressures it will exert on the parties concerned , those responsible for putting more and more obstacles in the way of the tribunal 's work .
Mr President , the European Parliament , with due respect , is ill placed to condemn the former Yugoslavia so vigorously .
The mass of paperwork we have produced on the subject bears little resemblance to reality .
If the European Union had in effect immediately recognised at the time , years ago , the pointlessness of the continued existence of the so-called multicultural unity state of Yugoslavia , it might well have saved a lot of bloodshed and human suffering , but Parliament was incapable of doing so .
Secondly , there are a few questions to be asked of the concept of an international tribunal itself .
I do not intend to go back to the first international tribunal at Nuremberg where barbarous war criminals - I am thinking in particular of the murderers of ten thousand Polish officers in Katin , among others - had to sit in judgment on other barbarous murderers .
But even today what is the human and even the legal value of an international tribunal of the world 's conscience if the world 's conscience is restricted to the former Yugoslavia ?
Why is there no international tribunal on the genocide in Tibet ?
Or on the cruel implementation of the Islamic barbarous law in countries such as Saudi Arabia or on the crimes of the Khmer Rouge ?
In my own country of Belgium they have still not managed to date to wipe out by means of a legal amnesty the divisions of the Second World War .
Even today , 51 years after the end of that war , there is evidence of that hatred still living on .
That at all events makes the members of parliament from my country ill placed to teach any lessons to the former Yugoslavia , with or without any tribunal .
I shall therefore abstain in the vote on the motion for a resolution before us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I worked in this area before I was a Commissioner and I have found the debate fascinating .
So I particularly share your frustrations as regards the ad hoc Tribunal on former Yugoslavia , but this could also apply to the ad hoc Tribunal on Rwanda .
But despite all the difficulties , I do not want us to lose sight of the positive aspects , because I feel sure a dynamic has been created which should not be undervalued .
First of all , I think that public opinion and the institutions are little by little coming round to the fact that impunity can no longer be tolerated .
I also believe that the idea of a permanent justice system is beginning to make progress and I hope the UN General Assembly will accept the date in 1998 for the Plenipotentiary Conference to establish a permanent tribunal .
Notwithstanding this , I share with you some frustration at the slow progress and the political obstacles that have been put in the way of the ad hoc Tribunal in terms , for example , of failure to arrest the suspects , but this tribunal has also been marked by a whole series of obstacles , including financial , from the start .
The Commission has contributed ECU 3 million to the ad hoc Tribunal on former Yugoslavia since 1994 , and I believe this Parliament has established a special budget line of another ECU 3 million in the new budget for 1997 .
I think many of the Member States have also contributed bilaterally .
The main problem is that ever since the Security Council set up the ad hoc Tribunal under Chapter VII of the UN Charter it has had to be financed from a special fund and that is a basic defect and limit .
Everything was voted through , but the problem then has been that the special fund does not get finance from the ordinary UN budget but has to be topped up from time to time with special contributions from the states .
Obviously there has been a gap or disjunction between the political will and the financial will which has made the tribunal 's work difficult from the start .
In any case , the Commission will continue to support this institution as well as the ad hoc Tribunal on Rwanda and , we hope very soon , the permanent Tribunal .
Like you I am also convinced that there is no peace without justice and that these are the instruments which can facilitate the reconciliation .
So probably a permanent tribunal could also have a deterrent effect which the ad hoc tribunals certainly do not have .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-1264 / 96 by Mrs Dury and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the breakdown of the fishing negotiations with Senegal ; -B4-1279 / 96 by Mr Pasty and others , on behalf of the UPE Group , on the lack of success of the negotiations on the renewal of the fisheries agreement between the European Union and Senegal ; -B4-1283 / 96 by Mr Bertens and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the failure of the fisheries negotiations between the EU and Senegal ; -B4-1290 / 96 by Mrs Langenhagen and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the breakdown of fisheries negotiations with Senegal ; -B4-1291 / 96 by Mr Pettinari , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the EC / Senegal fisheries agreement ; -B4-1300 / 96 by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the breaking off of the negotiations on a fisheries agreement with Senegal .
Mr President , the breakdown of negotiations between the European Union and Senegal in the fourth round has arisen , in my opinion , as much from the content of the discussions as from their context .
The electoral context for Senegal , with elections on 28 November , and the budgetary context for the Union .
That is why I hope to remain optimistic about a renewal of discussions in two or three months , or even in a few weeks .
The two parties have linked interests .
The Community market takes fish from Senegal , but Senegalese processing firms , and I am thinking particularly of those dealing with tuna , need the catches unloaded from European ships , and I am also concerned about the hundreds of thousands of employees , particularly the Senegalese women who have these jobs and who would certainly be heavily penalized if these agreements remain suspended .
One of the difficulties of these negotiations - we know - stems from the troublesome cohabitation of nonindustrial and industrial fishing .
We know that clashes between them were much more numerous in the 1980s . Nevertheless , local non-industrial fishing organizations are still on the defensive and we must therefore take all their claims into account during the negotiations .
I should like to remind you that the development of non-industrial fishing in Senegal is due to the motorization of fishing boats , to the fact that they carry ice-making plant allowing them to go ever further into the open sea .
Because of these new activities , they very often encounter and cross swords with industrial fleets .
I should also like to point out , however , that these industrial fleets are not only from the Union ; they are also those of third countries , those equipped by joint-venture companies and those of the Senegalese industrial fisheries themselves .
However , Madam Commissioner , my wish and that of my group is that , in this future agreement , resources be taken into account along with the interests of non-industrial fishing .
And although there is no legal obligation , we should , firstly , like the Senegalese government to be able to use part of this European financial package for projects to modernize non-industrial fishing and , secondly , we should like the EDF to be better exploited under the Lomé Convention and through regional and national outline programmes , in order to favour the indigenous fisheries of ACP countries .
Mr President , once again the fiasco of the Union 's foreign fisheries policy has been shown for what it is worth .
The Union is wrongly using its international contacts to solve its internal fisheries problems .
That cannot be allowed to continue .
Another thing that cannot be allowed to continue is fishing dry foreign seas , especially the seas of developing countries while hardly any compensation , not even modest financial compensation , is paid .
I hope that at long last we have learned our lesson with the impasse reached in the negotiations with Senegal , the reasons for which have been explained by Mrs Péry .
That country is a fishing country par excellence with a flourishing local and craft fishing culture .
More than 110 , 000 people are directly involved in fishing .
Our modern boots fish the waters dry in record time and force the smaller local boots ever farther out to sea to find fish .
That must stop .
First of all we must solve our problems internally and stop exporting them to those countries .
Then in agreements we conclude we must pay more attention to the needs of the local population .
We must think of joint ventures and improved training for the local fishermen .
Finally we must pay closer attention to the interests of the environment and the fish stocks ; failure to do so will herald the end of the fishing industry , both in Europe and in Senegal .
We cannot have that on our conscience .
We must develop sustainable fishing .
Negotiations must be resumed as quickly as possible on the basis of these principles and I share Mrs Pery 's optimism that in a few months ' time everyone will come to their senses and start talking again .
We must take time , not for fine words but for action .
It is interesting that in Senegal the local fisherman have managed to persuade the government that in the past the same government concluded an unfair fisheries agreement with the Union which was not directed at the local fishing trade but at the financial interests of the government of Mr Diouf which made the voters very unhappy .
I welcome the present situation in which the same government is trying to involve the local fishermen in the negotiations in the normal way .
Mr President , this motion for a resolution comes straight from the heart .
I personally am delighted that now for the first time the government of Senegal is saying : so far , and no farther .
For the first time it is saying clearly that for the sake of the future of the country and for all the 269 , 000 people there dependent directly or indirectly on fishing there must be agreements which appear to work for the benefit of all and not for the interests of a small group .
When my colleague here says that fisheries agreements cannot replace development cooperation then he is of course quite right .
What is more difficult to explain is that fisheries agreements are sometimes in a tense relationship with development cooperation .
For how can you explain that you are robbing the small fishermen of their daily bread , that you are denying all the people who work in the fish processing industry their future , that you are doing that with the one hand and at the same time trying to do something worthwhile with the other hand ?
The Senegalese government and all the other governments have their share of the blame .
We must now be careful that the money is invested in people , that investments are made in essentials , that the money is invested in modernising the African fleets .
These are matters which are essential .
But I think it quite wrong that we have tried to export our problems , the problem of over-fishing , to the south .
That must stop .
Where we have had to make restrictions , such restrictions should also apply to a number of African countries .
We cannot export our problems to countries that have so many more and much worse problems than we have , whose life is much more difficult than the fishermen in France or Spain or Portugal .
It is quite clear to all of us that a sensible settlement must be found , and that is a difficult task for the Commissioner .
I believe that the resolution before us represents that sensible settlement .
Mr President , those of us , like Mrs Péry for example , who are well acquainted with the local Senegalese fishing activities and market have seen a worrying trend developing recently .
Firstly , the local fishermen are going further and further afield into the open sea to expand their activity ; secondly , because of this , the proportion of pelagic species as opposed to demersal fish forms an increasing part of their catch ; and thirdly , a still larger proportion of this local production is removed from the market for local consumption and immediately packaged and despatched to western markets .
Faced with this development , Senegal is getting itself organized , is reacting and asking for a reduction in Union fishing quotas and an increase in the financial compensation we give it : and we are astonished by this .
But should we be astonished ?
How can we argue for our policy of development and cooperation only to contradict ourselves subsequently by arguing for our commercial interests ?
What Senegal is asking for - the conservation of global fish stocks , the conservation of biodiversity and financial compensation in order to fund local development - is precisely what we preach and I refer colleagues to the statements made by the European members of the joint EU-ACP Assembly , for example .
What I should like , therefore , on behalf of myself and my group , is that we ask the Commission to resume the negotiations where the areas of disagreement are in fact relatively limited in a way that testifies both to the generosity of the European Union and to our concern for consistency in what we say about development .
Mr President , I am the Committee on Fisheries ' rapporteur on third country agreements so I am very interested in this particular resolution and I endorse all that has been said by those Members speaking for the resolution by the PSE , ELDR , GUE / NGL , Green and ARE Groups .
I would also point out to the chairman of the Committee on Fisheries that it is his resolution which complains about the Commission and not ours .
Therefore , perhaps he should vote for our resolution .
This is a very important resolution not just for Senegal but because it sets a marker .
In the resolution we have considered all the points which are important for the future .
Speaking about past agreements in Rome this year , the Commissioner herself said : ' I share the position of those who say the first generation accords simply wiped out fish , as has happened in Senegal ' .
Clearly that is what happened .
It is not what should happen and we have to remember that this week the World Food Summit is sitting in Rome .
We have to do something about this transfer of basic food resources .
We know about the dependence of certain communities in the European Union on fishing .
How much more important it must be in those countries which , as has been said , have a so much lower standard of living .
Somehow we must end this transfer of valuable protein .
In the end we have to recognize that we must solve our fishing problems ourselves and not simply export them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate perhaps provides a good opportunity to clarify several points , for I have the impression that , on both sides , even though I recognize that it is sometimes complicated and difficult to establish balanced relationships between partners , we must nevertheless not forget certain truths .
I too understand that there may be lobbies in certain sectors of Senegalese activities .
I should like particularly to go back to what Mr Bertens and Mrs d 'Ancona have just said .
The issue is not the agreement we are in the process of negotiating and which has only ground to a halt over financial questions - to which I shall return later .
This agreement in fact provides for 10 , 000 GRT of deep-sea fish species at depths of 400 to 600 metres , and therefore out of reach of the Senegalese coastal fisheries .
I take it that you agree with me .
It is these species , amounting in all to 10 , 000 GRT , that the Japanese and Korean fleets are competing for , ladies and gentlemen !
There is no question of competing with the smallscale Senegalese coastal fisheries .
It is absolutely essential to realize this : we are in the process of negotiating an agreement different from the first ' Senegal ' agreement , which deals precisely with the problem of coastal fishing .
We have agreed to withdraw to beyond 12 miles except for a very few small boats , about eight to ten , of the European Community which would be the only ones authorized to fish within 12 miles , quite simply because they do not have the necessary self-sufficiency to fish any further out and unload their catch .
It is essential to be clear about this ; otherwise we shall go round in circles and persist in attitudes that I find difficult to understand .
Most of the species covered by this agreement , which - I repeat - consist of black hake and deep-water prawns , are caught at a depth of 600 metres , and the Senegalese , for the moment , have neither the means nor the technique to fish for them .
It is the Japanese and the Koreans who catch these species .
Bring me other arguments if you wish , but do not come to me and claim that we are competing with smallscale Senegalese coastal fisheries .
It is untrue , it is no longer true .
Secondly - and I am speaking here particularly to you , Mrs d 'Ancona - you say : ' Fortunately , Senegal has at last decided to say ' Enough ... ' and then you ask me to intervene in connection with Senegal so that the funds shall go instead to development or to coastal fisheries .
In accordance with fisheries agreements , it is for the State - the Senegalese state in this case - to decide what to do with anything paid over by the Community .
All this seems to me to be a little strange .
There are already a few sections in this agreement relating to fishing matters .
As for training , I think I have given you all the basic facts .
But this is an agreement which is also negotiated with the Senegalese government .
If the Senegalese government has budgetary priorities which dictate that it allocates fresh money coming to it from Europe to other sectors , I should find it a little peculiar that we were the ones to impose other economic priorities on it .
The matter can be discussed in the form of a dialogue but , frankly , we must also respect the economic choices which are made by the government and which are not for us to decide .
Just one more word before I finish .
The negotiations have been broken off for financial reasons .
The new agreement provides for a 23 % reduction in non-capture compared with the previous agreement .
Moreover , the financial compensation is increased by 22 % .
I have proposed up to 11.5 million ; it is impossible to go beyond that .
This is not only because we do not have the funds , it is also because it is a matter of commercial agreements .
Each species will thus have a commercial value .
I cannot pay the same price for black hake - you will understand me I am sure - as for cephalopods !
An agreement about a captured tonne of one of these is not an agreement about the other : catching tonnes of cephalopods which have some commercial value in the European market is quite another thing from catching black hake that almost nobody wants .
Let us therefore show a little sense about this .
It is true that , in the past , very large sums have been allocated to the ' Senegal ' appropriation which had less to do with catches and resources than with political relations .
It was quite right that this was so .
But , from now on , the minimal degree of rigour being applied to other agreements and other species precludes , Mr Hory , ladies and gentlemen , any possibility of going beyond the commercial level , otherwise we are in danger of producing a ' domino ' effect on other agreements that we shall have to renew in 1997 .
I do not know what budget will be necessary if , for political reasons , we do not show a minimum of common sense ; I do not know what ' domino ' effect we shall produce on other agreements that must in any case be renegotiated in 1997 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , be persuaded , in a matter as complex as this , that the Commission , and particularly the Commissioner , has no ulterior motive involving North-South exploitation .
My history , my tradition , my commitment all mean that , in my estimation , in fishing as in other sectors , it is possible to arrive at agreements which are equitable and beneficial for both parties .
Mr President , I am very grateful to the Commissioner for her clear answer .
I just want to make one point , which we cannot discuss here just now .
That is the idiotic form of such a debate .
But thought could perhaps be given , as the NGOs are doing , as the Dutch government and our minister for development cooperation is doing , to earmarking the way in which money is to be spent , and writing that into the agreements .
Perhaps that could be considered .
Otherwise I would like to thank you for your satisfactory reply .
Mr President , I should like to end by assuring you that I understand you , politically speaking .
But we must take into account the budgetary control which imposes precise rules .
I am making all possible efforts to prevent there being any contradiction between the fisheries and development agreements .
But frankly , for the time being , whether it pleases us or not , for these two types of agreement with different legal status , the most I can do is to support those that do not contradict the development policy .
Thank you very much , Madam Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Nigeria
B4-1256 / 96 by Mr Fassa and Mr Bertens , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on Nigeria ; -B4-1282 / 96 by Mr Moorhouse and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the situation in Nigeria ; -B4-1302 / 96 by Mrs Müller and others , on behalf of the V Group , on Nigeria ; -B4-1312 / 96 by Mr Pettinari and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on human rights in Nigeria ; -B4-1323 / 96 by Mr Castagnède , on behalf of the ARE Group , on human rights violations in Nigeria.China
B4-1258 / 96 by Mrs Larive and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the detention of Wang Dan and the human rights situation in China ; -B4-1268 / 96 by Mr Moorhouse and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the situation of Wang Dan , a prisoner of conscience in China ; -B4-1301 / 96 by Mrs Aglietta and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the sentencing of Wang Dan and the human rights situation in China ; -B4-1311 / 96 by Mrs Pailler and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the sentence imposed on the Chinese dissident Wang Dan ; -B4-1321 / 96 by Mr Colajanni and Mrs Malone , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the sentence imposed in China on Mr wang Dan ; -B4-1326 / 96 by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the sentence imposed on Wang Dan , a member of the pro-democracy opposition in China , and the political and human rights situation in that country.Georgia
B4-1269 / 96 by Mr Habsburg-Lothringen and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the death sentences or lengthy prison sentences called for in the case of Georgian parliamentarians and eminent persons involved in democracy ; -B4-1278 / 96 by Mr Trakatellis and others , on behalf of the PPE Group , on the announcement of ' elections ' in Abkhazia ; -B4-1320 / 96 by Mrs Jöns and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Abkhazia ; -B4-1327 / 96 by Mrs Schroedter , on behalf of the V Group , on the situation in Georgia with regard to the elections in Abkhazia.El Salvador
B4-1294 / 96 by Mrs González Álvarez and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on killings in El Salvador.Armenia
B4-1255 / 96 by Mr La Malfa , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the recent elections in Armenia .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
Nigeria . A year ago the environmentalist Ken Saro Wiwa was murdered by the Abacha regime and one year on Abacha is still there , his regime is still there , several murders have since been committed and there are still more people waiting to be murdered by this regime .
The Union must bring pressure to bear on the military regime and the Council on 25 November must take a decision to prolong the sanctions decreed at that time , otherwise they will lapse on 4 December and everything will be back to the beginning , the abhorrent beginning of this regime .
There must also be another assessment of the effectiveness of sanctions and it seems at the moment as if there is room for greater strictness .
I call on the Council to consider new sanctions such as a complete ban on arms exports to Nigeria .
Pressure must continue to be exerted in order to put an end to the violent suppression of the people of Nigeria , and we must do everything possible to enable the democratic forces in this major African country to work towards rebuilding the country .
Mr President , the sanctions which are to be renewed by the General Affairs Council on 4 December are , I understand , merely to be adopted under the written procedure .
Surely this act , which aroused such condemnation - I refer to the killing of Ken Saro Wiwa and eight other Ogoni people - merits a proper debate in the Council of Ministers .
I call on the Commission to report to Parliament - it may be Mrs Bonino will do so shortly - on the situation in Nigeria over the past year and on the prospects for democracy .
Ideally such a statement should be ready for the General Affairs Council meeting on 4 December .
Let us regard sanctions as a dynamic tool .
They should be used as such .
The fact is that they seem to be relatively weak for the situation in the case of the arms embargo which was applied .
How far has the embargo been successful ?
Would it not be better , as stated in the resolution , to some extent to make part of the arms embargo retrospective ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a year after the death of Ken Saro-Wiwa and his comrades-in-arms , a year after sanctions that achieved nothing , a year during which Shell cheerfully went on exploiting the oil resources in Nigeria , a year after vain appeals to a corrupt military dictatorship that is not willing to make any concessions , surely we can ask : what have we done wrong ?
Why have we not achieved anything so far ?
My answer to that is clear .
We did not do precisely what would have hurt the military to the core : we did not impose an oil embargo .
Oil is the source of corruption , the source of destruction of the natural living conditions of the Ogoni and other peoples in Nigeria , the source of Shell 's unscrupulous exploitation .
This is not just my personal conviction but also corresponds to what the representatives of the opposition in Nigeria keep asking of us .
On Monday I had an opportunity to talk to an opposition representative .
I asked him again quite clearly : should the European Union announce an oil embargo ?
And he said , yes , that was the only thing that would hurt the military .
I therefore call on the Council not to let another year pass without saving human lives , like those of the 19 Ogonis .
Do finally take the necessary steps and decide on an oil embargo !
It is shameful how the individual Member States excuse themselves on the basis of the consensus principle in the Council to justify the fact that no effective decision has yet been taken in the Council !
Mrs Bonino , let me ask the Commission : what are we currently doing with the ECU 220m that were blocked ?
Instead of somehow making them available to the military junta in future , which we cannot do , it might be appropriate to consider how this money can be diverted in order now to support the opposition , the democratic powers in Nigeria .
Mr President , first of all I should like to say to Commissioner Bonino how much we appreciate the way in which she has spoken out very recently on the tragedy unfolding in Zaire .
I hope that the same sort of note can be struck on Nigeria .
Just as she spoke as the conscience of Europe - and we very much appreciated that - this Parliament has to speak as the conscience of Europe on the disgrace of the toleration by the international community of the Abacha regime .
Without this toleration the regime would have fallen by now , I am quite convinced .
It is not just the Nigerians who are fairly powerless and are wondering why we are doing nothing .
It is our own citizens who are asking : is it the oil companies who are calling the shots ?
Is it the arms manufacturers who are calling the shots ?
Who is it that is putting pressure on the governments of the world not to bring down this regime which has no democratic legitimacy and which has blood on its hands ?
I think the Council has a great opportunity , as Mr Moorhouse said , to address this challenge at its next meeting and ensure that Europe can stand for something democratic and freedom-loving in the world .
Mr President , I believe we all risk being viewed by our people as users of doubletalk , and indeed of having a somewhat hypocritical attitude to problems affecting the world .
Yesterday we were in the disgraceful situation of finding that , after such fine words , we were unable in this Parliament to devote ten more minutes to discussing the difficulties of the Great Lakes , and we did not give Commissioner Bonino or the Commissioner competent in the matter an opportunity to respond to Members ' concerns .
My feeling is that people honestly see us as applying double standards in our international relations .
We are quite capable of condemning and imposing sanctions on small countries , but with a big country , when we know quite well , as has been stated here , that only an attack on its oil trade could resolve the situation , we dare not act .
This represents doubletalk , double standards and hypocrisy on the part of our Community .
Mr President , the events in Nigeria have been extremely serious .
I fully endorse this motion for a resolution which calls for serious measures to be taken , and for more measures than have been taken hitherto .
Measures such as an arms boycott are of course good , but they do not help the situation much .
Measures such as freezing the military regime 's assets are also good , but they do not really help either .
The only think that is really effective , and President Mandela also said so some time ago , is an oil boycott against Nigeria .
That kind of action must of course be taken together with a large number of countries , such as the countries of Africa , but in my view it is the only instrument which will help Nigeria back on to the road of democracy .
We in my group fully support the motion for a resolution before us .
There is just one point I want to make .
The resolution says that the multinational firm Shell is still in Nigeria .
That is incorrect .
Shell has withdrawn , as far as I know .
Shell stated publicly on television and in the media that it was wrong for it to be in Nigeria .
Mr President , I think if a multinational makes such a confession and yet is prepared to support action being taken , then you must also respect that .
That is why I would like to delete that one small point from the resolution .
We could blame Shell in the past but not now .
They are on the right track .
We should really be grateful that a multinational is reacting to the actions being taken .
Mr President , last year after a farcical show trial , Ken Saro Wiwa , together with eight members of the Ogoni people 's survival movement , was condemned to death by a scandalous judgement .
For a very long time the international community has been denouncing all the violations of human rights carried out by a regime which is still holding political prisoners and systematically torturing and abusing people .
In our view only by a total embargo on arms exports and a freeze on the financial assets of President Sani Abacha and the Nigerian Federal Executive Council will the international community succeed in exercising the necessary pressure to promote the renewal of democracy .
Of course our resolutions will remain dead letters again until the great American and European oil companies are forced to suspend their activities in Nigeria and as long as they continue to wreak the environmental destruction which is devastating Ogoniland today , and supplementing the finances of the Nigerian government through payments for drilling rights .
China
Mr President , I should like to use my sixty seconds to make two points .
First , Mr President , the China that cruelly persecutes critics of the regime such as Wang Dan can no longer be considered a left-wing regime .
The regime has scrapped socialist principles such as state ownership of the means of production .
All that is left is the desire to exploit a rapidly growing market economy in an attempt to keep state power in the hands of an aged and corrupt party elite in a one-party state .
The contrast with the democratic development in Taiwan is all the more striking .
Second , Mr President , the state leadership in China , a state leadership which has no popular mandate and whose power is based on the bayonet , can never be regarded as stable .
That is an insult to those who fight for freedom and democracy .
As we know , bayonets can be used for many things .
There is one thing that they are not suitable for , however , and that is sitting on .
Mr President , I am indeed sad to be speaking yet again about human rights violations and inhuman behaviour in China .
The conviction of Mr Wang Dan is but one further instance and illustration of the gulf between our democratic societies and the punitive and repressive regime that exists in China .
There is an appeal due to be heard tomorrow we understand , but I doubt that the harsh sentence will be overturned .
In fact I am inclined to be rather cynical about the timing of this appeal .
I was glad to see the Council of Ministers ' statement - quite a strong one - condemning this act on 5 November , just a few days ago .
Otherwise the hard fact is that the Chinese are thumbing their noses at us .
Take , for instance , their socalled Chinese diplomats .
They have free access to this Parliament yet we Parliamentarians are accorded absolutely no respect in return .
Instead we are addressed in an arrogant and desultory manner with no attempt by the Chinese to take on board any of the very valid points being made by Members of this Parliament .
Having said that , I am sure that we have all decided that the isolation of China is no solution .
But EU representatives and heads of state are , in my opinion , not making it sufficiently clear to the Chinese that we really cannot tolerate this sort of behaviour .
They are continuing to skirt the issues of human rights and democracy .
That is a matter of the deepest regret .
In conclusion , if China truly wishes to assume its place in the international community it must first start to act according to the basic principles of that community by putting into place the rule of order , democracy and respect for human rights .
It is about time that our leaders in the European Union make this clear at every opportunity .
I feel I have very personal links with the fate of Wang Dan .
While the movement for democratic civil rights was bloodily suppressed in Heavenly Peace Square in June 1989 , a few months later we in the former GDR could celebrate a bloodless change .
While I can work freely for my political aims here as a European Member , Wang Dan is again being sentenced for activities that come under the unalienable right to freedom of expression in a democratic society .
The now isolated Chinese regime is becoming ever more brutal .
To the outside it shows itself in sheep 's clothes as a rising industrial power in Asia , in particular with the support of European relations , European economic forces , many visits by politicians and flourishing economic relations .
They are supporting this regime and I believe that only economic sanctions can still force this regime to accept a minimum of human rights !
Mr President , I returned recently , with some colleagues from the Group of the Party of European Socialists , from a trip to China , including Tibet .
I must say that we had a very constructive and progressive dialogue and I see this resolution in furtherance of that progressive dialogue .
In particular , in paragraph 6 , we call for an open and candid dialogue .
Last year the European Union established a human rights dialogue with China .
Both sides agreed that meetings would be held twice a year .
The last one was in Beijing in January and I wish to ask the Commission representatives present here today when is it intended to have the next such meeting ?
I would be very interested in that reply .
Much of the resolution is devoted , as other speakers have said , to Mr Wang Dan 's case .
We were there when he was sentenced to prison for a further 11 years .
No international observers were permitted at the trial .
I think , with regard to the appeal , it would be a magnificent gesture if the Chinese Government , in an effort to try to repair the damage done to date , were to permit observers to attend this appeal .
These observers could well be the EU ambassadors in Beijing to include , of course , the Union 's own Ambassador , Mr Wilkinson , and these ambassadors would then do what we ask in the resolution , monitor the appeal , and they would be physically present to do so - that is the important thing .
Finally , I wish to ask that a message go to Sir Leon Brittan from Parliament .
He is visiting China with a group of businessmen .
I agree that we need to build our relations with China , both economic and political , but the political side should not be left out .
This should not just be a business trip that he is engaged in now ; business development and human rights must go hand in hand .
We rely on the Commissioner to make strong representations to the Chinese Government on the specific concerns raised in this resolution and , indeed , in former recommendations of Parliament , in particular in relation to the Pan Am project and Parliament 's view on the funding of that project .
Mr President , the Chinese authorities are once again forcing us to express an opinion about a serious violation of human rights .
This is one case amongst thousands of others .
I do not share the optimism of my colleague , Mrs Malone .
I believe the Chinese are not showing any willingness to enter into a dialogue .
Having said that , I hope the Commission will be able to provide us with some clarification .
In my opinion , the gravity of the problem stems from the lack of any European policy towards China .
We have no policy .
We have Sir Leon who travels a lot , who makes after-dinner or predinner speeches - we do not really know - about one or two matters relating to human rights , but there is no European policy towards China .
Neither , therefore , is there a Western policy , nor is there dialogue with the Americans or Japanese in order to lay down a few minimum , but definite , criteria on respect for human rights and on reform in the direction of a democratization of the People 's Republic of China .
That is the direction we must take .
Mr President , this urgency debate takes place on the eve of the visit by Sir Leon Brittan to Beijing with businessmen and on the eve of the appeal against the sentence imposed on Wang Dan .
So there is a legitimacy in this discussion .
I want simply to report that on 31 October , at a meeting with the Chinese Ambassador in Brussels , I raised this question of Mr Wang Dan .
The ambassador said to me : ' You have no right to raise these matters with us .
This is interference in China 's internal affairs .
I totally reject the points you are making . ' I said to him that my job as rapporteur on EU-China relations in the long term was to try to find some way of moving forward , and part of that was the dialogue on human rights referred to by Mrs Malone .
We are not looking simply for business relations but also for a political dialogue , as she herself has underlined .
It is not just business as usual , but also politics as usual .
I concluded by saying that the Helsinki Final Act was signed in 1975 with the Soviet Union .
Within 15 years that system had evolved into a democracy .
I said that I looked forward to the same process taking place , with our help , in the People 's Republic of China , and the sentencing of Mr Wang Dan does not help in that process .
Georgia
Thank you very much , Mr Habsburg .
I think this was you maiden speech in this Chamber ; all the best to you .
Mr President , it is known that the civil war , the bloody conflicts and the ethnic cleansing that have taken place in part of Georgia , Abkhazia , created many thousands of refugees who are now living far from their homes and lands under wretched conditions , as I myself have witnessed at first hand in some cases .
A just solution to the Abkhazia problem presupposes , among other things , respect for the territorial integrity of Georgia and at the same time safeguards for the rights of the various ethnic groups that made up the nation of Georgia before the civil conflicts .
Under those conditions , the elections which the Abkhazian side decided to hold on 23 November will not only fail to solve any problems , but on the contrary , will exacerbate existing differences still further .
I would like to stress that the elections in Abkhazia should take place once Abkhazia 's political status has been determined by negotiation with the government of Georgia , and of course , once stability has been restored to the region and all displaced persons and refugees have returned to their homes .
I should like to hope that those who wish to hold elections will realize that these elections just complicate the situation , and that they will postpone them and so demonstrate that they are prepared to go on to sincere and serious negotiations with the government of Georgia , to bring peace to that long-suffering area .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the announcement by the Abkhaz side of socalled parliamentary elections to be held in November will , as Mr Trakatellis said , do anything but promote the incipient Georgian-Abkhaz peace process .
Against a background in which large areas of Georgia have suffered civil war and ethnic cleansing for years , in particular Abkhazia , it is doubly important that we find a political solution for the future of Abkhazia , in agreement with all sides involved .
Only when that has happened can genuine elections be held .
But now the self-appointed Abkhaz authorities supposedly want to hold democratic elections , which in the end will simply create faits accomplis given that only 200 000 people may participate in them because numerous ethnic population groups are not allowed to vote , quite apart from the fact that 50 % of the population has fled Abkhazia or been driven out .
A solution must be found that respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally recognized borders .
At the same time , the serious refugee problem has to be resolved .
Elections , of whatever nature , which exclude half the original residents from taking part , must be condemned under international law and on principle .
My group therefore sharply criticizes the announced elections .
We call on the Abkhaz side finally to respect human rights and to let refugees and displaced persons live in peace with one another in this region .
In this connection I also call on the Commission and the Council to use every means at their disposal to support the peace process by confidence-building measures , in cooperation with all parties involved .
The conflict risks becoming explosive again , now that the settlement process really is faltering , partly because a decision has now been taken on the oil pipeline from which the first oil from the Caspian Sea will come towards the Black Sea .
However it is also a fact that the constitutional process has disregarded the problem of the status of South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
There is less activity now , which in turn is grist to the mill of the separatists .
The victims are the inhabitants , the thousands of refugees who have no refugee status at all because they are merely ' displaced people ' within an internationally recognized country .
And that is the problem : they have been denied their civil rights for years , they have been excluded from normal life for years and for years their children have not had a chance of normal life .
That is why I would ask you , Mrs Bonino , to accept paragraph 8 of the resolution in particular and to give it special attention .
Because for us too it is difficult to resolve such questions and to take conflict-prevention measures .
We still do not have a bridge between ECO and TACIS , and it can only be built by widening the mandate for ECO , which includes measures to rebuild regional areas .
Mr President , I believe that Georgia , unlike its Abkhazian part , wishes to face the question .
I think that we must - and the Commission , with a considerable presence in Georgia , has the means to do so - send a clear message to Abkhazia , saying to it that to want everything is to find oneself deprived of everything .
I should like to remind you of the precedent of the Krajina region , which had benefited from a highly developed state of independence .
We were able to see with our own eyes how this situation ended up .
I think that the Abkhaz people , who form only 30 % of the population in this region , should understand that they cannot claim to live at the expense of the 70 % of Georgians whose freedom of movement , as we have been reminded , has been restricted and who are still refugees .
I therefore think that the Commission should intervene firmly , all the more since it has the means to do so .
Let us hope that it can do so quickly .
El Salvador
Mr President , President Caldaron of Salvador said not all that long ago that the peace process was going smoothly and that is why the UN significantly reduced its presence .
Since then Salvador is on the right economic track , its economy is growing by 6.5 % , but at the same time poverty and crime are also on the increase .
Attacks are commonplace and we are reminded of the murder squads of a few years ago , as Mr Newens said .
A study has been commissioned but I have the feeling that it is not sufficient to prevent a spiral of violence .
I think , in as much as I have personal knowledge of the national police of Salvador , that the ineffectiveness of the Salvadoran society is playing tricks .
Caution is needed .
That is why I think it wise to recall that the Commission 's strategy document on cooperating between the Union and Latin America for the next four years should keep an eye on developments .
The democratic and human rights organisations deserve our support and the report that I myself am writing on the future strategy for Latin America will also draw attention to this country where peace has broken out , in the hope that peace is also lasting .
Mr President , El Salvador is engaged in a pre-pre-election campaign .
As in the last elections , the spiral of violence is escalating terribly .
By the time of the elections next March hundreds if not thousands of Salvadorans will once again have lost their life .
Even now there are 24 victims of violence a day !
The perpetrators of the violence in El Salvador can be named , as can their supporters .
We are doing so with our motion for a resolution .
The Christian Democrats ' attempt to blame the murders and killings on some nebulous power instead of naming names is cynical and only makes mock of the victims .
The most recent massacres and killings of individuals , which reflect an unparalleled brutality and include the murder of a well-known and much-loved musician , were perpetrated by death squads whose intellectual and material origins are to be found in the Arena Government circles ; and they were perpetrated by the new civil national police force , the PNC , which has been set up and maintained with broad support from the European Union too .
There is only one solution here , namely to put an immediate stop to aid to the police and rapidly to redirect the funds to threatened human rights groups and to all those who continue to fight for democracy in El Salvador .
Armenia
Mr President , President Petrosian has been re-elected , but in circumstances which at the very least are questionable .
International observers have noted irregularities , and since the president was elected by a small majority the election commission would be well advised to repeat the elections .
There is all the more reason for doing so as Mr Petrosian has shown little sign of democratic behaviour in recent years .
Oppressing the free media and banning opposition parties are two signals of authoritarian behaviour which should be condemned .
The Union must remain watchful and see that this situation is put right .
The Liberal Group therefore believes that the cooperation agreement should only be approved once the European Parliament has ascertained that sufficient progress has been made in the implementation of basic liberties and democratic principles .
We are duty bound to our own principles .
Mr President , one of the basic ingredients of a country 's democratic process is truly free and fair elections to elect those who are to govern it .
Unfortunately , in the elections for the President of Armenia on 22 September 1996 , international observers noted many irregularities and not a few serious contraventions of electoral law .
It is also known that after the elections there were disturbances that led the government to deploy troops and tanks on the streets of Yerevan to control the demonstrations by the citizens .
I think that in accordance with proposals by a number of organizations , the electoral process should be repeated in areas where serious infringements of electoral law were reported .
I believe Armenia should be helped to find its way towards true democracy , for which there is no substitute .
Our sympathy for that country and its people must not lead us to hesitate to condemn situations that represent deviations from democratic procedure , because only in that way can we help Armenia to remain committed to real parliamentary democracy .
Mr President , quite frankly I must say the EP itself is to blame !
It did not manage to send observers to the elections .
It does not have the courage to formulate longer-term strategies as a separate component of its common foreign and security policy and this resolution today is of course very belated !
Basically , we will lose credibility if we now call for the election to be repeated .
That does not mean I regard the elections as free and fair , but I think a rather more sensible strategy would be to offer the fragmented opposition a chance to reform .
That would mean supporting the call by the Council of Europe for parliamentary elections to be held very soon , for only the parliament can really provide the impetus for a society to move towards greater democracy , certainly not the president !
That is why I ask the House to approve our amendment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at this stage in your session agenda you deal with human rights violations wherever they occur in the world . We have heard debates on Armenia , El Salvador , China and other countries .
The Commission with its tiny resources , including financial , continues to follow the evolution of this problem across the globe and on the whole , while there are tentative improvements in some parts of the world , the general situation never fails to bring us back to the reality that many problems remain unresolved and that new attacks on fundamental human rights are appearing .
From the vantage point of the Commission 's observatory , even with very limited means , we succeed in taking a snapshot of the situation .
It is not positive ; worse still , there is not even a positive trend . In fact if we only look at the simple trend , I have the impression that in many parts of the world it is largely negative and very few improvements can be seen .
I shall deal with the various points briefly one by one .
As regards Nigeria , the Commission shares the profound concern expressed by Parliament .
It is no surprise to anyone that acceptable , or internationally acceptable , human rights standards have not been applied in that country , especially for the last two years .
Furthermore , daily life is also becoming increasingly fraught from the economic point of view .
As you know , in November 1995 , the Commission suspended cooperation with Nigeria and is preparing a series of measures to support the democratization process in order to improve the human rights situation .
The objective of these measures is to accelerate the retirement of the military government , the election of a civil government , and the renewal of an independent legal system .
I am fully aware that resolutions presented by the European Parliament call for an embargo .
Obviously I have to tell Parliament this is not a matter which falls within the Commission 's competence , but lies with the Member States of the Union .
The Commission has reaffirmed the block on development aid , but the only other projects we are pursuing are those I have mentioned .
As regards China , and the condemnation of Mr Wang , the European Union has chosen the policy of critical dialogue with our Chinese partners .
This policy , more or less satisfactory , has also been chosen by all the Member States of the Union in their bilateral relations .
But I have to admit that in practice there sometimes seems to be little critical dialogue and a great deal of economic dialogue .
The European Union and Commission attach special importance to deepening the bilateral dialogue , in particular on human rights , which was initiated about two years ago .
We have prepared a programme of cooperation projects aimed at promoting this human dimension in China to encourage the development of a civil society based on the rule of law .
On the specific question one Member put to me about the date of the second round of meetings , I have to inform Parliament that since the last meeting in January , the second date has not in fact been scheduled yet as the dates are fixed jointly by the two states .
China has not yet responded as to the schedule of this second round of discussions .
But I can tell Parliament that the European Union 's representative will attend the next appeal hearing in the trial of Mr Wang in person .
As regards Abkhazia , relations with Georgia and the announcement of elections in particular , the Commission records that the partenariat and cooperation agreement with Georgia , signed on 22 April 1996 , expresses support for independence , sovereignty and territorial integrity in the region .
The General Affairs Council of July 1995 stressed the importance of a peaceful solution to the conflicts in the region and the return of the evacuees and refugees to Abkhazia in a context of full respect for human rights .
The Union supports the territorial integrity of Georgia .
The European Union has frequently demonstrated its concern about the application of the death penalty in Georgia and the other independent states .
The problem has also been raised with President Shevardnadze , in particular as regards the case of the Members of Parliament who support ex-President Gamsakurdia , to whom the resolution of the Group of the European People 's Party refers .
The Union 's delegation to Tbilisi will continue to follow the situation closely as well as the trial scheduled for 19 November .
As regards El Salvador , the Commission has noted with consternation the new acts of violence which have occurred lately in the community of Vallenuevo , and expresses its support for the families of the victims .
I more than share your concern and while we are closely following the deterioration of the human rights situation in El Salvador , supporting the initiatives organized in the country to defend respect for human rights , what the Commission is actually able to do is have more of a presence in support of this project because outbreaks of violence are occurring , as always in electoral periods .
I was particularly moved by the poetry you quoted , Mr González Álvarez .
Such testimony should impel us to become not only more involved but perhaps more generous , too , in our financial support of social projects in that country .
As regards Armenia , on the assessment of the September presidential elections it certainly seems difficult at the moment for the European Union to call for new elections . The Commission is following the situation closely and awaiting the results of the local elections of 10 November .
We shall continue to examine the way Armenia responds to the criticisms expressed by the OSCE partners , in particular as regards the electoral process and the full participation of all the opposition parties , including access to the media .
I must tell the honourable Member who raised the question that while we expect good cooperation between ECHO and TACIS in the move from urgent humanitarian aid to the longer term development programme , the financing of rehabilitation projects is excluded from the legal basis of ECHO , because actually the legal basis for urgent humanitarian projects permits other agencies , TACIS in particular , to take over when the situation is no longer urgent .
Moreover , as you have realized in the last few days , the presence of ECHO is required in many parts of the world .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-1276 / 96 by Mrs Miranda de Lage and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the fire which has destroyed part of the historic ' Paços do Concelho ' building in Lisbon ; -B4-1322 / 86 by Mr Marinho , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the fire at the Lisbon City Council building .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the fire which last week destroyed a large part of the historic building of Lisbon 's City Hall calls for this Parliament to make a clear demonstration of solidarity and appreciation for all the public services , all the city officials , and the people of the city of Lisbon .
Solidarity over the loss of a part of its heritage , appreciation for the efficiency and swift action taken by everyone , which was definitely decisive in containing the fire and preventing a central part of the city 's history and European national culture from being affected .
However , I think that we should go beyond mere words of solidarity .
Someone deeply linked to the subconscious of the nation 's history and the very urban image of the city of Lisbon and its heritage said , more than two centuries ago , that it was necessary ' to bury the dead and look after the living ' .
Mutatis mutandis , today , since fortunately there were no human victims , once the ruins have been cleared away , we must reconstruct this building very quickly so that it can continue to be alive and serve local democracy .
For this , the vital municipal and government finances are already being made available , at least in part , and very quickly .
But also , and in particular , for this purpose and at such times the European Union must make itself felt because it lies in the subconscious of our people .
Therefore , the European Parliament really ought to recommend that the European Commission cooperate with Lisbon City authorities to rebuild the City Hall .
In conjunction with the municipal and government authorities , it should make available financial and any other resources considered necessary and appropriate .
That is why we are tabling this resolution which I am sure Parliament will approve .
Madam President , first of all a word to thank the House for having agreed to include , although its priorities were already set last week , the subject of the fire of Lisbon City Hall on the agenda .
This is an attitude which will raise the prestige of the European Parliament vis-à-vis public opinion , which obviously will take note of the cultural and human solidarity which this resolution represents .
In matters of disasters which profoundly affect the feelings of European citizens living close to - and with great emotional intensity - the irremediable losses of historic symbols - the cultural reference of generations - I think that all words are superfluous ; what remains is sadness , emotion and suffering .
Therefore , without looking back to the past but looking to the future , and beyond the tribute which the European Parliament is paying to the people of Lisbon , out of solidarity with the tragedy which the people of Lisbon suffered by approving this resolution , as it will no doubt do , what is important is that it should remain clear through this act that the European Union should find full justification , within the framework of traditional support , for calling upon the Commission to give its financial , even token , but financial nonetheless , backing to help to rebuild this part of our common and European heritage .
I hope that Commissioner Oreja , who is not here today , and Commissioner Bonino , who is here among us , who are both people of culture , will understand what is at stake here and , on behalf of the European Union , will set in motion the necessary mechanisms so that the people of Lisbon and its City Hall , and our friend and former colleague , Lisbon 's Mayor João Soares , when rebuilding that City Hall , can note that once again Europe was with Portugal .
Madam President , I just wanted to express , on behalf of the European People 's Party , our unconditional support for the resolution intended to demonstrate our solidarity in the face of the fire which has destroyed an important building from a heritage and historical point of view , in other words the Lisbon City Hall ( the Paços do Conselho ) , and launching an appeal for the Commission to give its support for the rebuilding of the City Hall as far as it can .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall be brief . I just wish to say that the fire which has ravaged the City Hall building in the historic part of Lisbon and the recent ( a few hours ago ) similar catastrophe which affected the Court of Justice in Rouen , coincidentally two major European cities in historic terms , has once again alerted us to the need for a preventive policy , which is both integrated and efficient , for defending our cultural and historical heritage , especially that which is located in historic centres of old cities .
In order not to take up much more time I should also like to echo what has already been said by my many colleagues and express , on behalf of my group , our support for this resolution , with the conviction that the European Union and the Commission will also , once again , show solidarity in this practical case , with Lisbon City Hall and the whole of Portugal .
Ladies and gentlemen , as you know , over the last few years , the European Commission , because of budgetary restrictions , has only granted symbolic emergency aid on the occasion of natural or criminally-induced disasters which have devastated very important monuments in the European Union .
I am thinking for example of the Fenice Theatre in Venice , of the offices in Florence , which were devastated by a criminal attack , of the Liceo Theatre in Barcelona or the Britanny Parliament in Rennes .
The Commission is particularly concerned in this case .
Following a well established tradition , it will analyse with all the necessary care the dossier on the fire that has seriously damaged the City Hall in Lisbon .
The Commission is aware of the importance of this building in the historic centre of Lisbon .
Our budgetary contribution will be symbolic , but the Commission is anxious to reassure Parliament .
It expresses its solidarity with the citizens of Lisbon and will support all the efforts they may make to restore such an important monument in the historical and cultural context of Lisbon .
The joint debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Madam President , I wish to record that the fact that a number of members of our group only arrived at 6 p.m. , and therefore did not vote before that time , was due to the fact that the screens indicated that voting would be at 6 p.m.
They thought that no votes would be taken before 6 p.m.
If that were recorded in the Minutes then everyone will know why the result of the vote on the fisheries agreement was different from what we really had expected .
I note your observation , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
Next time , we shall try to make an even more explicit announcement . It does , however , seem to me to be quite clear .
Votes
We shall now proceed to the vote on biosafety .
Mrs Bonino wishes to make a statement on this subject .
Madam President , on behalf of the Commission I would like to make the following declaration on point 8 of the resolution .
As far as point 8 on the proposed regulation on novel food is concerned , this paragraph goes further than the European Parliament intended with its six amendments adopted in March this year .
Moreover , the adoption of the resolution on this point would not constitute a helpful gesture in the present discussion taking place in an already difficult conciliation procedure for the adoption of the novel foods regulation and would constitute a peculiar procedural step .
Madam President , that statement really takes the biscuit !
And why is that so ?
Because it was the Commission , and specifically Commissioner Bangemann , who continually opposed the amendment tabled by Parliament on this point .
With the total agreement of this House we tabled an oral amendment that expresses precisely what the Commissioner has said but which has never been accepted by the Commission or by Mr Bangemann .
If the Commissioner is to be understood to mean that Mr Bangemann will accept Parliament 's amendment in the next conciliation then we welcome it .
Madam President , I must say sometimes even I am lost for words .
I think that at a sensitive time like this the diplomatic and sensible thing for the Commission to do , if it really wanted to facilitate an agreement , was to keep quiet .
I hope that none of the 20 members of the College of Commissioners see themselves as having a future in diplomacy because , frankly , that statement that we have just heard is more likely to prejudice than to broker an agreement .
As I understand , when we get to conciliation , it is the role of the Commission to facilitate an agreement between the two sides of Council and Parliament .
I must say that that intervention has done nothing at all to ease the burden that has certainly fallen on my shoulders over the last few weeks when I have spent hour after hour in the happy company of Mr Bangemann and other people from the Commission trying to find a solution to this .
That statement does not help at all !
If the Commission would simply retract it now , which would be the most helpful thing it could do , then sit and watch the vote , then it would see that the political groups have come to an agreement that is not at all prejudicial , because we are a great deal more sensible than some of the people who have put that statement into poor Mrs Bonino 's mouth .
I certainly do not blame her , she did not invent it .
We welcome the report on increased democratisation of the decision-making process in the EU .
However , giving the European Parliament more power by means of a strengthened co-decision procedure is completely the wrong way of strengthening democratic control .
We believe that such control should be exercised by the national parliaments .
The decision-making structure in the EU is at present very confusing .
It is extremely obscure who is responsible for political decisions .
The Council , which formally has decision-making powers , is dependent on proposals initiated and submitted by the Commission .
These institutions must obviously be subject to democratic control .
Democratic debate in the Member States is focused entirely on national parliamentary elections .
These also feature a markedly higher turn-out than European Parliament elections .
The EU is and should remain a cooperative venture between free states .
This means that democratic control over the institutions of the EU should be a matter for the national level .
An extension of the co-decision procedure is , we believe , a step in completely the wrong direction .
We cannot therefore vote for the report .
We believe that the Bourlanges / De Giovanni report is unacceptable .
It is a direct provocation to the strong and sceptical opinion in Europe which rejects a united states of Europe .
The report seeks to extend the co-decision procedure to all legal acts and to abolish the cooperation procedure .
It also demands that co-decision-making should be extended to new areas , such as agricultural policy , tax issues and trade policy .
This would lead to a major shift in power from the national , democratically controlled parliaments to the EU 's federally operating and undemocratic body .
The power of the European Parliament , the European Court of Justice and the Commission in particular will be strengthened .
The European Parliament is not a proper parliament .
Unlike national parliaments , it has not developed out of a people 's struggle for democratic freedoms and rights .
It was instituted from above as a kind of adjunct to the other EU bodies .
Parliament has no popular or democratic legitimacy .
Indeed the turn-out at elections has actually fallen as Parliament 's power has increased .
As a debating forum the European Parliament does not function very well .
Part-sessions are primarily an arena for various Members to make proclamations .
The rules on decision-making are faulty and attendance is low .
On account of the lack of a common language and common media within the EU there is no political dialogue before decisions are taken .
The European Parliament is guided by lobbyists to a much greater extent than national parliaments are .
An EU with strengthened federal and supranational bodies would represent an irreversible step towards a superstate with large distances and major distinctions separating the electorate from their elected representatives .
We have therefore voted against the report .
The report proposes that the co-decision procedure should be extended to all legal acts and that the cooperation procedure should be abolished .
It is also proposed that the European Parliament 's co-decision-making should be extended to new areas such as agricultural policy , tax issues and trade policy .
This would result in a significant shift of power from the national parliaments to certain EU institutions : Parliament , the Court of Justice and the Commission . The report would strengthen the federal and supranational character of the EU .
There is no popular support for such a development .
It is against this background that we have voted against the report .
This report is more an indication of the problem than a detailed programme of action .
But just because it indicates the problem it also makes clear what is so far not yet fully known to the public : there is not just Union legislation , there is also a legislative procedure , which can only be applied at Union level and which is also applied there and can therefore be regarded as the core and centre of all Union legislation : the codecision procedure , in which the Commission , the Council and Parliament act together .
This also clearly distinguishes between the powers of the Union and the Member States and is important in that it clarifies how the principle of subsidiarity should be interpreted and applied .
The two rapporteurs rightly state that it would be unrealistic to continue excluding such important areas as taxation and agricultural and environmental policy from the scope of the codecision procedure .
Parliament should also regard the adoption of this important report as demonstrating its appreciation of the courage and energy with which the Commission has dealt with this central question of European democracy .
The co-decision procedure was introduced into the Maastricht Treaty to increase the democratic nature of decision making in Europe .
The communication from the Commission to Parliament and the Council assesses the effect of that procedure and proposes that it be extended ' to all community activities of a legislative nature ' .
We agree with the Commission that the approach in which a decision is taken on a case to case basis on the policies which are subject to the co-decision procedure has been obscure and unsatisfactory .
We cannot , however , endorse the Commission 's efforts to change the situation by a general extension of the right to co-decision .
We believe that the democratic deficit in the decision-making process in Europe should be tackled first of all by a fundamental limit of the number of duties and powers of the Union .
If it is only the duties which undoubtedly require a European approach which are delegated to Europe then a government model will be created in which national policy has a bigger say .
It must be admitted that national governments are closer to the citizens and are therefore better able to keep a check on things .
Strengthening democracy is better done by upgrading the role of national parliaments .
If the European Union 's sights were set lower then the administrative burden of the Union 's institutions would be lightened and would contribute to the European Parliament being restricted to monitoring a number of legal matters .
Under these circumstances the decision-making procedures could be reduced to three : co-decision when the Council decides by majority in the area of the internal market , assent procedure for international agreements and consultation procedure when unanimity is required and in other cases .
In view of the debate on European integration being governed by the move towards increasing centralisation of decision making and in view of the European Parliament showing scant sign of wanting to reduce its powers we consider a discussion on extending the right of co-decision to be irresponsible for the time being .
It must be feared that the legitimacy of Parliament vis-à-vis the citizens of Europe will be further weakened in these circumstances and hence the democratic deficit will grow .
That is why we voted against the Bourlanges / De Giovanni report which goes even farther than the Commission on very many points .
d 'Ancona report
Madam President , in supporting the d 'Ancona report , I want to draw attention to the continuing scandal where properly recognized refugees under international law are forcibly kept apart from each other in the different Member States .
I raise as an example the Bosnian refugee Ekrem Bajramovic who lives in Rochford in my constituency , who has been divided by war from his brother Ahmo who lives in France .
These and others have seen their loved ones killed in the war and yet are unable to be reunited with surviving family members because of the refusal of some governments to grant visas .
I am told that there are particular problems in relation to France and Austria .
Refugees under the Geneva Convention are currently excluded from the Council 's 1993 resolution on family reunification and I call for an urgent review of this legislation to do what little we can for families who have lost so much .
Madam President , thank God this House has made the d 'Ancona report acceptable to us because of three key points , although it still contains several statements with which I do not agree .
But I take the view that we should underline something that was not adequately dealt with in the report .
Contrary to some views expressed during the debate , the fact is that the number of applications for asylum in Germany has risen disproportionately in relation to the number of applications submitted in other European Union countries .
That means that the proportion of applications submitted in Germany is increasing .
This is evident from the Eurostat statistics .
If what some people here suggested were true , that could not be the case !
That is why I vehemently call for the burden to be distributed more equally within the European Union .
A better distribution of the burden would represent a reasonable asylum policy , contrary to what some people have been saying so loudly during this debate !
The undersigned are voting for the d 'Ancona report but would nevertheless like to draw attention to a number of our standpoints .
The report claims that most refugees come from countries outside Europe and should be dealt with in their own regions .
We believe that there is far too little support for this claim and that it is not clear what is meant by their own regions ; we consider this to be very unfortunate .
We also believe that the Geneva Convention not only ' can ' be applied but that it should be applied .
Unfortunately the Swedish Government is not doing anything , either nationally or in the EU , to grant refugee status to women who are persecuted , which we believe it should do .
This report does not do this either , speaking as it does only of the right to asylum of women who are discriminated against on account of their sex .
We deeply regret that the European Parliament has not taken firmer action .
The Council 's proposal is unacceptable and would mean the harmonisation of asylum law on the basis of the country with the worst regulations and a kind of lowest common denominator .
The committee 's amendments are very good in terms of strengthening the rights of asylum-seekers .
What is lacking for me , however , is any explanation of what the consequences for people seeking asylum in EU countries will be of joining Schengen or of the Schengen rules being adopted by the EU .
Despite this shortcoming I have voted for the report .
With the disappearance of internal borders in Europe asylum policy has changed radically .
Since nationals of third states who have settled in the EU enjoy the same freedom of movement as EU citizens and can therefore move freely from one country to another , the asylum provisions of the 15 EU states must longer conflict .
It is therefore essential to have a uniform , harmonized asylum policy .
To that end I tabled an amendment , which was endorsed by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , calling for the rapid communitization of European asylum policy .
To retain the current decision-making structures ( differing national laws , non-binding European ' recommendations ' allowing for numerous exceptions ) would necessarily lead to ' asylum dumping ' in the EU and would therefore be irresponsible !
A harmonized procedure for the recognition of refugee status must include the following points .
Unless they are incorporated in the text I cannot approve the proposal .
In the event that an application for asylum is manifestly unfounded , the suspensive effect shall not apply to a legislative procedure and the applicant may be deported immediately.-Applications for asylum by EU nationals are in any event to be regarded as manifestly unfounded.-Asylum-seekers who attempt to enter via a safe third country must make their application in that third country.-Persecution on the basis of gender and sexual violence must be accepted as grounds for asylum.-Persecution by non-state parties ( e.g. in civil wars or similar circumstances ) shall also be regarded as grounds for asylum.The principle of the right to political asylum is unquestionable .
European legislation must therefore be drafted to guarantee that asylum-seekers are treated humanely while at the same time preventing the misuse of asylum provisions .
Biosafety
Madam President , although I consider food safety and food quality very important I was unable to vote in favour of the resolution because I believe that there are so many trade policy issues and practical trade problems involved here that I think that it should first have been debated in depth in the Committee on External Economic Relations before coming to the floor of the House .
I therefore request the Commission , and I shall also make that request of the chairman of the Committee on External Economic Relations , to speak in this committee next week or the week after on the issue so that we may debate the consequences of adopting this resolution on trade in soya and maize .
The growing imbalances between the two shores of the Mediterranean Basin mean that all the cooperation policies needed to form a region of peace and stability must be developed .
Faced with problems common to each of the third Mediterranean countries , such as high population pressure , too little diversification of production and industrial trade , and a long-term shortage of drinking water , the initiative aiming at strengthening a Euro-Mediterranean partnership in the field of renewable energy sources appears fundamental .
If we are not careful , issues related to the lack of drinking water and its distribution or the increase in its cost are in danger of destabilizing certain areas of the Mediterranean region .
The meeting which will be held in Marseilles on 25 and 26 November 1996 on the local management of water will have to take into account the conclusions of the European Parliament 's report and provide the tools necessary for an exchange of know-how and for decentralized action to be taken in the field of water management .
In addition , the formulation of an integrated energy policy requires specific budgetary resources for this sector , not provided for by the Barcelona Conference .
As the rapporteur emphasizes , a budgetary line should be identified in the MEDA regulation devoted to funding infrastructures in the energy sector and forms of decentralized cooperation should be developed in this field .
The absence of a Euro-Mediterranean organization in the energy field should be offset by setting up mechanisms such as the Euro-Mediterranean Energy Forum and this should be done in such a way as to create genuine cooperation between all the institutions concerned .
Many of the reports we debate here in Parliament argue in favour of the creation of new institutions and organisations .
The same is true of this report .
One almost never comes across a report which proposes that an institution or organisation should be abolished .
I doubt whether the Mediterranean agency and the new Training Institute which the report advocates are a good idea .
The aim may be most praiseworthy but I see many other social costs which have greater priority in the battle against unemployment and poverty in Europe .
Even though I am voting for the report I would like to express my serious reservations as outlined here .
Chichester report
The incumbent president of the European Energy Council , Michael Lowry , must explain the likely effects of the impending liberalization of gas markets in Europe .
The final plan for the liberalization of gas markets in Europe will be put in place before the end of the Irish presidency of the EU this year .
The new plan is likely to allow more industrial companies to shop around freely for competing sources of gas .
The changing nature of the market with more power generators opting for gas rather than coal to produce electricity has increased the pressure on governments to reduce the user threshold .
Minister Lowry must explain what the likely effect of the liberalization of gas markets will be on consumer prices .
Gas is increasingly becoming a more popular form of energy used in both residential and commercial set-ups .
Liberalization of gas markets in Europe must not mean higher prices for the consumer , which is the fear of many consumer associations .
The worry that the telecommunication markets in Europe will result in higher telephone prices must not be replicated when gas markets open up .
Any compromise proposals drawn up by the Irish presidency do not set a target date for the Gas Directive to come into effect nor does it give any indication of whether there would be follow-up measures .
The issue of who is going to regulate any new liberalized gas network in each Member State of the EU appears to remain unresolved .
Conservation of fishery resources in the Mediterranean
The next item is the report ( A4-0330 / 96 ) by Mrs Fraga Estévez , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation introducing transitional measures into Regulation ( EC ) No 1626 / 94 laying down certain technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources in the Mediterranean ( COM ( 96 ) 0128 - C4-0316 / 96-96 / 0091 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , as rapporteur I should like to seek your support for the Committee on Fisheries ' resolution , which requests the withdrawal of the proposal laying down transitional measures for the Mediterranean , one of the most surprising proposals put to us .
With this proposal the Commission wants to reduce the minimum sizes of hake and red mullet for the benefit of Adriatic fishermen .
Thus whilst other Mediterranean fishermen are asked to make a serious effort to comply with the Regulation on technical measures by not catching any hake less than 20 cm in size or red mullet less than 11 cm , Adriatic fishermen would be able , via this preferential treatment offered to them by the Commission , to catch , land and sell hake of 14 cm .
I should like you to grasp the real biological and ecological absurdity of this , and the chaos it would cause on fish markets .
No doubt the Commission is trying to tackle a problem which has so far proved intractable , i.e the reluctance of fishermen in this area to comply with the Community regulation .
But it is doing so in the worst possible way , and instead of taking technical and control measures to bring into the fold , as it were , once and for all an area among those in Europe where the catching and distribution of juvenile fish is most widespread , it exempts it from compliance with the regulation and legalizes the illegality .
There are many basic as well as other reasons for asking the Commission to withdraw its proposal .
In the first place there are biological reasons .
I can tell you that , in drafting my report , I consulted vast quantities of documentation from the most varied sources , including the Commission itself .
I have interviewed fishermen , biologists , fishery scientists and administrative authorities in the various Member States and in the Mediterranean coastal areas ; nobody , not a single report , not a single person , has been able to justify this proposal , including the Commission , which , whilst naturally upholding it , has been unable to do so in a way which carries any conviction .
The consensus is , I can assure you , virtually unanimous .
Allowing the capture of 14 cm hake is a complete absurdity and a biological crime .
There are also very sound market arguments .
In a ' Communitized ' market , captures from various countries meet at the same points of sale .
Retailers and consumers will find that they can carry on eating juvenile hake from Italy which would be theoretically illegal in the other Member States .
We shall see the results immediately .
Ultimately , Madam Commissioner , all Mediterranean fishermen will be fishing illegally , and on what legitimate grounds , with what moral authority , can the Governments of the other Member States and the Commission itself penalize them for doing what this proposal allows the Adriatic fishermen to do ?
The Commission 's proposal is also in head-on collision with its own principles , with its own measures contained in the new proposal for a Regulation on technical measures and with its MAGP 4 proposal .
According to the Commission , European fishing grounds , with the Mediterranean figuring prominently , are so over-exploited that measures to reduce fishing by up to 40 % are needed to safeguard the resource .
In the technical measures proposed , and for the same reasons , the Commission generally increases the mesh size of nets , raising it to 110 mm for hake .
But in this proposal for the Adriatic , the mesh size is kept at 40 mm so that these fishermen can continue catching 14 cm hake .
This is such a scandalous contradiction that I prefer to leave you to judge it .
We know that there are ways of changing the pattern of fishing in the Adriatic gradually , and that it is possible to catch larger hake and make these fisheries viable .
Our French colleagues in the Gulf of Lyons are well aware of this , for they changed their methods of fishing on their own initiative , accepting the sacrifice to safeguard their hake fisheries , well before any Regulation on technical measures existed for the Mediterranean .
With this proposal we find that responsible fishermen are penalized and those who refuse to comply are rewarded .
A nice lesson from which a sector in crisis will not be slow to draw conclusions .
Madam Commissioner , for all these reasons which are causing grave concern in the sector and in Member States I ask you to withdraw your proposal .
We know that the Regulation on the Mediterranean is causing problems , but shutting one 's eyes to them is no way of solving them .
The Venice Conference , now very close at hand , provides an excellent opportunity to discuss these matters , as will the study ordered by the Commission .
It is therefore worth waiting for these conclusions before arriving at a proposal for the amendment of the Regulation on technical measures .
On all these grounds , Madam Commissioner , I urge the Commission to think again and withdraw its proposal on transitional measures concerning the Regulation on technical measures in the Mediterranean .
Mr President , the position of the Socialist Group is , I believe , somewhat different , possibly calmer , and could perhaps be confined to five basic aspects .
In the first place , there is in our view no doubt that the Mediterranean constitutes a regional unit in terms of fisheries as well , and requires specific treatment , particularly as regards conservation and management of fishery resources .
Thus in our opinion there is a well-founded specifically Mediterranean aspect to fisheries and biological conditions , which clearly justifies certain technical conservation measures in this area : the Mediterranean .
Now to define within the Mediterranean and recognize within this particular area an exception for the Adriatic is , in our opinion , highly problematic , at least for the moment , and we consider that there are insufficient grounds or evidence for the proposal put to us today by the Commission .
Moreover , Madam Commissioner , we feel that the direction we wish to follow in relations with other nonCommunity Mediterranean fleets , from associated or third countries , is towards harmonization , and in our view extrapolating an Adriatic exemption could be a move in precisely the opposite sense .
Consequently we believe that before adopting this proposal the Commission should perhaps provide some basis , some reasons which would give us a clearer view and would incorporate this Adriatic proposal into a general Mediterranean approach .
I will conclude , Mr President , by saying to the Commissioner that the serious - very serious - points arising for the Commission from the comments in the explanatory statement of this report are a matter of concern to us . I believe the Commissioner should clarify them , and if appropriate refute them .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if there is a cornerstone upon which the whole construction of the Common Fisheries Policy rests it is undoubtedly the conservation of fishery resources .
Most of the other aspects of the Common Fisheries Policy centre on the defence of this fundamental principle and its corollary , the practice of responsible fishing .
Hence safeguarding the conservation of resources is a matter of constant concern to the Commission and to this Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries .
To take an obvious example , this basic objective was the common denominator of the reports debated in this Parliament at the last part-session , when the Gallagher and McKenna reports , among others , proposed technical and control measures .
I should like to point out the serious contradiction produced by the Commission proposal we are debating , since , in contrast to the general measures envisaged in Regulation 1626 / 94 , the Commission is now seeking to introduce special size derogations for certain species in certain areas of the Mediterranean , which are unjustified and are brilliantly exposed in our colleague Carmen Fraga 's excellent report .
The Gallagher report , which was , as I have already said , adopted at the last part-session , stressed , among other factors , the need to adopt special measures to protect juvenile fish , and particularly hake .
It would therefore be consistent now to support the Fraga report , which rejects , inter alia , the attempt to introduce special size derogations in sensitive areas with a concentration of fry of this species . If adopted , this would also be a cause of serious discrimination , Madam Commissioner , without finally solving the main underlying problem , which is still there and will continue to be .
To conclude , therefore , I should like to highlight this contradiction and this potential discrimination , to repeat that I support and congratulate the rapporteur , and to ask Parliament to back her report as being technically exact and politically consistent .
Mr President , Commissioner Bonino knows very well that the balance of the Adriatic Sea has been heavily compromised by pollution , eutrophication , excessive tourism , cement all along the coasts and also over-fishing .
The sum of these factors has compromised the Adriatic fishing stocks and that is why the Commission 's proposal to allow fishing for hake and mullet below minimum size is quite incredible and unacceptable .
So I am in full agreement with the contents of Mrs Fraga 's report and her proposal to reject amendment of Regulation 1626 of 1994 .
This is because there is no specifically Adriatic problem from the point of view of Community fleets ; it is primarily a matter of fleets from the other coast , from Croatia , and it would be best to consider reaching an agreement with them , on the model of those discussed at the Crete meetings and to be discussed at the meetings which will be held this month .
Finally , I also want to say that , from the practical point of view , this kind of approach is not only unacceptable for environmental reasons , but it is suicide for the fishermen who probably suggested it .
To think of eating into the stock and the young fish inevitably means there will be no more fish for anyone in the future .
For these reasons I really think we should reject the proposal .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I should like to start by saying that we reject the Commission 's proposal for a temporary derogation from the Council Regulation on technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources in the Mediterranean , as set out in the report by Mrs Fraga , who has indeed produced a genuinely balanced and very thoughtful discussion of a very tricky subject .
There are two reasons for this rejection : in the first place , the derogation would put young fish in the Mediterranean at great risk .
We should recall that the Commission itself incomprehensibly allows up to 30 % of hake and red mullet below the minimum legal size to be caught in the Adriatic , whereas the States ' representatives have repeatedly requested that the measures in the proposal should be implemented and hence obeyed by all Community fleets which fish in the Mediterranean .
The second reason adduced by the Commission , that third countries fish in the Adriatic without being obliged to comply with the minimum size , collapses unaided , since the Commission itself certifies that 70 % -80 % of the catch in this area is by Italian ships , as quoted in the discussion document it produced .
So , Mr President , permission for a certain Community fleet to fish with 60 mm nets simply promotes the capture of a species , hake fry , which is basic to the survival and future of marine fauna in the Adriatic , and creates a serious threat to other Mediterranean species .
As a result of investigation , the report itself describes certain illegal situations , and here , Mr President , this Parliament , the Commission , and still more vigorously the Council , should make a real effort of prevention .
There are also areas of the Mediterranean Sea where it is virtually impossible to fish with a line because the bottom is absolutely infested with drift nets .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , we consider it absolutely essential to await the results of the Commission 's study , so that we can obtain an objective analysis away from the pressure of Governments , and then issue and implement the appropriate regulation on the basis of the legal situation in the Mediterranean .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , according to La Fontaine ' a little fish will grow bigger if its life be spared ' , ' so to catch it in the meantime seems to me to be madness ' . Could we perhaps continue to crib from him just a little ?
Alas , that is becoming less and less possible and would soon be impossible if we allow the Commissions 's proposals on fishing in the Adriatic to be applied .
This fishing today involves catching fish very much smaller than those at the adult stage , and this concerns both mullet and whiting , which we shall soon be eating as small fry before the species become totally extinct .
These marine resources are becoming exhausted in oceans all over the world : as an example , we even learn that , for reasons that are still mysterious , Canadian cod are not only becoming scarce but the survivors , if I may call them that , are dying out for complex reasons .
It is therefore quite clear that we shall help to maintain long-term fishing activity merely by reducing still further the size of the fish caught in the Adriatic .
Just as too much taxation kills taxes , as Jacques Chirac was once fond of saying , in an electoral period it is true , too much fishing kills fish and if we are forced to reduce net mesh sizes , we shall end up catching nothing but plankton .
Consequently , we can only express our complete approval of the content of Mrs Estévez 's report ; her expertise in the subject is equalled only by the clarity of her text .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all the Commission is happy that certain watchwords and basic problems or ideas , are beginning to be accepted by this Parliament too , and by some of its excellent exponents , especially if they apply to other countries .
I am very honoured , Mr Antony , that you have adopted my slogan : ' too much fishing kills off fishing ' .
I hope you will still speak the same language when it is a matter of the POP IV relating to France .
First of all I want to clarify two positions : the first is that a derogation is always a contradiction of the basic rule .
I believe our Spanish colleagues know that very well .
For this very reason a derogation is normally temporary , and so is this proposal from the Commission which is based , ladies and gentlemen , on a criterion which I know is very close to your hearts , that is , the social impact of the entry into force of this directive on 1 January 1995 .
I believe each of you knows very well that there are special circumstances and each of you has made a stand in this Parliament on specific issues relating to factors affecting this or that fleet .
Having said that , I confirm very clearly that the Commission has had but one concern : to allow the fisherman of the Adriatic fleet a transitional phasing in period , given the social impact of the implementation of this directive .
Our relations have always been frank , and there are no other reasons to give .
The Commission has not merely proposed a derogation and done nothing else .
As you know , on the basis of the Venice Conference and alongside it , the Commission intends to propose two pilot projects , one centred on the Adriatic and one on the area between Spain , France , Corsica and Sardinia .
I hope that the pilot project dealing with relations between Adriatic fishermen and Croatian fishermen will be successful in finding solutions , hopefully within the next three years .
I will also tell you quite frankly that I have proposed this derogation , which is certainly in contradiction to the basic regulation - otherwise what sort of a derogation is it ? - entirely because of the social impact problems and in order to put the Italian fleet or the Adriatic fishermen in a position to benefit from this regulation and actually do so in a sustainable situation .
Having said that and wishing other colleagues luck , whatever their nationality , in sustaining similar positions when they affect their own countries , the Commission does not have any particular axe to grind .
I have listened to Parliament , I will take note of your vote , I will call for a discussion , at least one , at the Council table , between the Member States of the Council , and in the end I will draw the appropriate conclusions .
Thank you , Mrs Bonino .
Mrs Fraga , as rapporteur do you wish to speak ?
, rapporteur . ( ES ) Madam Commissioner , I understand your point of view .
Of course I can also see the point of exceptions , but I also believe that exceptions have to be justified , and this was my first point .
Is this exception justified ?
I believe the report shows that it is not justified , since I use data supplied by the Adriatic Fisheries Committee , data from the FAO , etc. etc to show that , even if this proposal for a regulation is adopted , if Italian fishermen continue to fish as they have hitherto , most of their catch , even with your proposal , will still be illegal .
The only problem is that this proposal , which discriminates against other fishermen , will create a set of marketing problems , etc. etc .
If it also fails to provide a 100 % solution to the Italian problem , Madam Commissioner , then why do we want this proposal ?
So that the other fishermen have more problems and the other Member States even more monitoring difficulties ?
I can understand exceptions when they are justified and have a basis , but in this case , Madam Commissioner , I sincerely believe - and I have considered the matter very carefully , for if sometimes there are problems which can be solved , then we should help - that your proposal will not help solve the problem of Italian fishermen in the Adriatic and it will complicate the lives of other fishermen and the other Member States .
Mrs Fraga , I do not believe that the proposed derogation will solve the problem of Italian fishermen .
I say again that it is merely an attempt to give the fishermen a chance to phase in .
I proposed a three-year derogation , from the viewpoint of social impact , to put the fleet in a position to comply with the regulations , with a three-year period in which to do so .
It is not unusual for there to be , at times , a transitional period when regulations come into effect .
At all events , since I have no special interest in this , and have explained the reasons for making this proposal , I shall of course await Parliament 's vote .
I want to call at least one policy debate in the Council and then I shall of course draw conclusions from the opinions of both institutions .
Thank you , Mrs Bonino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Fisheries agreements with Latvia , Estonia and Lithuania
The next item is the report ( A4-0363 / 96 ) by Mr Kindermann , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries on :
I. the proposal for a Council Regulation on the conclusion of an agreement on fisheries relations between the European Community and the Republic of Latvia ( COM ( 96 ) 0343 - C4-0478 / 96-96 / 0178 ( CNS ) ) ; II.the proposal for a Council Regulation on the conclusion of an agreement on fisheries relations between the European Community and the Republic of Estonia ( COM ( 96 ) 0355 - C4-0479 / 96-96 / 0187 ( CNS ) ) ; III.the proposal for a Council Regulation on the conclusion of an agreement on fisheries relations between the European Community and the Republic of Lithuania ( COM ( 96 ) 0356 - C4-0480 / 96-96 / 0201 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , this report by the Committee on Fisheries concerns the three proposals for regulations on the conclusion of fisheries agreements with the Baltic Republics of Latvia , Estonia and Lithuania .
Even before the enlargement of the Union on 1 January 1995 , in 1993 the Community of Twelve together with Sweden and Finland had of course already concluded agreements with those countries providing for annual protocols to be negotiated .
Since the accession of Finland and Sweden the Commission is also managing their agreements .
In order to makes fisheries relations clearer and simpler , in 1995 the Commission received a mandate to negotiate new framework agreements with the Baltic republics to replace all existing fisheries agreements .
The new agreements are now before us .
They differ very little from those currently in force and are almost identical between themselves .
However , their duration varies and the agreement with Lithuania is supplemented by a protocol on temporary joint ventures and joint enterprises , under which the contracting parties undertake to promote the establishment of joint enterprises , which would then receive financial support from the Community .
A joint committee to be set up by the contracting parties will select the projects , applying the procedures set out in the protocol .
In my view the most important element of the new , second-generation agreement is that it makes it possible to establish joint ventures and joint enterprises , an element that is fully developed in the case of Lithuania .
We regret , however , that it has not so far proved possible to conclude similar protocols with Estonia and Latvia .
We would politely request the Commission to take further action in this direction .
The projected agreements are framework agreements , i.e. , they do not contain concrete provisions on fishing activities and rights or on financial compensation .
Rather , they lay down principles for relations between the contracting parties in the fisheries sector , define common aims and provide for the distribution of powers , for reciprocal access to catch areas and for the possibility of the Baltic states granting additional catch rights to Union fishermen in return for financial compensation .
The explicit reference to the right of each party to inspect each other 's vessels , a settlement procedure in the event of the arrest of a vessel and the obligation to cooperate in international organizations are new .
The agreements also contain provisions on respect for the provisions in force , the maintenance of fish stocks and the exchange of information and research findings .
We welcome the new framework agreements with the three Baltic Republics .
They make the annual consultations much easier .
They contain the main traditional components of the earlier agreements and include a few important extra provisions .
The importance of international cooperation is emphasized much more clearly than was previously the case .
Reference is also made to the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea , the results of the UN conference on cross-territorial stocks and migratory species , the code of conduct on responsible fishing and the role of the International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission .
One important common objective of cooperation in these organizations is the conservation of Baltic Sea fish stocks .
Unfortunately the Community has not yet managed , in the framework of the International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission , to convince all the other contracting parties of the need to reduce catch quotas drastically , particularly in the case of wild salmon .
Here the cooperation with the three Baltic states certainly leaves room for improvement and the Commission is requested to work towards formulating a uniform approach to these important fishery questions .
The new agreements do not only offer advantages to the Baltic states , for example with the Community 's financial assistance and the opportunity to modernize their fisheries industry .
They also benefit the Community .
For example they improve the fish supply on the Community market and can help reduce the surplus capacity of the fisheries fleets .
Lastly , when evaluating the benefits of the agreement , account should also be taken of the wider framework of the Europe agreements between the EU and the Baltic states and of the objective of preparing for EU membership .
In my view these fisheries agreements can make a limited contribution to political and economic cooperation between the Baltic states and the EU .
They are , however , no substitute for an EU accession strategy in the fisheries sector , which ought also to provide for aid for restructuring the Baltic fleets .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will not go over the fundamentals of this agreement as they have been described by Mr Kindermann , who has rightly highlighted the fact that only one of the three states , Lithuania , has so far also accepted the second generation component .
I think it is a very important element , especially in the light of a pre-membership strategy : because in this light , in fact , bearing the pre-membership strategy in mind , the ' second generation ' component is very important because it facilitates mixed structures which can also make that sector in the three countries more economic .
As I said , only Lithuania has accepted this and created financial compensation equal to ECU 2.5 million for itself .
But precisely because the Commission is convinced of its importance , it will not skimp its efforts to try to convince the other two countries to accept this component in the various agreements as well .
With a view to ratification , the Community and the three Baltic Republics have already decided to hold a whole series of meetings in 1996 followed by annual consultations based on new agreements , so that the system establishing the 1997 fishing opportunities conforms to the agreements signed on behalf of the enlarged Community .
So there is a very close and intense process of dialogue with these three countries .
It is of fundamental importance to the Commission and also , I believe , to the three countries , that the new agreements should come into force on 1 January 1997 .
I shall dwell briefly on just two points and rapidly on the amendments .
The first point relates to the budget classification , because it seems to the Commission contrary to established doctrine on the nature of fisheries agreements ; the second relates to consultation of the European Parliament prior to the start of the negotiations .
I believe , Mr Kindermann , that there is a need to take account of the fact that the Council only grants the negotiating directives once for each agreement .
In any case , the Commission accepts the other amendments in substance though with some changes in form , but I stress that the Commission has gone beyond the established rules to keep Parliament regularly informed of the state of application of the fisheries agreements , through statements , seminars and reports .
I believe we have made a major effort .
As regards the role of Parliament in the financial execution of the fisheries agreements , I would only like to remind you that the three institutions are currently - with a little difficulty , as the rapporteur certainly knows - seeking to activate a code of good conduct relating to the budgetary procedure for the fisheries agreements , with the intention of being able to improve the organization of relations between the Commission and Parliament .
Having said that , I hope this dossier will not only come into force within deadline but that , in the close dialogue we are having with the three countries , there will be growth in the substance and nature of these agreements , which are such a fundamental factor in the pre-membership strategy .
One last remark , which has nothing to do with the dossier we are talking about .
As Members of Parliament perhaps know , this is a rather difficult period for me , and it is a very intense period on other dossiers , particularly on the humanitarian side .
So please excuse me if I do not stay for the whole debate and I also want to thank Commissioner Kinnock who will be present and will certainly give me feedback .
I have to catch an 8.30 flight , so forgive me , I have no choice at the moment .
I am sure Commissioner Kinnock will pass on the details of your speeches to me and I am grateful to him .
Mr President , I would first like to say that I appreciate how busy Mrs Bonino is , but it is no bad thing to be succeeded by someone who has just become a grandfather , and for that reason we congratulate Mr Kinnock this evening on recently acquiring that status himself .
As chairman of the Delegation for Relations with Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania , I can confirm that these three countries are interested in having agreements established .
People are very caught up in this process and we have discussed this on our delegation trips .
What I would like to address today is the framework for the common fishing of the Baltic .
This does not only have to do with economics .
It also has to do with the fact that the Baltic countries are involved in a common fishing policy , about which my colleague Kindermann has already spoken .
These three countries must have the opportunity of establishing their own industries , but they must also be committed to an assessment of resources , to keeping an inventory , to an assessment of capacity and to safety on board fishing vessels .
The Commissioner has already responded to the main principle involved , Parliament 's discussion of the financial considerations .
I will skip these aspects .
But what concerns me most , and something that may be related to the earlier debate on the Mediterranean , is that through the International Baltic Sea Commission we have a form of self-management of the countries around this common fishing area .
I can report that cod stocks are increasing .
The quotas are higher this year than previously because of a joint contribution in this area .
A similar system could be set up for the Mediterranean for instance .
As I see it , it is incredibly important , through self-management , to have fishermen involved in the planning process .
This is one more thing I would like to mention .
My colleague Mr Kindermann has spoken about the stocks of wild salmon .
For the sake of good order I can report that when wild salmon stocks are low in the Baltic , this is due to a disease known as M74 , and not to overfishing .
Mr President , empty as the seats are , I want to raise a matter that has been brought up before and that I consider of the utmost importance in relation to all these agreements .
Many years ago , when I first came into this European Parliament and the question of fisheries was occasionally discussed , it always sounded as though there would be unlimited potential in fisheries , as though this was the great , free , new open space in the world .
Now we have to look seriously at how to protect this space and must realise clearly that the miracle is over !
So , far more than in the past , we must do all we can to manage the sea in such a way that generations to come will still get something out of it .
In this connection I warmly welcome the agreements with the Baltic states .
For this idea of joint enterprises , this idea of cooperation in the fisheries sector , shows quite unequivocally that at certain levels it is understood what the real issue is : we really must do our utmost on the one hand to maintain the reserves so that fish can continue to be marketed , but on the other hand not forget that we must also cooperate with a view to further reducing the surplus capacity of the catch fleets and building up a sensible system .
Here , as in many other areas , the Baltic States have set us an example .
I want to say something further on this .
I was very pleased that the rapporteur and the two previous speakers mentioned the preparation for further steps towards rapprochement with the Baltic states .
For them it was a quite traumatic event when they lost their independence under the Hitler-Stalin pact .
We must give these Baltic peoples a sense of inner security .
We must give them the security that we are backing them , that we stand by them , that the European Union feels responsible for their future , which means we must ensure external security as quickly as possible but also open the gates to economic cooperation with the Baltic states .
This is a modest first step .
But let us be glad of this step and let us at the same time decide that further steps will also be necessary .
Mr President , I am just back from Copenhagen , where I had the opportunity to talk to some Latvians .
One of the issues we talked about was the necessity to have the right kind of balance for the future .
What Mr von Habsburg says is absolutely right .
But , the other side is exactly the point Mr Sindal made : we have to be able to reassure the Latvians and , for that matter , the other Baltic peoples that if they join the European Union they will not find that all their fishing resources are swallowed up and they lose control of them .
So , if we see that as a danger , we should also see the experience of the Baltic as a model for the future development of a common fisheries policy .
As Mr von Habsburg and Mr Sindal said , self-management is the key and decentralized management , with conservation in mind .
We should not impose some grandiose scheme on people in a false desire to impose something European on people who do not want it .
Let us make it cooperative and let us get the fishing communities fully engaged in this enterprise .
Thank you , Mr Macartney .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.55 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I would simply like to point out that on Wednesday , on the initiative of the President , we voted for an adjournment of the urgent debate on Zaire , but not for the debate to be closed .
Now this item was not reinstated yesterday on the agenda of urgent debates , whereas quite a large number of Members had asked to be called to speak individually on this item .
They were unable to do this , and I would like , Madam President , to express my amazement and surprise at this omission .
Mr Souchet , I do understand , but it seems to me that the article cited when closure of the debate was announced was in fact Article 130 , which provides for closures and not adjournment .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Votes
Madam President , as my colleague , Mrs Bonino , made clear yesterday , the Commission intends to reserve its position on Parliament 's request to withdraw the proposal until the Council has made its opinion available .
The Commission naturally will keep the House fully informed of any decisions on the follow-up to the proposal .
Madam President , with regard to the amendments : I have nothing to say about the first one .
I will leave this to the discretion of the House since it was not debated , although it can be seen that the said amendment emerged from the debate we held on the ECSC budget for 97 , on the Giansily report .
On the second amendment by the Socialist Group , I would like to explain , Madam President , that this paragraph 32 was modified by the Committee on Budgetary Control through an amendment introduced by one of our colleagues .
The colleague reached an agreement with the Socialist Group and this is the amendment which was tabled ; I understood that it was an amendment based on consensus , but I do not know whether all those who will vote on the text now featured under paragraph 32 will agree with the compromise achieved by the first person who made the amendment , Mr Samland , and the Socialist Group .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
The EU will never get on top of fraud and wastage in management and the budget unless the EU 's budget as a whole is reduced .
Unused appropriations are also a symptom of inefficiency and an excessive budget .
Ultimately it is the Member States that suffer through their membership contributions , Sweden contributing approximately 21 billion kronor gross and approximately 12 billion net .
I have nevertheless supported the report because the Committee on Budgets supports the criticisms of the Court of Auditors and others .
The measures proposed must , however , be complemented by the national audit bodies and local and regional authorities also being involved in audits , especially where the Structural Funds are concerned .
Europe Agreement with Slovenia
The next item is the report ( A4-0362 / 96 ) by Mr Posselt , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council and Commission Decision on the conclusion of the interim agreement on trade and trade-related measures between the European Community , the European Coal and Steel Community and the European Atomic Energy Community of the one part and the Republic of Slovenia of the other part ( 11278 / 96 - C4-0574 / 96-96 / 0255 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , today 's debate on the interim agreement with Slovenia is evidence that the European Union can sometimes work quickly and unbureaucratically .
I am grateful to the Commission for providing me with the information promptly .
On Monday this week the Council signed the agreement and on Tuesday our President officially consulted our Committee on External Economic Relations on it .
The day before , we had already adopted the report in question unanimously and today the House is in a position to say yes to the interim agreement with Slovenia .
This interim agreement is necessary because the association agreement that we approved by an overwhelming majority at the last part-session still has to be ratified in the national parliaments .
We hope they will do so quickly but know from experience with other at times less complex association agreements how long this can take in practice .
That is why , as I said , this interim agreement , which implements the trade and economic policy sections of the Europe agreement at once and provides the legal base for bodies such as the Cooperation Council , which is now being turned into an Association Council , must enter into force on 1 January .
In this context I must however note the difference between theory and practice , because sadly the Cooperation Council has not met once since 1993 , i.e. , over the duration of the trade and cooperation agreement that is now being superseded , because it was blocked .
We believe its bodies must quickly be given the power to act and from what I have heard there will be a meeting very soon .
The content of the agreement is like the others .
Most industrial tariffs will be dismantled rapidly .
A free-trade area will be set up within six years at the most , and indeed we hope that in six years time this country may already be a member of the European Union and that the process will therefore be rather speedier .
The only derogations apply to agricultural products , ECSC products and textiles .
A separate agreement will have to be concluded on wine .
I am very much in favour of such an agreement , for Slovenian wine is excellent and Slovenia is one of the few countries to have a song about wine as its national anthem .
That too is a symbol of the peaceable spirit of the Slovenians , their spirit of good neighbourliness , for which we also want to show our approval by supporting this interim agreement .
The fact that our House is giving its assent to an agreement twice in the space of two months is a sign that we regard this country with its favourable macro-economic data as an essential component of the community of free Europeans .
Following the elections in Slovenia last weekend we also want to send out a European signal to that country .
You know that Slovenia elected a new parliament on Sunday in a spirit of great plurality .
Some people might say too much plurality .
But when one looks at some of the developments in other countries one can say that this welcome plurality of parties , the spirit of free discussion and free parliamentary debate that have emerged there give us the hope that we will acquire a valuable partner in the European Union .
After giving our assent to the association agreement we therefore also give our assent to the interim agreement .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first let me underline that our group entirely endorses the rapporteur 's statements .
Let me also congratulate Mr Posselt on his past work in connection with Slovenia .
The rapid implementation of the interim agreement with a view to the integration of Slovenia in the EU will act as an important signal for this Central European country .
Slovenia does indeed set standards in several areas from which we in the EU can and want to learn something , for when correctly understood , integration is a unique opportunity that can benefit both sides .
In spite of the incredible upheavals Slovenia managed to build up its democratic structures , demonstrate its internal political stability - as also proved by the elections a few days ago - restructure the economy and at the same time maintain social peace .
Slovenia has proved particularly mature in its consensual and moderate foreign policy and in the European context it provides exemplary protection of minorities , both at purely legislative level - and we should remember that nowhere else do minorities have the dual right to vote and stand in general legislative elections - and in relation to real , positive social integration .
In view of these extremely positive data it is likely that any questions that may remain open can be resolved without difficulty .
Slovenia has now achieved an average per capita income comparable to that in the EU countries and we hope we will soon be able to welcome it to our midst .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to warmly congratulate the rapporteur , Bernd Posselt , on his work and also Parliament on its resolution of 24 October .
I believe it is thereby doing justice to a country that has made the most amazing transition in recent years , from being a part of the Yugoslav communist regime to being one of the most developed countries of the former Eastern bloc , which it really is in every respect .
It is handling the question of minorities in exemplary fashion and that is a sign of a highly developed democracy , which is not even necessarily the norm in every Member State of our Union .
The economy has grown to an extent that raises hopes that Slovenia can soon become a full member of our Union .
The geographical situation of Slovenia shows us that Europe needs this country if it really wants to be united .
That is why I offer congratulations for this rapid treatment of the matter and hope that similar trends will continue not only in Slovenia but in other countries too .
Thank you , Mr Habsburg , I am happy to have been in the chair for your first speech .
But I believe you spoke yesterday as well .
Congratulations .
Perhaps I could open by repeating a tradition in the British House of Commons and congratulating the honourable Member on his maiden speech .
It was short , to the point and I am sure Parliament will look forward to hearing further from him .
The House will recall that less than one month ago my colleague , Mr Van den Broek , was here for Parliament 's assent to the European agreement with Slovenia .
At the time he emphasized the political significance of ensuring the entry into force of the interim agreement on 1 January 1997 .
In particular , he asked for the agreement of this House to applying the urgency procedure in order to support Slovenia 's efforts to catch up with the other associated countries in their pre-accession strategies .
I greatly appreciate the effort made by Parliament to respond positively and to play its part in ensuring that Slovenia can advance on the European path without further delay .

This debate comes , as Mr Posselt says , just three days after the agreement was signed by the Council , the Commission and the Slovene Government and it seems realistic to hope , therefore , that the agreement will be concluded this month and can enter into force on 1 January 1997 .

Indeed , after the enthusiastic advocacy of Mr Posselt , Mr Bösch and Mr Habsburg , I can scarcely wait to toast that occasion in Slovenian wine .
I would like to extend my enthusiastic thanks to the rapporteur of the REX Committee , Mr Posselt , for the succinct and positive report which he produced so quickly .
The entry into force of the interim agreement with Slovenia will allow that country to participate actively in the pre-accession strategy on an equal footing with other associated countries in Central and Eastern Europe .
I am pleased that cooperation between the Commission , the Council and Parliament has proved to be so effective .
My colleagues and I are confident that the new government in Slovenia will continue to develop our relations in a very constructive way .
It is clear that this Parliament is eager to play its part in that evolution as our neighbour continues with its preparation for membership of the Union .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Improved financial management ( SEM 2000 )
The next item is the report ( A4-0331 / 96 ) by Mr Colom i Naval , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Commission 's programme to improve financial management ( Sound and Efficient Financial Management 2000 , SEM 2000 ) .
Madam President , Mr Colom i Naval was doing so well that I was almost tempted to leap up and say he could have another five minutes .
But it would have been unfair to have sprung it on him at such short notice .
As he said , Parliament has always been at the forefront of the fight against fraud and we see that not only in what he referred to , the creation of the UCLAF Unit , but also its endowment with both staff and resources in order to do the job .
This debate is about taking the argument much further than merely the fight against fraud to what needs to be done in order to ensure the sound and efficient use of all our resources .
Fraud is but a very small symptom of the problem of inefficient use of resources .
Much more money is lost by bad management and inefficient , ineffective control than is lost by fraud .
That is the real object of the SEM 2000 process - to make sure that we use resources more effectively and more efficiently right throughout our procedures .
The Commission initiative is one that I believe is supported not only by all in this House but especially by all those in the Member States who are concerned about ensuring the proper and effective use of scarce resources .
The proposals we have before us , on which Mr Colom i Naval has based his report , show a major change in culture in the Commission .
That major change in culture is one which reflects a critical and self-critical evaluation of what needs to be done .
The Commission is to be congratulated on that .
It has not pretended that everything is all right .
It has started from a self-critical basis .
Special praise and credit is due to the two Commissioners primarily responsible - Mr Liikanen and Mrs Gradin .
With its proposals the Commission has given a lead that no other Community institution can afford to ignore .
Where the Commission has led with its proposals Parliament and the Council must offer corresponding support .
That support will come in three main areas .
Today Mr Colom i Naval , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , is offering quite clearly the political support which is needed from this institution and also the undertaking that this House will play its part in guaranteeing the legislative and financial support which will be necessary to put some of these proposals into effect .
There will need to be legislative changes .
The proposal in relation to the method of applying the Financial Regulation is something which is of course controversial and will need change in the financial regulations .
But this House will play its part in doing what is necessary to ensure that sound use of resource .
But Parliament has to look at it in the context of our overall responsibilities and they involve the particular responsibility which this House has for the discharge procedure .
In the discharge procedure - something which started in this Chamber earlier this week when Mr Friedmann , on behalf of the Court of Auditors , presented both the Court of Auditors ' annual report and the statement of assurance - we saw quite clearly that when we look at the inefficient use of resources , the areas where management procedures have been seriously lacking , the Court of Auditors has identified that 90 % of the instances of inadequate information or improper audit trails rest not with the Commission itself but with the Member States of the European Union , particularly including some of those who shout loudest and point the finger at other institutions most regularly .
As we give our support in this procedure to the Commission , we must encourage the Commission to make sure that the accounting procedures at the centre are properly integrated with all the accounting procedures in the Member States so that in future , when sound and efficient management is introduced by the Commission , it is done in such a way that no government of any Member State will be able to use the European Union as its alibi for its own domestic inefficiencies in the management of Union resources .
That is the essential lesson and it is the attitude in which my group fully supports Mr Colom i Naval and his report and will do all we can to make sure that our views , linking together with the Commission initiative , stand fully behind the efforts to make sure that every ecu of taxpayers ' money is soundly , wisely and efficiently spent .
Madam President , I am very happy to participate at short notice in this debate and to recognize the contribution that Mr Colom i Naval has made by bringing up this particular report , by his contribution at the level of the committee where he analysed very thoroughly what the problem is and proposed sensible solutions , and to thank him for his contribution here this morning .
We have to recognize that as the resources of the European Community have been increased over the years a lot of bad publicity has attached itself to the administration , to the European Commission and to the institutions of the Community generally because of what was perceived as a looseness in the whole administration .
Parliament itself cannot rid itself of part of the blame for this .
All the institutions of the Union , as the budget increased , tended to participate in the creation of regulations which did not facilitate the best and the most efficient distribution of the resources which were at our disposal .
Last year the Court of Auditors drew attention to the fact that it is not only the institutions of the Union that are failing in the correct administration , but more importantly it is the national governments .
Also , the basis on which we make resources available particularly to the poorer regions is not always very clear , either to ourselves who proposed the regulations or to the Member States who have the responsibility of interpreting them .
Far too often all the good intentions of every individual Member of this Parliament and the various committees , every good idea and every popular sentiment are catered for when drawing up the regulations , with the result that it is very hard for national governments to recognize what the thrust of our intentions is or how exactly they should administer the money .
So now that we have gained some experience of drafting regulations , I think we have learned a bit about how to go about it .
The Member States have learned too and I hope that the new regulations proposed will be more focused , more clearly written and that it will be possible on the basis of the regulations and what happens to identify where European money has gone exactly .
This has not proved possible with the old programme and the Commission 's administrative services are not the people to blame .
Madam President , Commissioner ; fraud , wastage and poor control , ambiguous divisions of responsibilities , delays in making payments and poor cooperation between the EU and the Member States are some of the key concepts in descriptions of the mismanagement of EU resources .
A mere few percent of the EU budget represents a financial loss of tens of millions of kronor .
This would always be wrong but it feels particularly painful now at a time of austerity , when many law-abiding citizens are having to tighten their belts .
Madam President , all the measures we ask of others we must first take ourselves if we are to have any credibility .
You must therefore conduct a rapid review of our own benefits , such as subsistence allowances , travelling allowances , expenses and other provisions for refunds , and implement provisions on attendance and allowances which have the confidence of the public at large .
Other proposals we support in SEM 2000 are the following :


joint audit bodies involving the EU and national bodies ; -increased local and regional auditing of how Structural Funds resources are used ; -more auditors who are independent of the EU ; -systematic controls and follow-up of how resources are used.On the other hand , I personally do not believe in EU police measures such as sanctions and penalties against Member States which take the form of the withdrawal of appropriations .
This is the wrong way to go where there is supposed to be cooperation between countries ; it only creates greater mistrust of the EU .
Less bureaucracy , simplified rules , better follow-up of budgetary control in cooperation with national bodies such as customs , the police , tax experts and elected representatives are in my view a better model .
I applaud the report and the committee 's proposals .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the 370 million citizens of this European Union have a right to know what happens to their taxes .
They also the right to know - and they hear that every year when the Court of Auditors submits its report - about any abuses , mismanagement , fraud and other such unpleasant phenomena .
We have applauded that here this week too .
But I think these 370 million citizens also have the right to know what efforts we , Parliament , the Commission and I hope also the Council , are making in order to put an end to these abuses and achieve more sound and efficient financial management .
From that point of view it is scandalous that this report , this discussion , this debate is being held on a Friday morning !
I know that nobody likes Fridays .
They all say , I do not want this taken on a Friday .
But in this case , Madam President , during a week when on the Tuesday the general public in this Union looked at the Court of Auditors ' report and saw all the things that are not working , it would have been only fair for all the institutions involved , including of course our rapporteur who has invested a great deal of work , to show that public that we do also have measures to combat mismanagement , to combat fraud and to combat sloppiness !
We cannot just let abuses be writ large in the newspapers and all our efforts writ small , for what we have achieved with our efforts is not that small !
I now call on everyone in this House and all the groups to please reconsider their attitude in such matters for otherwise this is what could happen : people could say that this House is also being hypocritical about fighting fraud .
In our Sunday speeches we say yes , we are protecting your money , that is what we are there for .
Parliament is always in action and always in the forefront .
But these things must also be carried out and be made visible .
I would like to have a debate one day at which all the group chairmen are here and give their views and say : yes , we support this kind of programme .
We thank the Committee on Budgetary Control .
We thank the Commission and then we will also try to ensure back at home that steps are taken in our Member States , in the regions and wherever there are difficulties , which I cannot go into now , not just to take decisions but also to transpose them .
Madam President , for that we need people to be present , for that we need a day when people are watching us and when it is not just the Members who , sadly , have gone off home , but even all the journalists !
( Applause )
Madam President , the Commission thanks Mr Colom i Naval for his very thorough work and warmly welcomes the proposed resolution of the European Parliament on the Commission 's SEM 2000 programme , which is , of course , a tangible expression of President Santer 's pledge to this House in January last year to change the financial and administrative culture of the Commission .
The initiative has been led , of course , by my colleagues , Commissioner Anita Gradin and Commissioner Erkki Liikanen .
Phase I was focused on arrangements in the Commission , and financial and human resource units have been set up , or reinforced , in all the Commission departments and made directly responsible to senior management .
We have clarified the lines of responsibility and are making sure that officials at all levels feel personally responsible for using the taxpayers ' resources in the most cost-efficient way in order to get value for money .
Phase II of the SEM programme assessed possible changes in procedures , in working methods and in regulations .
Phase III has dealt with the management of the 80 % of the Community budget which is spent in the Member States .
Since March the Commission has been working with a high-level group of personal representatives of the Ministers of Finance to improve budget execution , to tighten up financial management and to clarify the definition of eligible expenditure in order to reinforce the coordination of financial control and to exchange best practice on evaluation and the fight against fraud .
We were particularly pleased that this Parliament 's rapporteur , Mr Colom i Naval , was able to participate in the work of the personal representatives ' group and inform them of Parliament 's position on the various aspects of the programme .
I suggest that the content of today 's short debate will further reinforce the messages in the period ahead .
The Commission notes that Parliament reserves the right to evaluate the future progress of SEM 2000 and we can assure Parliament that the Commission is under no illusions about the size of the task it set itself and that evaluation of the programme will be a vital part of the process .
The Court of Auditors ' annual report and statement of assurance has emphasized that more needs to be done within the Commission and in the Member States , and Commissioners have made their active agreement with that view very clear .
I wish to deal briefly with the main headings of the resolution .
On procedures and organization within the Commission , there is complete agreement between Parliament and the Commission on the need to achieve a balance between the management of financial and human resources and of policy and on the conviction that staff working in financial and resource management must be properly trained , properly motivated and appreciated in terms of career planning .
On budget implementation , Parliament rightly calls for better performance in the Member States .
The Commission believes , however , that the most effective way of making progress is through cooperation , rather than financial penalties for irregular flow of information .
On financial liability of the Member States , clearance of accounts and financial correction , the Commission shares Parliament 's view that the management of the structural funds must be closely scrutinized .
We believe , however , that rather than applying a clearance of accounts system on the lines of what is done for the EAGGF guarantee expenditure , it is better urgently to tackle the problem of defining eligible expenditure , in partnership with the Member States , and to take measures within the existing legal framework in order to strengthen financial management and clarify the responsibility of Member States and their designated authorities .
We expect also to propose amendments to the recovery provisions of the own-resources legislation .
On rationalizing controls , coordination of financial control and audit and preventing fraud , we consider that a vitally important feature of SEM 2000 is the rationalization of prior-approval checks on payments and the development of the internal audit function , including performance audit .
After assessing the possibility of revising the rules dealing with the Financial Controller 's prior approval in individual transactions , we concluded that the use of generally accepted audit techniques , such as sampling , should continue for the time being in the context of the existing rules which ensure the Financial Controller 's right to retain prior checks on transactions , where these are considered necessary .
On coordination of financial control and audit in the Commission and with the Member States , the resolution before the House invites the Commission to involve national control authorities more extensively in coordinating controls and harmonizing control of audit methods .
I report to the House that the Commission is working actively to develop this coordination through an annual audit programme covering the Commission services , the national control authorities and the European Court of Auditors .
On fraud prevention and fraud proofing , as the House knows , one of the underlying aims of SEM 2000 is to reduce the assessed level of fraud relating to EU expenditure , which is currently estimated to stand at 0.6 % of the Community budget .
Fraud and irregularities on the income side of the budget - notably lost customs income - meanwhile is estimated at 1 % of the budget .
As the House will be aware , the Commission services dealing with the detection of fraud and the recovery of lost revenue for Community taxpayers are beginning to produce encouraging results .
In addition , the Commission is also tackling the root of the problem by taking steps to prevent fraud .
Instructions have been given to the Commission 's Financial Control and Anti-fraud Services to fraud-proof all draft decisions and legislation .
The Commission 's aim is to ensure that its services develop fully effective anti-fraud reflexes .
On evaluation , the Commission shares Parliament 's view .
Our aim is to get rid of the so-called spending culture and to move to an evaluation and performance culture , in partnership with the Member States .
The success of the SEM 2000 will clearly depend , first and foremost , on motivating our staff and it will also depend , obviously , on having the effective cooperation of Member States - as honourable Members have said in the course of this debate - and on those Member States ' dedication to handling Community funds with maximum efficiency .
Naturally , the Commission welcomes Parliament 's strong support for our initiative and we shall continue to keep Parliament fully informed through the relevant committees and , indeed , directly to this House .
Thank you , Mr Kinnock .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr Tomlinson has the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , can I just say how regrettable I found it that the House did not have the opportunity of hearing the sound advice of people like Danish anti-marketeers who had so much to say a couple of months ago to hidden cameras about how we should have sound and efficient management .
When they had the opportunity here today to debate this point properly in Parliament , I found it quite regrettable that we did not have the benefit of their advice , despite the fact that a particular Danish lady was here taking her seat earlier this morning .
Mr Tomlinson , as you very well know , this is not a point of order .
But your intervention is accepted .
We will not open this debate again since this issue was closed with a unanimous vote in favour of the excellent report by Mr Colom i Naval , whom I would like to congratulate on his usual good work .
Live plants and floriculture
The next item is the report ( A4-0336 / 96 ) by Mr Filippi , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) introducing specific measures for live plants and floricultural products ( COM ( 96 ) 0261- C4-0390 / 96-96 / 0155 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to give you an idea of the importance of the sector we are dealing with this morning , and I think I have a duty to do so because when we talk about agriculture , industry and the economy in general , some sectors are considered important and strategic and so on , and in my opinion marginal sectors are left out .
In terms of employment , the agricultural sector we are talking about here represents more than half a million jobs .
That is equivalent to the number of jobs in the three largest European motor industries put together .
The sector has an incidence of 4.3 to 5 per cent on the total turnover of European agriculture .
Still talking about employment , this sector is highly labour intensive , with relatively moderate investment .
So there are a number of reasons why this proposal to introduce specific measures for live plants and floricultural products .
What is the issue ?
The issue is that producers in the sector feel abandoned .
I have had meetings with them and that is how they feel about a situation where imports into the European Union from the CAP countries are favoured , where there are preferential agreements with the countries of Central and South America , and , finally , agreements with Israel , Morocco , Jordan and Cyprus . In fact 80 % of cut flowers entering Europe enjoy customs exemptions .
So while there are support measures for European production in other sectors in a similar position , there have been and there are no measures for this sector .
Furthermore , this sector also has to deal with competition from the gift industry and manufacturing , so it has to compete directly on the internal market as well .
In November 1995 , after the agreements with Israel and Morocco in particular , the Council committed itself to establish specific measures , but these measures have never seen the light of day .
So last May and June , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture , I raised the issue in an oral question and a resolution of Parliament calling for promotion measures in this sector .
I must admit that the Commission has responded rapidly so we now have a proposal on promotion to discuss .
The proposal is moving in the right direction in that it provides measures to stimulate initiatives promoting European production by agreement with the Member States and producer organizations .
On the other hand it is limited and unsatisfactory as regards timing - it will not come into effect until 1998 - and funding .
ECU 10 million is envisaged , compared with the ECU 60 million called for in the resolution Parliament passed last June , and corresponding to 4 per cent of the value of the sector , hence far less than what other agricultural sectors receive .
So more funds are needed and , above all , intervention is needed as from 1997 .
As you know , the Council of Ministers shares our opinion on the need to start in 1997 and envisages an allocation of ECU 15 million .
We think that is inadequate and more should be done because , apart from anything else , the action we are asking for in this sector will help very small and medium-sized firms operating in it to organize and work together on promotional activities .
Other problems will probably have to be dealt with in the future but if we start with these promotional measures I believe we will be starting off on the right foot to resolve the difficulties of the sector .
Mr President , the climatic conditions of the autonomous region of Madeira give it comparative advantages over the rest of the Community when it comes to the globalisation of the economy vis-àvis floriculture .
Its subtropical climate means that it can produce flowers outside or in greenhouses , and the small property structure on the island is appropriate for this kind of production .
The high quality cut-flower market relies to an overwhelming extent on the aeroplane .
Once you have the right climate , the right kind of property structure and , in the short term , a highly operational airport , you then have all the right conditions for promoting floriculture .
This promotion of floriculture , based on small property , demands , however , commercial construction with infrastructures which are able to back up Madeira 's floriculture production .
We have been blessed by nature and are guaranteed links with the outside world but we now urgently need a market or an area for concentrating production and funding .
Without the existence of that market or an area of concentration linked to small producers guaranteeing marketing , imposing quality and promoting production , the existing comparative advantages will be wasted .
For us , as a peripheral region , Parliament 's report should include for these regions the funding of commercial infrastructures which mean that potentials can be exploited and small producers can be assisted in organizing a sector with a great future for an economically depressed region .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by saying something quite different .
In the previous debate Mrs Wemheuer said that nobody likes Fridays .
Let me say to this that this Member at least likes Fridays because we must at last acknowledge that we owe it to our electorate to work here on the days that we are here .
Let me continue by saying that the live plants and flower market , on which Mr Filippi has drafted an excellent report , is extremely important to us , indeed more important than most people realise .
There is , perhaps , one point where I do not quite agree with Mr Filippi .
I believe that the proposed promotional activities are quite unsatisfactory .
It is not enough for us to try simply to expand the market by means of propaganda - which unfortunately is the main emphasis of the promotional activities .
I am very grateful to my colleague from Madeira for pointing to the importance of the islands , for the same applies to the Azores and the Canary Islands as to Madeira .
I openly admit my interest in the Canaries , for many secondary producers in the Canaries are Bavarians .
They have told me about the difficulties they face because our market in live plants and flowers is not sufficiently protected , we allow and promote imports from outside , especially from South America I hear .
God knows I have nothing against South America .
The farmers there have a right to our support !
When I look at who sends us flowers from South America it eerily reminds me of the time of our debate on bananas when people kept saying that the bananas were imported in the name of the farmers , while in fact it was large capitalist companies that were flooding our market with bananas .
I will enthusiastically vote for the Filippi report .
Thank you , Mr von Habsburg .
You know that this Presidency must , under institutional rules , be balanced and cannot under any circumstances express a personal opinion .
But allow me to say that I support your first comments and that , personally speaking , I am very pleased to chair the Friday sittings .
Mr Santini , speaking on behalf of the Group Union for Europe now has the floor for four minutes .
Mr President , it is a great pleasure to be working here today in such a cordial atmosphere , enhanced by the subject we are dealing with : flowers .
But there is no rose without a thorn , as the saying goes .
In fact , while the market for flowers has been organized since 1968 , it is a mystery why this important produce of the earth has never been granted the same dignity and consideration as others which are better known and regarded as strictly agricultural .
There are no interventions or aid to benefit the producers , there are no promotional and export incentives , and yet flowers , plants and bulbs are creating a thriving European trade balance and covering increasingly vast areas of territory with their bright colours .
There are 42 , 000 hectares in the open air , 23 , 000 under glass and 68 , 000 in nurseries in the European Union today .
I do not know if the rapporteur , Mr Filippi , mentioned these figures and if so please forgive me for repeating them , but they need underlining to appreciate that we are not talking here about small street-corner flower-sellers , but about a very important sector which now accounts for more than 510 , 000 jobs , with production estimated at over ECU 11 billion .
They know a bit about this in the Netherlands , where flowers have become a genuine national industry . It goes without saying that they are producers , but they are also great consumers of flowers .
So there is a real flower culture as well as cultivation - in Italian that is a play on words which may be lost in translation .
Every year , European citizens spend the equivalent of ECU 19 million on flowers , on average ECU 51 per head .
Despite our romantic reputation , we Italians are certainly not at the head of the class ; we actually trail along with the Swedes and the Austrians .
Once again the Dutch come out top .
Community production - and here is the thorn - is not protected .
The GATT rules have reduced the tariff since July 1995 , there are privileged relations with certain countries , in particular developing countries or those engaged in the fight against drugs , and there are also the relations with the GSP and Lomé Convention countries .
In short , the European flower producers are up against fierce and privileged competition and obviously they are concerned about all these forms of privilege .
It is calculated that no duty is currently paid on 80 % of imported flowers .
The 1996-1997 price package , for which I was proud to be rapporteur in this house , launched a few small measures as incentive and encouragement to the sector , but it is little enough .
ECU 15 million have been proposed for the first year , with total expenditure of ECU 60 million over the next few years , whereas the loss of profits due to preferential tariffs is valued at ECU 50 million per year by the producers ' organization .
In fact , to be competitive , Community producers are forced to market imported flowers and plants as well as home production .
That is why they are now asking for help for promotion and help for exports , in short help for their industry .
Help which seems to me all the more legitimate , Mr President , bearing in mind that this is not an industry where large multinationals are active .
It depends predominately on small and medium-sized enterprises , the majority of which are family firms .
Thank you , Mr Santini .
I must warn the ladies and gentlemen in the public gallery that Parliament 's Rules of Procedure prohibit visitors from making any comments whatsoever .
Therefore I would ask you to remain silent .
Otherwise I will unfortunately be obliged to ask you to leave .
Mr Mulder , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , now has the floor .
Mr President , first of all I should like to join other Members in congratulating Mr Filippi on his excellent report .
Many people may well be wondering why the agricultural policy should now start subsidising a branch of agriculture which has not received any grants to date , for floriculture has hardly benefited from any European grants .
It is a completely liberal market .
Yet I do believe that the present circumstances justify making a grant , albeit a small one , to this area of agriculture .
And why is that so ?
The reason is that in recent years the European Union has concluded more and more free trade agreements with countries which often strive towards ideal goals .
I agree with Mr von Habsburg that it is by no means certain that these goals are achieved , but the result is that the European Union is now importing large quantities of flowers without any form of protection .
That means large-scale competition for our flower growers in Europe .
So what we must now decide is how high the subsidy should be .
The amount proposed by the Commission is 0.1 % of the total turnover in the European Union .
That is peanuts .
I think we should give a larger subsidy as we already suggested in this House last June , I think it was .
I agree with the rapporteur 's proposal of 60 million , which is 0.5 % Some people might be wondering why we do not advocate a completely free , liberal policy .
But I would not recommend that , we must have fair competition .
Stringent regulations on the environment prevail in Europe , which unfortunately is not the case in the rest of the world .
That is what justifies this subsidy .
Mr President , I too realise that we are dealing here with a very important market - involving many jobs , large revenue , good business - and do you know why that is so ?
It is because until now we have left this sector out of our organizations of the market !
And now we get proposals to regulate it , even from Liberals !
Mr Mulder , I am most surprised to hear you now call for subsidies to be introduced in this prosperous market even though everybody says we have to dismantle subsidies !
The difficulty of this market is surely the fact that it has functioned so well ; that is why so many producers entered it , and now there are marketing problems .
Now public funds are to go into a market and a business that is doing so well in the form of promotional activities so that , as is written here , people will buy flowers throughout the year , not just occasionally , but all the year round .
If that is what is wanted , then this industry should do it itself , this market should regulate it itself !
If we begin to do so , we will be opening the door not just to financing promotional activities but also , as Mr Santini said , to subsidizing and supporting exports ; for that is the next step .
Then the gentleman from Madeira comes along and says : since we are so peripheral , I would like some of these funds too because we are doing so badly !
But you have better conditions for growing flowers than anywhere else !
After all the Netherlands have to use a great deal of oil and energy , whereas in Madeira they grow by themselves .
But of course , the fact of being peripheral once again justifies receiving subsidies .
What we are embarking on here is a race to obtain public funds , and the next stages are quite predictable .
And I must say again , Mr Mulder , that I am very surprised that you as a Liberal actually want to smear this flourishing market !
A further consideration : we have agreements on minimum import costs , for instance with Israel ; otherwise duties are levied .
Of course that could also be done with third countries and would be a sensible measure .
But surely one should not intervene in a flourishing market by imposing an organization of the market on it !
We can discuss other measures , but we cannot endorse this report as it stands !
I may be the only person to speak against it here , but really it seems total nonsense for you all to head in the wrong direction !
Mr President , my first words must be to repudiate those uttered by the previous Member since he does not really see the importance of ultra-peripheral regions and their respective floricultural activity ( or other farming activities ) , which need to be protected because this is a market which is suffering very much from the costs of isolation and this must be taken into account by the Community institutions .
The commercialisation of European floriculture is not going through a time of prosperity mainly because of the increase in competition which the European Union itself has fostered .
This explains the proposal for a Council regulation and the excellent report drafted by Mr Filippi , concerning the establishment of specific measures aimed at promoting the production of commercial flowers , foliage and house plants .
We are fully in agreement with this proposal which will significantly increase the consumption of those crops in the Community .
Member States are not always as aware as they should be of the problems of marketing , leaving it to producers to solve the difficulties which may arise .
But now they have an opportunity to take more interest and to play a more active role in commercialisation .
We have to show our support for the Filippi report which considerably improves the proposal for a regulation not only because it suggests a greater European Union contribution as of 1997 , to support actions aimed at increasing the consumption of house plants and other Community floriculture products but also because it will make it possible for a single Member State to present and implement measures and activities aimed at developing this consumption and to receive help from the rest of the Community .
Because I come from an ultra-peripheral region enjoying the best conditions for exotic floriculture , with room still for extraordinary expansion if the proper measures are taken by my country and by the European Union as a whole , I have to , once again , support something which I think should have been done a very long time ago : protecting the very many regional high-quality farms by applying the principle of Community preference , especially in regions of Member States where natural resources are scarce and productive activity is still lacking in diversification or simply under-developed .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the rapporteur Mr Filippi for his thorough and positive report .
As the House will know , the purpose of the Commission 's proposal for a regulation is to support the promotion of live plants and floricultural products in keeping with to the commitment made at the General Affairs Council of November last year .
The proposal aims at developing national programmes in one or more Member States to promote demand both in the Community and elsewhere for live plants and flowers produced in the Community .
The Community budget would bear 60 % of the total cost of the programmes and the Commission expects these programmes to have a positive effect on farmers ' incomes and throughout the marketing chain .
As it is important to use effectively all the available money in 1997 and to start the programmes without delay , a Council decision this year is obviously desirable .
So far as the amendments are concerned , Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 3 relate to Recital 1 and the Commission feels that its proposal is already sufficiently clear .
Similarly Amendment No 4 is already dealt with in the financial fiche of the proposal and detailed arrangements will figure in the implementing measures .
As for Amendment No 5 , the Commission is happy to say that the Council is ready to increase the budget allocation to ECU 15m for 1997 from the ECU 10m originally proposed .
I hope that will enjoy the support of the House .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , we voted against this report precisely because we regard this as such an important sector .
It may be a sector that does not feed us directly but one that instead brings us pleasure , but that is just as important and the reason it has developed so well in recent years is because there was no organization of the market .
There is a similar sector , potatoes .
I do not grow flowers but potatoes and as a grower I would resolutely oppose an organization of the potato market because that would block our development in this area .
You can see that in all the other areas where we have had market organizations .
Those are the sick areas of agriculture , while the others are more or less managing to keep their head above water .
Exactly the same applies in the floricultural sector and now we are to start introducing an intervention system , although rather timidly at first by sales-promotion measures ; but as you have all heard from other Members , that is not to be the only promotional measure , eventually it is to lead to intervention and to the export subsidies we are urgently trying to dismantle in other areas .
For some speakers to say we did not want to promote the peripheral areas is not quite correct .
In fact if they are also included in these promotional activities then , as can be seen in other areas , in the end they will not be promoted because of the concentration on the best soils and will be left standing empty-handed .
That was the result of the organization of the market .
That is what we do not want .
That is why we are for and not against the development of the peripheral areas , which was reflected in our vote .
Mr President , I must say I have been listening to this debate on the regulation for the flower sector with increasing amazement and that even the liberals have claimed that this regulation is needed , not just needed but that a substantial amount of money should be pumped into it !
I think that is quite scandalous !
We all know , certainly in the Netherlands , that the flower sector is the branch of agriculture par excellence which is the biggest polluter of all , where enormous quantities of pesticides are used , where admittedly not oil but natural gas is wasted and where now we are expected to approve money being thrown at it in scandalous fashion to promote the industry !
I have even heard voices here advocating export subsidies , and that at a time when some poor countries in Africa are trying hard to get their flowers on to our markets .
I therefore voted against because I believe we should try to vote here in line with the stances we often adopt outside this House , namely that we should work towards greater openness of our markets .
I really fail to understand what is happening here .
We have decided to abstain in the vote on this report since a proposal intended to support the horticultural industry with ECU 60 million seems unreasonable .
Firstly , every single sector of agriculture cannot receive support each time it gets into difficulties .
This does not after all happen with other industries , such as manufacturing and services .
Moreover , the proposal smacks too much of protectionism because plants and flowers cultivated in the Third World are put at a disadvantage .
Mr President , I would just like to comment briefly on what Mrs Van Dijk has just said .
What we are trying to do here is promote sales in the European Union itself .
We need to support flower sales because more and more free trade agreements are being concluded for various reasons , with South America to help reduce the growing of drugs , with all other regions for all other kinds of reasons. the big questions is whether we can achieve our objective , but the question also is whether there is fair competition .
We may well be using a lot of pesticides in the European Union but outside Europe far more are being used which are very harmful .
Flowers can be imported without any protection .
I do not call that fair competition and I think that even the Green Group would agree with me .
That is why I am very much in favour .
Mr Mulder , as you very well know , this is not a point of order .
I did not interrupt you - I will never interrupt you or any other Member - but I would like all of you to comply properly with the Rules of Procedure , because your comments have now opened up the debate again , even though we have already voted on this report .
Therefore in future I would ask you and all the Members to help me conduct these debates properly , using in each case the time we have for the intended purpose .
Thank you , because I feel sure that you will in future help me .
Equal opportunities in the civil service
The next item is the report ( A4-0283 / 96 ) by Mrs Larive , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , on the implementation of equal opportunities for men and women in the civil service .
Mr President , now that women are increasingly well educated and present on the labour market it is high time that they also started occupying positions where the top decisions are being taken .
In practice , however , many women are still hitting their head against the so-called glass ceiling .
A large proportion , sometimes more than 50 % , of the civil service is female .
The average throughout the European Union is around 44 % .
But women are seriously under-represented among the top decision-makers , indeed they sometimes even excel by their total absence .
And that applies to both national and European civil service .
Women make up more than half of the population and they should be equally involved in deciding the shape of our society .
Equal representation is essential for democracy , for reflecting society in the civil service and for ensuring that so-called mainstreaming is achieved , in other words implementing a policy where equal opportunities are integrated into a general policy rather than having to resort to all kinds of contortions to produce the statutory female figure .
That is why the Committee on Women 's Rights calls on the Member States to take a certain number of measures , or to intensify them if they already exist , such as annual plans and target figures for equal opportunities .
We must monitor these plans .
We must evaluate them and do so with the aid of measurable indicators in the hands of specially appointed staff , preferably women .
We also call for penalties against ministries and public bodies which fail to keep their side of the bargain .
We want the Commission to propose community legislation obliging the Member States to make equal treatment in the civil service the law if it is not already the case .
Such legislation must include the following matters . Programmes for career advancement for women and agencies to monitor policy are very important ; job descriptions should be re-assessed and the principle of seniority in promotion should be replaced by the principle of merit .
Equality of composition of selection , promotion and recruitment boards is of the essence .
The European institutions themselves , and the European Parliament in the forefront , must set a good example .
The measures I have just adumbrated should be applied in all European institutions .
In this House , this Parliament , we shall follow closely the agreed system of preference for women if they are under-represented in a particular grade or sector - of that you may be sure .
We also desperately need a study into all aspects of equal treatment for women in Europe . For how could it happen that in an open competition for Austrian A 8 officials 48 % of the candidates were women but not one single woman made it to the reserve list ?
We want the national and European civil services to apply the target figures vigorously .
We want to see that expressed in a quota with a minimum percentage for both sexes , including men , if the target figures are not met by the year 2000 .
That brings me to the Kalanke ruling of October 1995 . We are unhappy with it .
This ruling is grist to the mill of people who question the legality of certain positive actions .
But we shall not be put out by it . And this I say for the attention of our male colleagues : positive action is not discrimination against one sex but a measure to end existing discrimination .
This is specifically an action to combat existing discrimination against women as a group as long as they are under-represented in certain sectors and grades .
They are , I hope , temporary measures .
Our Committee on Women 's Rights consider it urgent that the 1976 directive which was used in the Kalanke ruling for the negative opinion be applied in such a way that positive action is specifically allowed .
Furthermore the Member States , when they reform the treaties in the Intergovernmental Conference , must approve the new legal base for equal treatment and equal rights , thereby creating a legal base for positive action .
Ladies and gentlemen , experience has shown , particularly in the new Member States , that positive action and equal opportunities plans act as a catalyst in the civil service .
They set off a chain reaction in the specific sector and as a result in the rest of society .
They set an example .
We do not view child care facilities , flexible working hours and parental leave as a positive action for women , because men and women equally benefit from these measures .
In conclusion I wish to mention the principle of subsidiarity , which is trotted out , rightly and wrongly , to justify whatever is expedient , but I really believe that it is an important principle here with positive action .
I think that Member States should have and continue to have the freedom to give their own interpretation of positive action .
It is an expression of national culture and national identity .
I welcome the large consensus in this House on our report .
There is only one amendment which has been tabled which I would totally endorse .
Mr President , do not allow the Commission to hide behind one ruling of the Court of Justice , namely the Kalanke ruling , but let it have a free rein , let it take the initiative and together with us call on the Member States to ensure that women occupy top positions among the decision makers to shape society of the twenty-first century .
Mr President , first I want to thank Mrs Larive for her excellent report that was presented here today .
I believe that , as she said , there was a broad consensus on her report in this House and that we all endorse her report as it stands , and with the amendment .
I would , however , like to raise two points .
First I want to say that quite obviously the situation remains as it always was , namely that everything drafted by the Committee on Women 's Rights is taken on the last day , more or less at the last hour , or in the evening during the night sitting when there is hardly anyone left in the House .
I think that shows how women 's questions are treated , how we women , who actually make up half of society , are treated here in our House too .
I hope that in future women 's questions will have the same chance of being entered on the agenda at a suitable time .
Nevertheless , I would like to make a few comments . I consider it very important that Mrs Larive also listed our demands on the actual positive promotion of women , especially in the public sector .
I myself used to work in the public sector and I know where women have the best chance of actually obtaining jobs there , namely in the lowest-paid areas , i.e. in areas where they are basically regarded as supplementing the man 's income .
We must do everything in our power to change this .
That is why I think it is so important for quotas to be introduced for the most senior posts , positive quotas , that can be used as a kind of crutch until women are treated equally .
In particular , I believe that far more attention should be paid to ensuring that the qualifications women acquire at home if they stop working for a long period in order to devote themselves to their family should also be taken into account in appointing them to senior positions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . First of all I should like to congratulate Jessica Larive on her outstanding report .
It is not only an excellent report but it is also a pleasure to read .
It contains well thought out arguments and is compulsory reading for anyone who has yet to be convinced that positive actions for women are needed .
Our group fully endorses the proposals in the Larive report .
Positive action plans are needed to provide the proper basis for analyses , for assessment , for the benefit of work organisations , child care and regulations on leave , and especially for the necessary criteria for appointments and promotions .
We now know that seniority does not serve women , that written tests often put them at a disadvantage and I am convinced that it is more to do with the way the tests are compiled rather than the fact that it is women sitting them .
Selection tests for the police , for example , which expect women to run a hundred metres in ten seconds - I think that can only be done if Marylin Otty were to apply to the police force .
We are in favour of strict objectives in all departments and at all levels , including quotas and rules on priority .
I would repeat that my group urgently calls on the Commission to present a proposal as a result of the disgraceful Kalanke ruling whereby positive actions are presented as a positive way to promote equal opportunities for women .
We shall only retain some degree of credibility , ladies and gentlemen , if the European institutions themselves set a good example .
I would like to take this opportunity here of congratulating Parliament and the Commission on the positive action plans in place here , with target figures at all levels , including the senior grades , but it is clear that in percentage terms , 16 % and 18 % at the top level , we are still a long way from equal opportunities .
I am also pleased to be able to announce that the Socialist Group has launched an offensive and even although we already have 20 % women in A grade posts we continue to work towards equality .
Our target , I think , should be 50 % .
I would like to warn colleagues about an argument that has been becoming more widespread in recent times , as I think Mrs Larive will confirm ; namely that equal opportunities for men and women in the civil service should be accompanied by specific measures for men in executive positions .
I would welcome more male telephonists , more male messengers and more male secretaries , but I think that is the wrong way of looking at things .
Positive action plans are aimed at eliminating discrimination against women in society and in the world of work .
So we need a quota and positive action plans for women , and not at least for the time being for men .
That is the reasoning behind Amendment No 10 from the Socialist Group to paragraph 3 .
I hope that everyone in this House can support this amendment .
Mr President , 44 % of working women , and in some Member States even more than half , are employed in the civil service , but when it comes to senior posts and fairly responsible jobs they remain under-represented , in spite of having excellent vocational qualifications and exam results .
When undertakings , firms and authorities decide to cut costs and jobs , it is usually women who are asked first to resign their job .
The argument put forward is that the family is the only place where they can really fulfil themselves .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party do not question the importance of the family .
It is central to our concept of social policy .
As ever , women bear the main responsibility for the family .
They are sensitive psychologists , they cope with stresses and strains , are wonderful organizers , financial specialists , in short , courageous managers of day to day life and , on top of it , bundles of energy .
To restrict these abilities to home life conflicts with the principle of the freedom of choice of the individual and partnership between man and woman , the freedom to choose at their own discretion whether to opt for career or family .
Women have had considerable successes in , for instance , communications , medicine and the creative professions , but they are ignored by the machos and by the last supporters of outdated role allocation .
These people try to explain why there are so few women in management by saying that women themselves did not want to be promoted and that this can be seen from the small number of women applying for management seminars and training .
It would be more true to say that women often underestimate their abilities and do not push themselves forward .
Measures must therefore be taken to give them a more positive sense of themselves .
Steps must be taken to make them more self-confident while at the same time making men more aware of the need for equal opportunities .
Jessica Larive from our Committee on Women 's Rights is to be congratulated !
Her report is very well researched and provides an exact analysis of the question .
It also points to the effects of the Kalanke ruling , which is often seen as a ruling against the promotion of equal opportunities .
Anyone who reads the ruling carefully will note that the European Court of Justice only ruled on an individual case in which , in its view , the measures taken went too far ; but it expressly accepts positive measures to abolish and reduce real inequalities .
In the political field , such positive measures - i.e. , practical action to combat unequal treatment - include quotas or , as in my party , the setting of quotas .
Every third job in the party executive and parliament must be reserved to women in cases where women are not adequately represented .
I know that many self-confident women do not accept these measures .
They are not alibi-women - thank God - and want to be accepted and selected on the basis of their ability .
But quotas do encourage young working women in particular to enter the political arena .
The paucity of women in the civil service needs to be compensated by plans to assist them .
These plans must be implemented , evaluated at regular intervals and up-dated so that progress reports can be drawn up .
Prejudices can only be changed on the basis of facts .
Factual information forms the basis for further training programmes , measures to improve promotion prospects and advertisements for jobs for which women have to be given precedence if they are working in under-represented areas .
The civil service could thus become a model for improving equality of opportunity in the private sector too .
Sanctions must be imposed if any authority at European , national , regional or local level does not draw up or implement equal treatment plans .
The civil service needs legislation on equal treatment , women 's representatives and equal representation on bodies responsible for recruitment and promotion .
We need to create a Community structure to ensure these laws are transposed at Member State level .
Commissioner , it is here that the Commission must submit a proposal for a legislative act .
My last point relates to the Intergovernmental Conference .
The promotion of equal opportunities must be included as a subject of the Maastricht II discussions .
For instance , widening the scope of Article 119 could safeguard the equal rights of women and men .
The EPP endorses Mrs Larive 's persuasive report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to congratulate Mrs Larive on her excellent report and express my support for it .
I think that paragraphs 17 and 18 of the report are particularly important in our attempt to improve women 's lot .
Community legislation on the civil service which regulates career advancement for women is no luxury but is an absolute necessity .
From my own experience of many years in a leading position in an organisation in my own country I know that women do not reach the senior positions precisely because they have not been appointed to the positions immediately below , from where they would be expected to move up .
Then you find yourself in the process that women are deemed unsuitable for the top positions because they have not had the necessary experience .
And it is only with exceptionally good personnel management , career planning and staff assessment that we shall be able to catch up , for quotas alone will not remedy the situation .
Paragraph 18 is particularly important when it comes to the burden of proof on equal pay and equal treatment for men and women .
My country , for example , has not yet signed the United nations treaty on equal treatment in social security .
I would quote a poignant example from the treatment of a pension fund linked to the public service in my country , it is in fact the government pension fund , which deems it appropriate to give a women who herself has contributed towards her pension and is involved in a divorce procedure less than half of her pension rights and to give the man more than half .
The reason given is that women live longer and that is justification for taking another average when paying out her pension .
I think that kind of practice is outrageous .
There should be regulations which prohibit this kind of practice .
I am the rapporteur for demography in the Committee on Social Affairs and one of the trends we detect in the demographic development in Europe is that the birth rate is only 1.4 children per woman of child-bearing age in Europe .
Now I am not going to advocate an increase in the birth rate here but would point out that we are facing an enormous ageing of the population and more and more women are choosing not to have children , simply because the circumstances are not right .
If we do not take this opportunity of changing the circumstances so that responsibility for children is taken by both men and women with the civil service showing the way here , then I think that the outlook is indeed bleak for Europe .
That is why I fully support the Larive report .
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate Mrs Larive on her work in producing this report .
The civil service , particularly the civil services of the Member States , must act as an example as regards applying Community Directives on equality .
Bearing in mind the existence of recommendations , Community action programmes on equality , the promotion of positive action for women , the Convention on the removal of discriminatory terms and resolutions both by Parliament and by the United Nations , it is paradoxical that the real situation for women regarding employment , and in this particular case , even more unacceptably , employment in the public service , is still unequal .
We consider this resolution to be of the greatest importance because we think that , despite the efforts made to establish equal working patterns , the percentage of women civil servants working at C grade is still much higher than for other grades , particularly for grade A. Moreover , women are not sufficiently represented in technical departments .
The need to formulate and improve current legislation must go hand in hand with the will to apply it .
In many cases , the recommendations or measures to be applied are not binding and a wide margin of manoeuvre is left , so that any progress achieved is minimal or simply nominal .
The concept of mainstreaming or the need to take equality into account in every area runs the risk of remaining a mere word if there is not attempt to put it into practice at every level .
In direct opposition to this concept are the budget cutbacks which affect in particular women in the civil service .
While fairly effective measures are being applied to deal with direct discrimination against women , it is in relation to indirect discrimination that there is most resistance to change and which requires rigorous application of positive action .
Positive action is being challenged on the basis of the same argument of discrimination , thus undermining any possibility of real change .
Some of the measures regarded as positive , such as parental leave and flexible working hours , would benefit men as much as women , for which reason they should be taken out of the chapter on actions in favour of women , leaving room for other measures which would be of direct benefit to women alone .
One of the problems facing women in the public sector is segregation .
In some departments there are virtually no women , while in others there are very high numbers .
In those sections where few women are employed , it is very difficult to implement equality plans , even when this is compulsory in a Member State .
On the other hand , we find that the sectors where there are large numbers of women are often under-valued .
A first step towards a balance in this situation would be to adopt measures to upgrade these sectors to place them on the same level as the others .
These irregularities cannot be smoothed out without conducting specific studies to find out the reasons why equality is not being implemented in the various Member States .
The new Treaty must introduce a legal basis to legitimise positive actions aimed at achieving equality , as well as a clear , official definition of what is meant by positive action .
The Member States should adopt legislation to put the departments within the public service on the same level , including promotion schemes , the appointment of delegates responsible for equal opportunities and encouragement for the setting up of selection , promotion and recruitment bodies consisting equally of both sexes , while ensuring that the principle of subsidiarity is observed and that these measures are in keeping with the general framework laid down in Community law .
To conclude , Mr President , in my capacity as a man , I would like to underline a premise without which no current or planned measure can ensure equality : from the legal point of view we cannot improve the situation of women at work and in society unless we have already made it possible to reconcile family and professional life and to redistribute responsibilities in a spirit of solidarity .
Mr President , I shall not reiterate what everyone has already said here , but I do wish to record that Mrs Larive 's report is an excellent one which indicates quite specifically what has to be done in order to improve the position of women in the civil service .
I shall stick to Europe because we have such a fantastic example here - fantastic in the worst sense .
I trust the Commission is listening carefully because I am going to put several urgent questions to him .
What we are facing is continuous preferential treatment for men .
Many people are unaware of it , certainly many men , but we shall only manage to eliminate this preferential treatment for men if we introduce and act upon preferential treatment for women .
And that means , however uncomfortable this may be , that if you want to treat women on the same footing , including in the civil service , then men will have to make room for them , for otherwise nothing will change .
I have the following problem with the internal contradictions within the European Commission .
We had the Kalanke ruling , which we here found outrageous , but quite honestly what I find worse is that the Commission 's reaction to that ruling was to change quickly a directive , yes to amend a directive , but to do so in the totally wrong direction , while the Court said that the text of the directive excluded any other ruling .
So the Commission should improve the text of the directive in another way .
So we have on the one hand the Commission producing a proposal to worsen a directive while at the same time we have Commissioner Liikanen , i.e. the same Commission , trying to implement a positive action policy in the European institutions .
I should like Commissioner Kinnock , whom I welcome here and hope he can respond , to tell me exactly what is going on , how you can try to improve your policy on the one hand while at the same time tightening up your policy for the rest of Europe , by worsening the position of women , for that it what it boils down to .
This internal contradiction must be halted .
I hope that with this report we shall not only continue to help women in the civil service but also other women .
But I repeat , that will not happen without the men making space for women .
Mr President , this resolution is almost perfect .
It is a complete and precise guide , based on clear and well-reasoned grounds , intended for the Member States and the Community institutions .
When it has been passed , it will represent the will of the men and women we represent and therefore the Commissioner cannot ignore it .
It is not possible to illustrate this important resolution in two minutes , but it is possible to stress the salient points .
First of all , it deals with a growing problem , given the threat from the spending cuts all the countries are implementing in order to qualify for monetary union , which involves loss of their jobs for the women who make up the majority of those employed in this sector .
Secondly , it requests the governments engaged in the Intergovernmental Conference to include an appropriate article in the new treaty ratifying equal opportunities for men and women and making explicit the legitimacy of allocating resources to effective positive measures , not just promotional ones , to improve gender balance at all levels .
Thirdly , it reaffirms the principle of subsidiarity as regards experiments in positive action , to counter erroneous or convenient interpretations of the Kalanke ruling .
Finally , but there is much more to be said , it invites the Community institutions and the Member States to establish appropriate organizations to carry out continuous assessment of changes in the position , naturally in the hope of improvement .
Commissioner Kinnock , we are very glad you are here and we count on your sensitivity in the areas where the Commission is concerned .
Mr President , I wish to begin by responding to the point made by Mrs Marinucci and declare an interest .
I respond not only as a Commissioner but as the father of a daughter and , for the last three weeks , the grandfather of a granddaughter and , consequently , I must say that I bring to bear on these issues a degree of passion which may be unbecoming in the formal status that I occupy as a European Commissioner .
I shall , however , faithfully represent the view of the Commission .
I am very grateful to the Committee on Women 's Rights , and especially the rapporteur , Mrs Jessica Larive , for the important work that they have undertaken on the preparation of this report .
Naturally I am pleased by the convergence of views between Parliament and the Commission on the promotion of positive action for women and on the way in which the public sector can have a catalytic effect on awareness and serve as a model for the development of positive actions in the private sector .
That is clearly important , especially when women have often relied upon the European Community to stimulate progress on equal opportunities .
As the House will know , and several speakers have already said , the Kalanke judgment of the Court of Justice in October 1995 generated controversy , to say the least , throughout Europe about the legitimacy of quotas and of other forms of positive action that are aimed at increasing the number of women in particular sectors or levels of employment .
The House will recall that the Commission quickly responded with its communication on the interpretation of the judgment and with a proposed amendment to the equal treatment directive .
If the honourable lady will have the slightest patience , I will explain to her why that position had to be taken .
It is because the Commission , above all , has the function of being the guardian of the Treaty .
It would be entirely inappropriate , therefore , for the Commission , whatever its motivation and whatever degree of passion it brings to bear on these issues , to act in a way that was inconsistent with the laws set down by the Treaty .
And since the Commission patently must respect the law , the text that we produced clearly reflected our view that positive action measures - short of rigid quotas - are permitted by Community law , and Member States and employers are therefore free to use such measures .
The Commission welcomes the many suggestions for improvement that have been put forward in the report from this House .
They are particularly useful because it is increasingly evident that the anti-discrimination laws , adopted some 20 years ago , are not enough to achieve equality for women in employment .
The report before the House highlights issues that the Commission has already taken up in the framework of the Fourth Action Programme on equal opportunities .
Naturally , I would like to emphasize that the Commission has already initiated the main-streaming of equality between women and men in all appropriate Community policies and actions .
The first visible manifestation of this new approach was this year 's communication , which is currently being discussed , as the House will know , by its own appropriate committee .
As far as the Commission 's policy for its own personnel is concerned , the House will know that since 1988 the Commission has adopted two positive action programmes .
The current Commission with its group of Commissioners on equal opportunities and women 's rights looks upon equal opportunities as a priority both inside and outside the Commission .
Ambitious female recruitment and nomination targets for 1995 and 1996 go further than those established within the present positive action programme and also take account of enlargement priorities .
The measures taken are clearly consistent with the request made by the author of the report and the discussion .
They have resulted in considerable improvements , particularly at the higher levels of responsibility in the Commission .
When the new Commission took office in January 1995 there were just five women directors .
Now there are 15 women A2s , an increase of 200 % in less than two years .
The main effort , however , was made at the lower levels of the A category as part of the medium and long-term strategy to redress the very significant imbalance between men and women A grades .
Indeed , in these last two years , the Commission has recruited 51 % of women from the new Member States and approximately 30 % from the Twelve .
The administration is closely monitoring this operation to ensure further steady progress .
In addition to setting targets , the Commission has also examined selection procedures .
In order to eliminate any possible indirect discrimination against women it has organized general administration competitions at the lower level .
It has improved its information strategies for external competitions in order to make career descriptions more women-friendly and it has ensured as far as possible the presence of women in selection panels .
As a result of this package of measures women now represent 32 % of the A8 level .
Last , but not least , it is worth mentioning that the Commission practices derogations to the age limits for written entrance competitions of up to five years for applicants who have taken time out to bring up their children .
Within the context of interinstitutional cooperation , it may be possible in the future to envisage further ad hoc derogations of this kind .
We know that huge changes are taking place in society and that women rightly want to be much more active in the labour market at all levels .
The achievement of that objective is regrettably still distant and it is abundantly clear that there is a continuing and huge need to raise awareness and to change attitudes about what is possible and what is desirable - indeed , about what is right in terms of civil liberties .
I thank Parliament once again for giving sustained support to the cause of positive action .
I am sure we will continue to cooperate with the same priorities in mind and with the same commitment .
The issue of equal opportunities between women and men needs to be given a strong impetus for many reasons , not least the need to achieve and implement more active policies in favour of the integration of women into the labour market at every level in their own right and on the basis of completely just assessment of merit and no other consideration .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you very much indeed for the help you are giving me in the House , particularly my friend Mr Bertens .
But he can understand that if my eyes are wandering to one side , it is to the left .
Therefore Mrs van Dijk has the floor .
Mr President , I should just like to put one more question in view of the reply given by the Commissioner . Does the Commissioner think that the report in its present form , and it is likely to be adopted unanimously in this form , is in line with the proposal for a directive as a result of the Kalanke ruling , and does the Commissioner think this report is in line with the Court 's ruling discussed here today ?
I am glad that Mrs Van Dijk has raised the question and indeed raised it in this form .
I have read the report with great interest .
I particularly read pages 22 and 23 which put the case for a strong legislative approach .
Since the honourable lady asked what my view was , I can actually say that I have great sympathy with the case put .
The problem is - and I repeat what I said earlier - that it does not matter how the Commission feels individually or , as it happens , collectively about the rights and wrongs of the issue .
We have an absolute pre-requirement to fulfil the law and to obey the law .
Consequently I just take this further opportunity to make it clear that a change of the kind that is required in the report , regardless of the merit of the arguments put , can only be made by the alteration of primary law and not by the introduction of a new regulation .
I can , as an individual , regret that fact .
I nevertheless , as a realist , acknowledge that it is a fact .
Mr President , in view of the Commissioner 's reply to Mrs Van Dijk I should like to ask him if the Commission considers it its job , every time that the Court of Justice hands down a ruling on the basis of specific European legislation , to adapt such legislation to the Court 's ruling ?
Would it not also be possible , Commissioner , for the Commission to adapt its legislation in another way , so that the next time such a ruling would become impossible ?
The honourable lady who has put a huge amount of work not only into this report but into the cause generally will fully appreciate that , in the wake of the court judgment , the position of women under European law was extremely exposed .
In those circumstances it certainly was necessary to come forward with proposals that whilst not conforming to what she would want or indeed , maybe what I would want , nevertheless made the best of what could be done in the legal circumstances at the time .
It is on that basis that the Commission had to make a response to the Court of Justice 's judgment , apart from anything else to ensure that there was not further deterioration in the general position so far as positive action is concerned .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We can still hear opinions because , after the vote , we will have the explanations of vote .
Therefore , although the debate is closed , comments may still be made .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Ladies and gentlemen , I would ask you for a few moments ' attention to listen to the explanations of vote . Allow me first of all - I am sure that in this I am echoing the sentiments of the House - to congratulate Mrs Larive on her excellent report and on the unanimous approval it received .
Furthermore , Mrs Larive , although I know that you are not listening to me at the moment , I would like to say that I feel very fortunate in having had the opportunity of chairing this sitting and of witnessing directly the importance and high quality of all the debates .
Mr President , I want to thank Mrs Larive for her excellent report , with its unswerving support for the principle of subsidiarity , one of the mainstays of our social policy .
I welcome this very objective report on the equal treatment of women and am glad that so many men were here in the House today , unlike the case of many other debates on women .
I also regret the fact that many men are often not interested in this important question .
I would say , however , that the principle of subsidiarity was once again rather put in question at some other points ; but by and large the report can certainly be endorsed and I want to thank Mrs Larive warmly for also mentioning the role of mothers in this context .
Mention was made of the public services , and one of the most important public services men and women can render is public service in the family .
That is why I welcome the fact that mothers are also mentioned here and I propose a report on mothers in the European Union .
Mr President , I made it clear to Mrs Larive a moment ago how very much we support her report , her intentions and the excellent debate we held in the Committee on Women 's Rights .
I want to take this opportunity , given that we have discussed the question of overcoming divisions between people , to congratulate one of the Members of this House very warmly : the German Social Democrat Mr Schulz .
Tomorrow his mother will be receiving a badge in honour of 50 years ' membership of a party , my party , the CDU .
That shows that what divides need not divide for ever .
Thank you , Mr Mann .
It is very kind of you to think of my dear mother who will indeed be honoured tomorrow for her fifty-year membership of the CDU , which , let me say , is proof that even great women can sometimes make mistakes !
Thank you , Mr Schulz .
We wish to congratulate your mother on two counts : for the award and also for being the mother of such a distinguished Member .
Mr President , I voted of course in favour of Mrs Larive 's report , and enthusiastically so .
But I should still like to take this opportunity of clarifying that the European Court in its Kalanke ruling did not say at all that the relevant regulation in Bremen was in breach of Article 119 or was in breach of the Treaty , but only that it was in breach of the text of part of the second directive ; the relevant text is quite clearly very badly worded because it talks about equal opportunities and absolutely nothing prevents the Commission from changing the text of that directive - and very many lawyers agree with me on that .
Such action is not in breach of the Treaty .
In the meantime I want the Commission to end their line of argument because , I am sorry , but their arguments are just not right .
I have voted for the report but feel that certain aspects which are important from the point of view of greater equality are missing .
The biggest issue facing Europe today is unemployment .
This is also a major equality issue because unemployment is generally higher for women than for men .
The labour market for women must be broadened and made more flexible .
It is appropriate that there should be guidelines on parental leave and fair rules for part-time working are called for at European level .
There must be opportunities for both men and women to combine work and parenthood .
Today 's minimum level of parental leave should be extended and apply to both parents .
Access to good child care and care for the elderly is of decisive importance for equality .
The EU should work to increase access to such care services in the Member States .
The EU 's training programmes and structural aid should be geared more to women who want to start their own businesses .
The Treaty on European Union refers to the principle of equal pay for equal work but compliance is poor and it should be applied in all Member States .
Issues of equality are largely national issues but the EU can contribute with information work and by influencing public attitudes .
Administrations can and should apply their own equality rules within their own organisations .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the report on equality between men and women .
The report contains significant challenges for the Commission , including that of establishing legal provisions within the EU , based on the Kalanke judgment which had to do with the concept of positive discrimination .
After all women represent a very high proportion of those employed in public administrations , and it is a good thing if the results of positive discrimination can be seen here , and if the Commission seeks to develop this area further .
However we would also like to see the private commercial world demonstrating greater joint responsibility with regard to the employment of women .
This simply involves exerting more pressure so that the commercial world chooses women for positions .
Otherwise we would end up with a situation where all women were employed in public institutions , and all men of 10 years standing were private employees .
Good working conditions , possibilities for advancement , even if a man has a family and children and is not therefore prepared to sacrifice his private life for his work , must not only be a public issue - it must quite simply be a requirement of all forms of employment , so that these two sides can come together .
It must also be acceptable for women to be in the employment market .
Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your cooperation . We have discussed all the items on the agenda .
Adjournment of the session
I declare adjourned the session of the European Parliament .
( The sitting was closed at 11.30 am )
Resumption of the Session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 15 November 1996 .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , would you consider designating two of the lifts downstairs for Members of Parliament .
The reason this House is so empty just now is because there are over 200 Members trying to get up in the lifts .
Because visitors cannot get up they are using the lifts to go down to -2 and then back up again .
If we had two lifts designated for Members there would be many more Members in the Chamber now .
I agree with you , Mr Corrie , but unfortunately that has nothing to do with the approval of the minutes .
Mr President , my point is not related to the point just raised by Mr Corrie .
It refers to an event which happened somewhat earlier .
Today the chairman of the Committee on Petitions received a petition from some 4 million European citizens - one of the largest petitions we have received - supporting Parliament 's call for a ban on animal testing for the purpose of cosmetics .
Their desire to present this petition was notified to Parliament weeks in advance .
The event was organized in conjunction with Parliament 's services and yet on their arrival today they encountered long delays in entering and their technicians encountered an attitude little short of hostile from some of Parliament 's staff .
This Parliament should be open and accessible to the people of Europe and this kind of event should be encouraged .
Would you order an investigation into the events surrounding today and find out why it was so difficult for the animal-testing protesters to gain access to this building .
I shall look into the matter , Mr Watson .
Mr President , thank you for agreeing to look into that .
I also wanted to say that a few minutes ago Parliament received a petition signed by the largest number of people ever .
Over 4 million European Union citizens from all fifteen European Union Member States signed this petition which supports the European Parliament in calling for a ban on animal testing for cosmetics .
I know you will want to note that and the Committee on Petitions will be looking very seriously at this petition .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Mr President , when I came into the building I was handed a document ' Parking survey D3 ' which bore an address in Brussels and which requested my cooperation in the survey .
I wanted to ask you , Mr President , if this survey is being carried out with the Bureau 's permission ?
Are we expected to make a useful contribution or are we not expected to make a useful contribution ?
That is what I would like to know .
Mr Chanterie , I can 't just answer that off the cuff - please let me have a copy of the survey and we 'll look into it .
I do need to see what it 's all about .
Urgent political matters
Mr President , over the last couple of weeks the world has witnessed dramatic developments in the Great Lakes region which have created new and tremendous humanitarian political challenges : the massive return of refugees from Eastern Zaire to Rwanda within a few days but also the dispersion of hundreds of thousands of refugees and displaced people in Eastern Zaire creating a dangerous new potential for destabilization .
The defeat of the Zairean army was a severe blow for Kinshasa .
The government and the transitional parliament are deeply divided over the question of how to deal with the crisis in Eastern Zaire while the rebels and their allies are gaining ground very rapidly .
The fighting in Kivu has severe repercussions on Burundi where fighting and human rights violations have intensified in various parts of the country and Tanzania which is now hosting the largest refugee population in the Great Lakes region .
There is also an urgent need for a fundamental reappraisal of the political situation .
I proposed to the Development and General Affairs Council a plan of action for European Union assistance to the Great Lakes region which we hope will provide a comprehensive framework for all relevant humanitarian , political and development issues . These include the following : emergency and relief efforts , the reintegration of refugees and displaced people , social and economic rehabilitation , reconstruction of independent and equitable justice systems , rebuilding or reinforcement of administrative structures and constitutional institutions and regional peacebuilding efforts .
A taskforce of DG VIII is working out the details of this plan after an assessment mission to the region in coordination with ECHO and the special envoy , and taking into account regional and international peace-building efforts as well as the activities of other donors .
This plan will , of course , be adapted according to new developments in the region but the basic assumptions will , however , remain relevant .
We have to acknowledge that we are facing an intricate set of problems with military , political and socio-economic aspects .
These aspects are present in some form or other in all the countries concerned but not with equal intensity and we will have to focus the priorities in each country .
In Rwanda the priority is the successful reintegration of the returnees into Rwandan society .
Beyond the immediate humanitarian urgency this is also crucial for the political future of the country and for social peace between the ethnic communities .
Human rights and the rapid establishment of a functioning and equitable justice system will be essential in this respect .
In Zaire there is an urgent need in addition to the delivery of humanitarian aid to populations in distress to defuse the tension in and around Kivu in order to avoid protracted civil war .
It is still unclear what the role of a multinational force could be in this respect since the military situation has become much more complicated .
Nonetheless it is essential that all political forces engage rapidly in peace negotiations .
In Burundi ways and means have to be found to avert a further intensification of fighting and to revitalize the political dialogue .
The common position of the countries of the region in the next meeting of the Arusha process scheduled for early December in Congo will be crucial to oblige the Burundian political forces to engage in longawaited negotiations .
The Arusha process has been the most important forum addressing the conflicts in the region and this process could be turned into permanent conference mechanisms for central and eastern Africa .
This could clear the way for the conference on peace , security and development in the Great Lakes region .
This conference should be convened as soon as the main obstacles are overcome , that is to say when all countries agree to a multiple process of conflict management and subscribe to a number of principles which are essential to achieve lasting peace in the Great Lakes regions .
These are seven principles : respect for the frontiers and the territorial integrity of all countries involved ; respect for international humanitarian law with regard to refugees and displaced people ; effective protection of minorities and their civic rights ; respect for human rights and the rule of law and the re-establishment of functioning and equitable justice systems ; condemnation and effective legal prosecution of ethnic discrimination , ethnicist propaganda and all kinds of activities inspired by ethnic hatred ; respect for democratic principles and constitutional order ; establishment of a regional framework for economic cooperation in global coordination of rehabilitation .
In my opinion the conference should not only produce a multilateral peace agreement but it should also be a forum for discussing the required international assistance to consolidate such an agreement and to implement its decisions .
The conference would thus become the cornerstone of a peace strategy linking the regional efforts and commitments of the international community .
You might ask why I have not referred to the situation of refugees .
Let me be quite clear , humanitarian assistance in Eastern Zaire will not be possible unless military security is given to the NGOs and humanitarian agencies in the field .
Unfortunately this has not yet been solved at UN security level , nor has it been solved at Council level in the European Union .
I would like to put the following question to the Commissioner .
If a decision on sending an intervention force is not made within the next few days then it will be too late .
We are now being told that there is no agreement on that in the Council .
I want to know if anything can be done so that an initiative is taken at least at Council level in conjunction with the OAU which has made it clear it wants to do something by way of an intervention force .
My second specific question is : when is the Commission going to do what it promised five years ago , namely compile an arms register .
The problem with arms supplies to both sides , both the Hutus and the Tutsis , is that it means that this war is solely being waged with arms and not with political arguments .
And my last question is what decisions have been taken by the Commission or the Council on sending a sufficient number of observers to Rwanda to ensure that reintegration does not lead to the silent extinction of returning refugees .
It is difficult to assess in full the current number of refugees in Eastern Zaire .
The reports from the World Food Programme indicated some weeks ago that it is in the range of 700 , 000 .
Later reports claimed it was much less , in the order of 250 , 000 .
Whatever the true number , it is a staggering amount .
We cannot ask our NGOs to go to places where the military say they will not be safe .
If it is unsafe for the military it cannot be safe for NGOs .
One thing is sure : the situation in Zaire is far from being secure and therefore it will be extremely difficult to ask NGOs to go .
Pressure should be made at Security Council level for this deployment to be carried out as soon as possible in some parts of Eastern Zaire .
The Commission is trying to address the plan in a way which will not give the idea that the situation is solved - far from it .
That is the reason why in early December we will present this broad plan regarding humanitarian , political and rehabilitation issues .
I hope everyone will then take up his responsibilities .
With regard to human rights , it is absolutely essential that observers go as soon as possible and increase the numbers over there .
We are in contact with both the UNHCR and the United Nations agencies for human rights in order to help them deploy significantly increased numbers of human rights observers both in Rwanda and in Burundi .
In Rwanda we hope to have approximately 300 shortly and in Burundi something of the order of 170 .
On top of that Member States are willing to send some observers .
The only thing the Council and the Commission asked is for people who are going to be adequately prepared so they can be of help rather than making things more difficult .
With regard to arms deliveries , there has been some movement on the UN side .
As far as I could ascertain , some private research that was done by , among others , CNN has quite definitely proven that there have been illegal arms deliveries to the former Rwandan army and others throughout the embargo .
I cannot go further than that at this stage but I will inform you when I have more information .
I thank the Commissioner for his statement . I would like to pursue this matter of the supply of arms to the Hutus .
The Hutus were defeated by the Tutsis and disarmed a year ago and now they seem to be rearmed .
As you know , Commissioner , there is information that these weapons are coming from European Union Member States and it seems immoral that this should be allowed to continue .
What are you going to do about it ?
Concerning the multinational force , it seems that Canada is perfectly willing to lead such a force but someone is blocking it .
Can you say who is blocking the multinational force which would be prepared to move into the region as a matter of urgency , as you suggested ?
Furthermore , what is the Commission doing about monitoring the returnees into Rwanda when they reach their villages ?
Finally , there are approximately 600 , 000 refugees missing in the region .
It is unbelievable that we cannot identify exactly where they are so that we can assist them .
The NGOs know where they are and there is no reason why we should not have the information .
As you know , unfortunately in international diplomacy it is very rare that someone puts things as straightforwardly as you would like .
No country is openly blocking it but there are some countries - and I would mention among others , France , Italy and Spain - which are pushing for decisive and urgent action on the military side , while others are more hesitant and want more clarification before committing themselves .
Regarding the monitoring of returnees , a team from DG VIII were assessing the situation in Rwanda last week so that immediate assistance can be provided , namely shelter and help in sorting out some problems caused by the influx .
The main problem now is not food or medicaments but it is basically shelter and trying to find some ways of earning a living in the months to come .
With regard to the 600 , 000 who are missing , it is very difficult to make an assessment .
The figures given range from 250 , 000 and 750 , 000 but whatever the true number , it is amazing .
I would add that there is another problem to which we have not paid so much attention .
I refer to the huge number of refugees in Tanzania now in the range of 700 , 000 .
I put it to you that things are not easy at the border between Burundi and Tanzania and unless the international community acts quickly we might witness there something of a repetition of what occurred at the Zairean / Rwandan border .
That is one of the reasons why the Commission is willing to put this plan forward to make everyone aware of the current dangers on top of the ones we are already acquainted with .
Mr President , hitherto we have been deploring the inability of the international organizations to get a neutral multinational force into the field .
Today , the arguments about the numbers of refugees still remaining in the area are more heated than ever .
So there is a more and more urgent need for action , because otherwise death will put an end to the problem .
Those European States that are members of the Security Council have proved incapable of instigating the debate and defining a European position capable of breaking the deadlock on the Security Council .
Don 't you think that Europe has a unique opportunity here to show that it does exist ?
I should also like to mention the problem of aid to the refugees and those repatriated to Rwanda .
As you know , Rwanda is still refusing to accept humanitarian aid or do anything to control the return of the refugees .
This attitude is unacceptable in the present situation .
Could the European Union not use its influence to persuade Rwanda to change its attitude ?
Finally , I should like to know what our diplomatic position is in Burundi . We know there has been a coup d 'état there , and apparently we are negotiating with Mr Buyaya .
What 's going on , Mr President ?
Regarding the multinational force , among other things we have proposed a contribution by the European Union through the Commission budget so that the Africans could have through the Trust Fund of the UN Security Council the possibility of participating in the multinational force .
Unfortunately , from the humanitarian point of view , this is led by the UN and therefore the European Union can apply pressure but cannot replace the United Nations in that role .
With regard to Rwanda , so far the Rwandan authorities have been cooperating very well with UN agencies and with the resettlement of refugees .
Despite minor incidents , the global picture is very encouraging .
In Burundi we are approaching the problem through the Arusha regional group , in other words , through the points that have been agreed upon by the states of the region .
Therefore , we have been careful not to legitimize a government which the countries in the region do not recognize as legitimate .
In that regard I should like also to stress that the delegation of the European Union will be reopening in Burundi very shortly . I hope this week .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his answer .
One of the questions was : what is standing in the way of the Council sending in a military force ?
The second question is : what measures is it taking , vis-à-vis the Rwandan Government , to support and assist the humanitarian organizations that are there , given that some of them are not being given the legal status they need in order to act ?
And the third question : you spoke about the conference on peace in the region .
This House has been calling for such a conference for some time and has given its approval in resolutions .
When do you think it will be possible for the conference to take place ?
The Council does not have the power to decide but it has the power to approve declarations and to put pressure on those who have to decide .
Unfortunately the conclusions of the Council were not as strong as many hoped for .
Therefore the matter is again before the UN in New York with no precise date for the deployment of the military force .
Besides what I have already said about Rwanda , I should like to emphasize that the Commission has made available all the funds it could at this stage - both through NGOs and UN agencies - in order to make things work down there as much as possible .
So far the Rwandan authorities have been very cooperative in many ways and I am encouraged by that .
I hope it will continue in the future .
As to the peace conference , it should be convened as soon as possible .
Not only do the problems of some countries in the region need this conference but the whole situation is so complex it is impossible to deal with it in a bilateral way .
Only a peace conference under the aegis of the United Nations could make a tentative start to improving the situation .
I would say bluntly that if we do not achieve some peace-building through this conference we might witness a regional war involving many countries in the region including others which so far have not been involved in this conflict .
Needless to say , an implosion in Zaire will have major consequences not only in the Great Lakes region but in many other countries which border on Zaire .
That is one of the reasons why we need to address the political situation urgently and the special envoy is doing magnificent job in the region .
He is one of the few interlocutors whom everybody will talk to .
It is not easy but we should try and I hope in early December I will be able to tell you what we propose .
Mr President , there are three questions I would like to put to the Commission on this subject .
First , the principle was supported that refugees should only return voluntarily .
Might some of this escalation possibly have been avoided if rather more emphasis had been placed on the return of the refugees ?
Secondly , the question of the observers .
Is it not a little late in the day to send observers after disaster has already struck ? Because if the non-governmental organizations have virtually no room for manoeuvre because of the unstable situation , is not that even more the case as far as any observers are concerned , however many of them there might be ?
My third question relates to the conference you mentioned . Your seven principles are certainly highly ambitious .
Why have such conferences not worked in the past ?
Questions relating to the protection of ethnic minorities and their legal position , respect for frontiers , these are precisely the things that are not in place , and of course they are to a large extent the reason for the present escalation .
Are you thinking just about a conference under the auspices of the United Nations , or is the OAU also to be involved ?
The only alternative to the voluntary return of refugees is to point a gun at them and say : ' Either you go or you will be killed , either by the gun or by withholding shelter , food and water ' . The only acceptable way is the voluntary return of refugees .
We had human rights observers there .
The problem is that security was so bad that the observers had to leave the area .
We cannot ask the observers - who are civilians and sometimes volunteers - to submit to a situation which is highly insecure and in which they may be killed .
Therefore we could not ask the observers to remain even if that is what we wanted .
At present observers could be deployed safely in Rwanda and in some parts of Burundi but in Eastern Zaire it is simply not possible .
The security situation does not allow it just as it does not allow NGOs to be there .
With regard to the conference , it takes two to tango .
The two conflicting sides have to agree to sit around the table .
Otherwise it has no meaning .
So far there has been a conference of the regional states but we want to go further and have everyone sit around the table .
The aegis of the United Nations has been claimed from the beginning but this does not mean that the Organization of African Unity or the European Union which , by the same token , is by far the largest provider of humanitarian and rehabilitation assistance in the region will not be present .
I hope we will and that we can make a contribution when it is convened .
I have two questions about Rwanda .
The first relates to the particular problems facing women returning to Rwanda .
70 % of the population of Rwanda currently are women .
Many of the returnees are women , many of whom are widows or single mothers stigmatized because of that .
Under Rwandan law they have no rights to property or inheritance .
What will the European Commission be doing to ensure women 's rights to property , shelter and proper protection when they return to Rwanda ?
Secondly , you will be aware , Commissioner , that one of the important things we need to ensure is that people in Rwanda have a sense that they are returning to a country that will deliver justice .
One aspect will be that we ensure proper trials for those guilty of genocide .
How will we be protecting , ensuring and supporting the Rwandan Government 's case for beginning those trials in January ?
It will be absolutely essential after the genocide laws have been passed that the trials begin in January .
What will you be doing to ensure that those two things occur ?
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
That brings us to the second part of the debate on urgent political subjects of major importance : the disruption of free movement of goods and persons in the road haulage sector .
I give the floor to Commissioner Kinnock .
I should like to express my gratitude to the Committee on Transport and Tourism and its chairman Mr Cornelissen for providing me with this opportunity to make a statement to the House about the damaging and continuing dispute in the road haulage sector in France .
The Commission naturally shares the widespread concern about events which are clearly having grave economic and social consequences both inside and outside the country .
Obviously such a dispute with something like 200 blockades throughout France causes hardship and distress both to those directly involved and to many of the innocent victims of the dispute .
Indeed , there have been reports of physical violence and that particularly is to be condemned .
The Commission naturally hopes that all involved - workers , employers and the French authorities will do everything in their power to achieve a speedy and lasting resolution of the dispute and to alleviate the hardship that is being suffered by those who are not direct participants .
As the House will know , both President Santer and myself , on behalf of the Commission , have called upon the French authorities to act urgently to remedy the situation and to ensure that the Treaty provisions relating to freedom of movement in the single market are fully respected .
As the House will also know , however , in practice the Commission has no effective legal right or ability to intervene in a national dispute unless a Member State is shown to be negligent in its duty to uphold the legal freedom of movement of goods and persons specified by the Treaty .
That is a plain reality .
It is certainly not an alibi for a passive attitude .
It is a fact of life and a fact of law .
It is worth noting that some who have been loudest in their demands that the Commission intervene to prevent or to end such disputes would be amongst the first people to express even louder outrage if power was ever given to the European Commission to supersede national authorities , national conduct and national decisions in such circumstances .
Of course none of that would excuse inactivity when so many Community citizens and businesses from all Member States are being affected by a dispute in one Member State .
I , my cabinet and services have consequently taken what action we can and taken it consistently .
Last Thursday evening I met the Secretary of State for Transport with responsibility for the road haulage sector in Paris .
She was obviously already very strongly focused on the issue .
On Friday I followed that meeting with a letter to her to express my concerns at the developments in France , urging her to continue to work towards solving the issue .
As the House would expect , the Commission is also maintaining close and continuing interest and contact with the French authorities on the course of the dispute .
The efforts of the French Government to secure a negotiated end to the dispute are being sustained with the appointment of a mediator and with a series of lengthy meetings between the parties involved .
The last one broke up in the early hours of this morning and the next one is due to meet in about quarter of an hour 's time in Paris .
I understand that some progress with retirement commissions for workers in the haulage sector has been achieved and that is to be welcomed although there are clearly vital and basic matters of substance that are not yet resolved .
The number of non-French trucks blocked last weekend was about 20 , 000 .
That had been reduced to 5 , 000 by Monday but , sadly , that number has risen again in the last 48 hours .
Despite this the French authorities have been able to secure the release of another 150 British , Spanish and Portuguese lorries .
The 200 blockades mean however that there has not been significant easing of the overall situation .
Most of the issues which give rise to the dispute are obviously a matter solely for the employers , the employees and the French authorities to resolve .
Some of the issues such as driving hours , rest periods and working time are issues on which there is relevant Community legislation or on which proposals have been made .
On driving and rest periods there are claims by drivers that some employers are not respecting the existing legislation .
Obviously I am not in a position to make a final judgment on that at this stage but naturally the Commission has a desire and the duty to try to ensure that all Community and national legislation is properly enforced and fully respected .
We have taken a number of actions to assist with this .
One is the proposal for a new tachograph which will make it easier to check driving hours accurately and to make falsification much more difficult .
I am hopeful that the Transport Ministers Council which meets early next month will make significant progress on this proposal in order to reach a common position under the Dutch presidency in the early part of next year .
There have been previous relevant actions .
In 1995 the Commission convened a meeting with national administrations to promote cooperation between Member States in improving interpretation and enforcement of driving hours ' legislation .
Obviously we report on the application of legislation .
On working time more directly and generally , the House will know that the transport sector is excluded from the existing working hours ' directive .
The Commission has constantly said that appropriate provisions should be established for the excluded sectors , whilst recognizing their specific characteristics .
On the basis of some recent progress in the joint transport committees between employers and employees , the Commission will be publishing a White Paper on the excluded sectors and we believe that progress may be possible with non-mobile workers in the transport sector .
As far as mobile workers such as truck drivers are concerned , as the House may know , the prospects of progress are much slower and much less evident .
In the general concern relating to the dispute , the issue of compensation has naturally been raised .
I have to advise the House that the Commission has no legal power to intervene on this specific issue since there is no general Community law which covers the right to compensation for individuals or companies which have been affected by strike action , nor is it likely that there ever will be such law at Community level .
However , Member States have set up compensation schemes in specific cases in response to concerns expressed at national and Community level .
I note therefore the reports that the French authorities have said that they will take steps to compensate foreign drivers and that local préfectures can provide compensation claim forms .
In conclusion , it will be evident to the House that in democratic societies the right to withhold labour is a basic civil liberty and while some Member States specifically recognize that in their laws and their constitutions , the protocol on social policy annexed to the Treaty excludes Community legal competence with regard to the right to strike .
Consequently there is no Community law or Community rules relating to strikes .
It will be evident to this House and to all other parliaments of the Union that the right to strike must of course be exercised with proper respect for the law and that includes the obligation to maintain the free movement of goods , services and people in the single market , in the European Community .
It is this aspect in particular which is the matter of focused attention by the Commission , although naturally we are among the many people right across the Union who hope that the reports that the dispute may be resolved by the coming weekend turn out to be correct .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , I absolutely agree with you that this is a totally private dispute and nothing to do with the public authority .
The ineptitude of the French Government has been confined to taking too long to choose a mediator , and also taking too long to do something about the economic conditions under which the haulage sector operates , conditions which drive people to disregard the safety rules .
What remains for us is to consider the problem of working conditions in that profession which , in France , is one of the last bastions of an extremely archaic , not to say feudal , attitude by employers .
All this is highly surprising .
The average working week for the road haulage profession in France is 62.5 hours .
Commissioner , my question is this : don 't you think there is scope for the European Union to try , by means of a directive , to harmonize safety conditions in road haulage throughout the Union ?
That is all I have to ask .
I am grateful to Mr Rocard .
As he will know , the Commission has constantly striven to try to ensure that there are equitable conditions right across the Community , particularly in respect of fair conditions of competition and of civilized conditions of work .
He will be familiar with the difficulties encountered in many areas of occupation and that certainly applies to the transport sector , including road transport .
The Commission cannot offer a view about the quality or otherwise of conditions in the French haulage sector .
However , I believe that if there was a reappraisal of the general requirements relating to fair competition and civilized working conditions it is conceivable that some of the issues said to lie at the root of this dispute could over time be eased to the benefit of all .
I welcome what the Commissioner has said but I should like him to remember especially those parts of the Union that are on the periphery such as Northern Ireland .
Some of the trucks from my country have been held up into the second week .
I welcome what he has said and the representations he has made .
But this is very urgent for those on the periphery of the Union .
I am grateful to the honourable Member .
I am sure he will understand that to the degree we can bring political influence to bear , we will certainly do it , not least because we understand the great social and personal distress being encountered by a large number of truck drivers and their families and the disadvantages caused to all parts of the European Community 's economy , notably the peripheral areas , as a consequence of a dispute of this kind .
With due respect to the Commissioner , there are a few aspects of what he has just been saying that I should like to contest .
First , on the tachograph , it was the Commission that originally proposed something which did not take account of the most modern technology , namely the computer .
Second , as a Parliament we have been requesting for years new proposals on driving and resting hours including working time proposals .
To date the Commission has not come up with new proposals .
Finally , it may well be that the Commission rightly takes on the freedom of movement but it is clear that this is causing extreme damage to drivers and road hauliers from all over the Community and that the control on the application of driving and resting hours is lagging far behind .
We have just received the figures for 1991 and 1992 .
We still do not have them for 1993 and 1994 and we know that some Member States do not even hand them in .
When the honourable Member uses the terms ' with due respect ' , generally speaking I take cover .
I see that my experience of his wit and wisdom is well-founded and I could have anticipated the kind of question which he rightly raises .
So far as the tachograph is concerned , because of his intimate and active acquaintance with this particular issue , he will know that what the Commission has been trying to do for a very considerable time is not to achieve perfection , which we would like , but to maximize the amount of progress that could be made in eradicating falsification and in upholding decent conditions .
We now have the prospect of getting the application of advanced electronic technology to the tachograph and I very warmly welcome that .
He will be aware of the fact that on previous occasions , it has not been easy even to get the kind of consensus necessary for even more modest changes which would have the outcome that both he and I very strongly desire .
Much the same applies to the question of working time .
He and I are at one in our desire to ensure that there are fair competitive conditions and that there are civilized working conditions .
The fault for not securing progress in that respect is certainly not that of the Commission .
As Mr Wijsenbeek knows , it is the legal duty and power of the Commission to propose .
It is the right of the democratic representatives of the Member States to dispose .
If on previous occasions they have chosen not to dispose in the direction of significant change in working time in the transport sectors , I can hardly be held responsible for that .
What I will do , however , together with representatives from Parliament and some Member States is to continue to strive for progressive change that would increase efficiency and competitiveness whilst sustaining decent conditions .
Some of us might be tempted to come in wearing swimming costumes in order to catch your eye in future .
While we accept that Commissioner Kinnock has acted urgently , he has given us two reasons why the Commission , as guardian of the Treaties , has two grounds on which it can take action against the French Government .
These are on negligence .
The first is negligence by the French Government in failing to implement the drivers ' hours regulations .
The second is negligence by the French Government for failing to uphold the fundamental Treaty provisions on free movement .
On the matter of compensation , fresh foods , perishable products and even live animals have been delayed for over eight days .
They might perish and compensation must be paid .
We have the right to petition the Commission on constituents ' behalf to take action for compensation .
Will he take these actions up on our behalf ?
I am grateful to the honourable lady .
I pay no attention whatsoever to the remarks she makes in respect of swimming costumes .
That might further complicate an already complex set of issues .
On the matter of compensation , I regret that I have nothing to add to the clear statement I made earlier both in terms of the general nature of Community law and in terms of the readiness of the French authorities to establish procedures to enable people who have been damaged as a consequence of this dispute to make appropriate claims through the offices of local préfectures .
They are at liberty to gain the appropriate forms which are currently available and to process their claims accordingly .
That is the current legal reality and there is nothing at this stage that I am capable of adding to that .
So far as the alleged failure of the French authorities to fulfil their responsibilities under Community law is concerned , on the driving hours regulations that will bear further consideration .
At this stage I must say that there would be difficulty in demonstrating satisfactorily that the weaknesses are a consequence of negligence in any legal sense by the French Government .
We are constantly willing to monitor and to examine these conditions .
As far as fundamental Treaty obligations of guaranteeing the freedom of movement of goods and people is concerned , the Commission is willing as on previous occasions to act using our powers under the Treaty in the event of negligence being apparent on the part of a Member State .
In the days of this dispute the readiness of the French authorities to appoint the mediator and to be active in meetings that have lasted up to 12 and 14 hours does not give satisfactory evidence of negligence or of the lack of will to try to maintain the freedom of movement .
Consequently , while we will continue to observe closely the whole set of events with a view , if necessary , to pursuing cases related to negligence , there is no evidence that would justify that course of action at this juncture .
Mr President , I firstly have to express my regret that the group of visitors I invited are not among our spectators today as their journey here has been held up on French roads .
Secondly , the Commissioner spoke very clearly regarding the lack of potential compensation for damages suffered already by lorries held up on French territory .
In the Spanish case , losses amount to something in the region of 250 million ecus in terms of perishable goods .
My question , however , is this : what is being done regarding , for example , the harvesting of citrus fruits in the Mediterranean basin ? The industry is at a complete standstill whilst we await a solution to this dispute , which has caused the loss of many working hours and an increase in unemployment .
What is being done about the slowing-down in the rate of work in Spain 's ports on the Mediterranean which are currently unable to export to the Community goods arriving from third countries ?
Is this yet another area where the Community is not going to intervene ?
I fully recognize the grievous conditions to which Mr Colom i Naval draws attention .
Indeed , the great concern he is expressing is shared very generally in the Community and representations have been made by a very large number of bodies both in the professions and from families and from national governments .
The fact remains that whilst we acknowledge with deep regret that there will be very great and lasting loss as a consequence of a dispute of this nature , we are not at the juncture where there can be effective or realistic legal intervention by the Commission to try to prevent or repair damage .
I know that he will understand that in some respects one is bound to feel like any other normal citizen a sense of frustration in these circumstances .
But these are the realities .
I would be misrepresenting the reality to this Parliament if I were to pretend otherwise .
I emphasize that if it is justifiable to take action which will have the desired effect of bringing a damaging dispute to a conclusion the Commission is as ever ready to take that action .
The justification at this juncture for pursuing that course is not evident .
Mr President , Commissioner , with all my customary disrespect for institutions , there are two things I would like to say to you .
The problem has nothing to do with freedom of movement - it is the problem of social Europe .
I believe that Europe and the Commissioners are too timid .
They should jump at the opportunity and make the point that , without a social Europe , this kind of problem does arise , because it is a problem of harmonization of labour law and it is also a problem of public health protection .
The more miles the trucks cover , the more dangerous the roads are .
The more the Commission - or Europe - proves unable to protect its citizens , the more danger there is for all of us .
And , thirdly , I would like to say to all Members , to everyone who tries to speak in this House about freedom of movement : all social change comes through strikes , and when there is a strike , social change takes place .
That is why the Commission should thank the strikers - because they are advancing the cause of social Europe .
I can say fairly on my behalf and probably on yours , Mr President , that we need no instruction from the honourable Member about the justification , history or nature of strike action .
I would also say to him that he would have difficulty in demonstrating in the course of history that social change of a progressive and productive kind has only come as the result of strikes .
Respect for the development of the law is as vital to ensuring the right and privileges of people in a free society , as I am sure the honourable Member will readily acknowledge in a sober moment .
I would say to him further that when he says to us that this is not a problem of freedom of movement but of social Europe I understand the implication of what he is saying and I am not without sympathy for that view , as he will understand .
However , he tells us that where there are trucks there are dangers and as long as we have as many trucks there will be dangers .
As Transport Commissioner , I can understand the implication of that too .
But I am not sure that in his efforts to uphold the social interests of those engaged in this dispute he would carry their full sympathy if what he was arguing for is fewer trucks on the roads of France .
I thank the Commissioner for his statement .
He said that he had made a certain amount of progress in freeing a certain number of commercial vehicles in particular from Spain and Britain .
I did not hear him mention the island of Ireland .
There are quite a lot of Irish vehicles locked with perishable goods , mostly lamb and beef , in refrigerated trucks which now for twelve to fourteen days have been surviving on a small amount of diesel to keep the refrigerators going .
Could the Commissioner inform me if he has made representations , or if he still can make representations , to take those perishable cargoes out of the system as quickly as possible so that they will not be lost , particularly taking into account the enormous costs involved in the consignments I have mentioned .
And also taking into account that Ireland is totally dependent on the export of our both lamb and beef .
I would assure the honourable Member that , as I indicated earlier , I am acutely aware of the impact of this dispute on all parts of the Union but in particular those parts which are at the periphery .
Naturally that has great implications for Ireland .
My mention of the United Kingdom , Spain and Portugal arose simply because of my desire to report accurately on the most recent releases .
It does not in any sense indicate a casual attitude towards the nationals and businesses of any other Member State or , indeed , of those who come from beyond the borders of our Community .
As the honourable Member indicates , the damage is already significant .
So far as representations are concerned , the French Government has made persistent efforts with some modest success to secure releases and from what I understand they are putting emphasis on those loads that carry perishable cargoes which are in particular jeopardy for all the obvious reasons .
There are restraints on the degree to which they can act but I am assured that they are making efforts .
The honourable Member may share my feelings about good news .
I have been informed by the European transport trade unions that because of their intervention the United Kingdom hauliers blocked in Calais have just been released due to an intervention by the unions and I hope that kind of intervention will have wider effects on the nationals and the businesses of other countries .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his explanation and for his efforts .
It is not the first time , nor I fear is it the last time , that roads are blocked in order to exert pressure on negotiators in a labour dispute .
I would like to ask the Commission to examine ways of creating a legal instrument to guarantee free flow of traffic on Europe 's main routes .
I would refer you to Dutch legislation in which summary proceedings can be used to ask an independent judge to rule on the legality of actions .
My second question is whether the Commission would request temporary use of red diesel to enable lorries outside the blockades to leave France .
Mr President , there are two sides to every coin .
The indispensability of road haulage has been clearly proved in this issue .
I am grateful for the question .
I share the honourable Member 's great anxiety and , as I said earlier , I was very glad to be given the opportunity by him and by his colleagues to make the statement .
The purpose of undertaking strike action of the kind being followed in France is self-evident but to try to develop a Community law that is comparable to the Dutch practice would be extremely difficult .
I do not even put into question the value of such a law or the principles involved into it .
I would simply say that whilst in the Netherlands the decisions of the Dutch Parliament and Government in relation to a sort of automatic injunction in certain specific circumstances could be respected within the borders of that sovereign territory .
The likelihood of the European Community giving powers to the Commission or to the Court of Justice to be able to apply that principle across the Community is extremely remote .
When we are in the situation , as happens at regular intervals , of individual Member States resisting even the judgments made by the Court of Justice in the course of the law that already exists , no matter how extensive their frustrations - and I certainly understand that - will come to recognize that the proposition being made is unlikely to have practical effects or secure general agreement in the institutions of the Community .
Mr President , Commissioner , I hope your helicopter flight over the Tyrol gave you a good impression of heavy goods traffic in that region .
But that 's by the way .
My two short questions are as follows : first , you were annoyed by what Mr Cohn-Bendit had to say , and I can understand that .
But should not the situation in France prompt the Commission to make it clear to the Council just how important social dialogue in Europe is ?
The only way to avoid such fundamental problems and strikes is for the social dialogue to become a basic principle !
Secondly , Commissioner , I would also like to ask you to state clearly in this House - because it will set a good example for the procedure on the rail White Paper , and we had a demonstration here just recently - that you will enter into early discussions with the trade unions .
I am grateful to the honourable Member .
The last part of the question is not strictly relevant to the question raised by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Therefore , Mr President , I accept your injunction to focus entirely on issues relating to the road haulage dispute in France , although it is true to say that the general consultation and discussions on the rail White Paper will be continuing and be very extensive involving all the social partners .
As far as the situation in France is concerned , I miss no opportunity with my colleagues in the Transport Council and elsewhere to emphasize the value of what the honourable Member describes and is generally understood to be the social dialogue .
Guarantees of the kind that could develop out of that are an important contribution to the maintenance of industrial peace on a satisfactory basis which involves none of the parties in the surrender of fundamental requirements and basic rights .
I can do that , however , as much as I like .
My fundamental concern at this moment is the resolution of a specific dispute .
It may be that a different level of social dialogue could have contributed to getting rid of the causes of disputes like this .
However , what I want at this juncture is to ensure that Parliament , like the Commission and everyone else , is focused on the efforts being undertaken to try to bring this particular dispute to a satisfactory and long-lasting conclusion .
Mr President , as the Commissioner explained a moment ago , serious problems have arisen not only in France but also in neighbouring countries .
We are concerned about the news we are receiving from Spain in this connection : losses of 1 , 000 million in terms of fruit and vegetables in Alicante and 5 , 000 million in Almeria ; the citrus-fruit harvest is at a standstill in Castellón and , in Portugal , the textile and car industries are on the verge of collapse , etc .
Commissioner , it is not my intention to harp on about the dispute 's prospects , because you have already gone into this , nor about what the Commission is doing .
However , I do have one very specific question for you : do you have any news to the effect that attitudes in the dispute could harden even further in the light of the announcement of a French air-traffic controllers ' strike ?
My reason for asking this , Commissioner , is that some Spanish fruit-andvegetable hauliers were already using air transport as an alternative to road transport .
I share the deep concern made evident by the honourable Member and by other honourable Members who have raised questions and those who have not .
Any sensible person is going to be deeply worried about the effects of the strike not only in the short term but in the longer term , especially amongst those who rely on road haulage to carry their produce .
So far as other disputes are concerned , it would be unwise of me to try to comment at this juncture on speculation about the extension of the dispute into other transport sectors or other countries .
I have heard during the course of the day , for instance , that a Danish transport dispute is in some way related to what is going on in France .
I can categorically say that on the best information available that is not the case .
I will comment no further on the possibilities , regrettable as they would be , of any developments of the strike into the civil aviation sector since there is no comprehensive or reliable information on that at this juncture .
Our thanks are due to Commissioner Kinnock for giving us an account of his position .
That ends question time .
Appointment of EMI President
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , under the Maastricht Treaty the European Parliament is to be consulted on the appointment of the President of the European Monetary Institute , and in fact is required to give an opinion regarding the candidate .
Today , then , we are called upon to give an opinion , first , on extending President Alexandre Lamfalussy 's term of office until mid-1997 , which has been proposed , and secondly on the appointment of Mr Wim Duisenberg to succeed him from July next year .
I should like to take this opportunity to thank Mr Alexandre Lamfalussy for his efforts in past years .
He has established the European Monetary Institute as required by the Maastricht Treaty .
I need not remind you what a difficult job that was at first .
I remember the building work that had to be done here .
I remember a visit to the Monetary Institute in Frankfurt where we were virtually scrambling around on a building site .
Even so , Alexandre Lamfalussy has proved an outstanding head of the Monetary Institute , and has even managed to keep to the timetable .
If , today , we can feel certain that - at least as far as this aspect is concerned - the timetable for monetary union can be met , it is Alexandre Lamfalussy whom we have to thank for it .
There are other things , too , for which I should like to thank him : his excellent cooperation with the European Parliament , the many discussions that have taken place in the European Parliament 's Monetary Subcommittee , all the personal contacts , and the statements he has made here in this House .
His cooperation with the European Parliament has been exemplary , and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy therefore proposes that Alexandre Lamfalussy 's term of office be extended until June 1997 .
Mr Wim Duisenberg has been proposed to us as Alexandre Lamfalussy 's successor .
On 30 October this year we invited him to be questioned by the committee .
We used the same procedure that we employ for the appointment of the European Commissioners - starting with a hearing at which the candidate is invited to answer questions on personal and substantive matters , following which the committee retires to deliberate and reach a decision .
We took our duties very seriously , because we are aware that this is an exceptionally important appointment .
We need to bear very much in mind that the magical date of 1 January 1999 is now only 765 days away .
In particular , during the brief period between the spring of 1998 , when the decision is made on which countries will be participating , and December 1998 it will be crucial to make the European Central Bank operational as quickly as possible .
That will be no easy matter .
It would make sense , therefore , if the person now appointed to head the European Monetary Institute could later take charge of the European Central Bank .
So we asked Mr Duisenberg that question : would he also be a candidate for the European Central Bank ?
His answer was a brief , crisp ' Yes ' .
I think that was an important moment .
It surprised me very much that the press took virtually no notice of it , not even of the fact that this was a formal hearing at which the European Parliament was exercising its rights .
We know that the decision on the first President of the Central Bank will be a matter for the heads of State and Government , after consulting the European Parliament , but despite that I thought it was important to obtain such a clear statement of intent from Mr Duisenberg .
In the course of the hearing it became very clear how much international experience of monetary matters Mr Duisenberg has acquired in the course of his professional life .
He has also served as the Dutch Finance Minister , and was an exceptionally successful Governor of the Dutch Central Bank .
He enjoyed pointing out that , in various areas connected with the stability of the guilder , he has actually been more successful than his colleagues in the German Bundesbank .
On the basis of its discussions , the committee came to the conclusion that Mr Duisenberg is certainly a suitable candidate , and we recommend the European Parliament to vote for his appointment tomorrow .
But , in doing so , we will be placing our hopes and expectations in him .
We all respect the independence of the European Central Bank , and regard it as a matter of the greatest importance .
Equally , though , we are convinced that the Euro-Tower in Frankfurt must not be allowed to become an ivory tower , because the European Central Bank and its President will be taking decisions of the utmost importance for many citizens throughout the European Union .
The President of the Central Bank , then , must declare his policy , and the forum for him to do so is the European Parliament - the committees and part-sessions of the European Parliament .
So we expect and hope that Mr Duisenberg will continue to act in the excellent spirit of cooperation that we established with Mr Alexandre Lamfalussy .
The President of the European Monetary Institute is also the guarantor of the stability of the European currency .
I should like to say once again why we in the European Parliament , by a very large majority , are convinced of the importance of a stable European currency .
Last Saturday I spoke to a woman in the market place in Offenburg , and she said to me that she was very sceptical about the European currency .
I asked her why .
She told me that she had been working as a saleswoman for 54 years and was now planning to retire .
She obtained a printed notice of her pension entitlement , and learned that she could expect DM 1 , 130.00 per month .
Her rent is DM 700.00 .
So anyone will understand that woman wondering whether rents and food prices are going to go up in the fairly near future , because her very existence is at stake here .
People on small incomes cannot escape the effects of inflation in the same way as people on high incomes - inflation has a direct impact on such people , and they expect us to do everything we can to ensure that the euro will be a stable currency .
If my meeting in the market square had been with Mr Soros or Mr Costollany , who earn their money through speculation , then of course their concerns would have been rather different , because we know that inflation can be a way of earning money , too .
And that brings me to the second reason why the stability of the currency is so important : inflation diverts investment , sends it in the wrong directions - unproductive directions .
If we want investors to invest in the future , to invest in jobs , then the first essential for that is to provide a stable currency .
I have no doubt that all the omens are good at present , though a great deal still remains to be done .
On a more positive note , 10 out of 15 Member States now satisfy the stability criterion , meaning a rate of inflation of 2.6 % or less .
I regard this as a major success , because it shows that the Member States of the European Union have made massive efforts as far as stability policy is concerned .
However , it is equally clear that only three Member States have so far complied with the deficit criterion , which shows what great efforts are still needed if monetary union is indeed to become a reality on 1 January 1999 as planned .
I am certain that , in order to sustain confidence , we need to stand by the stability criteria in accordance with the letter and spirit of the Maastricht Treaty .
The second reason why I am in a positive frame of mind with high hopes of the European currency and its stability is the independence of the European Central Bank and its concern for stability .
This is a very , very important requirement .
And we must have no doubt about this : whether or not European monetary union is a success will ultimately depend not on a handful of articles in the treaties , or on the phrasing we are so carefully working on at present , or even on the precise wording of the stability pact , but , to an absolutely crucial extent , on the individuals who will shape the future European Central Bank .
I have no doubt that Mr Duisenberg will be one of those individuals , and I am convinced that this very important appointment decision that we are taking today will also be a right decision !
Madam President , the Group of the Party of European Socialists also believes it is right to extend the mandate of the current EMI President , Mr Lamfalussy , and is also in favour of nominating Mr Duisenberg as a suitable candidate to take over as President of the European Monetary Institute .

The fact that Mr Lamfalussy was able to construct and plan the European Monetary Institute , its personnel and its organization and its administration , was a stroke of luck for monetary history as a whole , not just for the development of that Institute .
Really substantial progress has been made even as regards the status of the personnel , and also as regards the acceptance and credibility of the monetary union project in the finance markets and among the general public .
This Parliament , then , has reason to be grateful for his commitment to European monetary union , and express its gratitude that there has been a President Lamfalussy at the head of the Monetary Institute .
I should like to remind the House that not only has Mr Lamfalussy , as agreed , complied with his democratic obligation to give an account of his acts both in discussions with the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs and here in the House , but it was also possible to approach him with projects that were important to this House .
To quote just one example , this Parliament was a very early supporter of the European exchange rate mechanism , designed to prevent a split in the internal market and a split , too , between countries that would participate in monetary union and countries that would not .
The President of the European Monetary Institute , contrary to the view that had previously prevailed , very quickly recognized the need to find a new mechanism which would both suppress speculation and express solidarity , without depriving the future European Central Bank of its mandatory objective .
Our questioning of his successor , Mr Duisenberg , enabled us once again to make it clear what this European Parliament expects of the President of the European Monetary Institute .
Personal integrity and qualifications are important , undoubtedly .
But questions about monetary conceptions , attitudes to monetary policy and the role of that policy within the European Union were very important , too .
In the course of this question-and-answer session , the Members of this Parliament were able to make it clear how much Parliament expects of the future President of the European Monetary Institute - expectations which , of course , are all the greater because this candidate has stated that he is also a candidate for the office of President of the European Central Bank .
So we take him seriously when he says that the democratic accountability of monetary authorities in this European Union is of great importance to him , too .
In that light , I expect him , in his function as President of the European Monetary Institute , to move further ahead with the preparations for monetary union , so as to ensure that it is technically and organizationally impossible for it to fail .
But I also expect him to ensure that , before the European central banking system and the European Central Bank itself are set up , all the national central banks are independent .
He might , for example , influence his own government to ensure that the central bank in the Netherlands becomes independent very quickly now - that would be a symbol of credibility .
The same applies to the dialogue with this European Parliament and the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs , and it will also be necessary to document this democratic accountability , with the European Central Bank bringing transparency to the justification of monetary decisions , with a guarantee of the complete independence of that institution .
So the articles of association , the statutes of the European Central Bank , must be prepared to enable the European Central Bank to be set up in 1998 .
Here again , we place great reliance on this president , who has assured us that monetary policy for him is not just a neutral policy but also includes economic and employment policy ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Liberal Group , I would like to express our full and committed support both for the recommendation to extend the mandate of the President of the European Monetary Institute , Mr Alexandre Lamfalussy , up to 30 June 1997 , and for the recommendation to appoint Dr Wim Duisenberg as his successor .
This is an extremely important appointment with far-reaching consequences for normal development of the third stage of Economic and Monetary Union and the introduction of the euro .
The timetable is now a pressing one and we must now progress with maximum precision , given that we are less than two years away from the setting-up of the European Central Bank and barely more than 24 months away from the introduction of the euro .
Both Mr Lamfalussy and Dr Duisenberg have to ensure that , in the coming months , the European Monetary Institute carries out the work which is vital for guaranteeing not only the proper functioning of the European System of Central Banks but also the introduction of the rules , direction , structure , logistics and organization involved in all those aspects which are to form the link between the Central Banks of the Member States , the European System of Central Banks and the European Central Bank .
We would like to draw honourable Members ' attention to the momentous importance of this process , which will lead to the consolidation of one of the bases and one of the milestones in the process of European integration over the last 20 years , and to its significance in terms of the future structure of the Union as we enter the 21st century .
Naturally , if we achieve full European Union , operating with a single currency managed by a European Central Bank , a European System of Central Banks , under the overall direction of a single economic and monetary policy at Union level , we will have made enormous progress on the path towards European integration .
This is the task facing Mr Lamfalussy and especially Dr Duisenberg over the next few months and we would like to confirm that they may rely on our full cooperation and support in achieving this task which , I say again , is of immense importance as regards the process of European integration in the Union as laid down in the Treaty .
Madam President , in committee my Group was unable to endorse the unanimous recommendation that Mr Duisenberg be selected to head the European Monetary Institute .
He is unquestionably a very experienced and competent individual , but we believe that his basic monetary and economic views are not of a kind which we can support .
He seems to be a strong advocate of monetarism , and he also seriously underestimates the need for a common economic policy under monetary union .
We consider that such a policy will be an absolute must .
Although the future European Central Bank 's independence of political passions must be safeguarded , it is important that the Central Bank should be directed by people who have a realistic view of the operation of the real economy .
As we are not particularly convinced that he does , I have recommended that my Group should abstain in tomorrow 's vote .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Convergence and single currency
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0379 / 96 by Mr Metten , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , embodying the opinion of the European Parliament , pursuant to Article 109j ( 2 ) of the Treaty , on the 1996 convergence decision by the Council , meeting in the composition of the Heads of State or Government ( 11505 / 96 - C4-0586 / 96 ) ; -A4-0371 / 96 by Mr Christodoulou , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on : I. the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) on the strengthening of the surveillance and coordination of budgetary positions ( COM ( 96 ) 0496 - C4-0576 / 96-96 / 0247 ( SYN ) ) II.the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) on speeding up and clarifying the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure ( COM ( 96 ) 0496 - C4-0577 / 96-96 / 0248 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0375 / 96 by Mr Herman , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on : I. the proposal for a Council Regulation on certain provisions relating to the introduction of the euro ( COM ( 96 ) 0499 ) - C4-0578 / 0-96 / 0249 ( CNS ) ) II.on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the introduction of the euro ( COM ( 96 ) 0499 - C4-0579 / 0-96 / 0250 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0352 / 96 by Mr Hoppenstedt , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the European Monetary Institute report concerning the changeover to the single currency ( C4-0559 / 95 ) ; -A4-0374 / 96 by Mr Harrison , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the impact of monetary policies on the real economy , inflation , interest rates , growth and employment within the third phase of economic and monetary union and the economic function of the convergence criteria .
Madam President , the convergence report bearing my name is the official opinion Parliament must give to the heads of state and governments on the date for the beginning of the third stage of Economic and Monetary Union .
The Treaty stipulates that EMU may be started earlier than 1999 if a majority of Member States were now already in a position to qualify and if the heads of government were to agree .
Since twelve of the Members States have issued a so-called ' excessive deficit statement ' , it is clear that the first condition has not been met .
The Treaty states that a start shall be made on 1 January 1999 with the Member States which qualify .
The report which is in my name confirms this conclusion .
As Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs naturally saw this situation coming a long time ago it used this report to pursue another goal , namely to remove the taboo from the flexibility which is included in the criteria in the Treaty .
That is why the explanatory statement in the report deals meticulously with the margin of manoeuvre available in the Treaty and the political interpretations required by the Treaty .
The aim therefore of this report is to clarify and not to dictate .
Depending on the situation prevalent at the time it may well be that Parliament has to decide on the choice of suitable candidates for EMU in 1998 .
I believe that Parliament can be well pleased that the Commission adopted the same approach in its recent convergence report of 6 November .
Although the convergence report of 5 November from the European Monetary Institute uses stronger language , there are still no basic differences with it .
In a word , the possibility of a flexible interpretation of the criteria is firmly on the political agenda .
If you compare that with the reaction provoked by former President Giscard d 'Estaing at a congress here in this Parliament in Brussels in February of this year when he basically did nothing more than refer to the flexibility of the Treaty , then you must be struck by the change in public opinion .
That change is largely due to this House and this report has played a useful part in this process .
As to whether flexibility in the Treaty will prove to be really necessary , that is another question .
Together with the convergence report the Commission published its autumn forecasts based on the latest figures and plans from the Member States .
If these forecasts are realised , then EMU is possible with ten Member States on 1 January 1999 , even if 3.0 % is maintained as the budget criterion .
My view is that as economic developments improve there is less reason for using the relative clauses which are part of the criteria .
Against that it is in everyone 's interest that the first wave of EMU participants is as big as possible so that the two-fold division created by the EMU is as short-lived as possible .
The whole debate on whether that would not mean that the euro would be too weak seems to me to be spurious .
The achievements expected of the Member States are enormous as can already be illustrated by the fact that the so-called pace-setter of the whole system , namely Germany , will have the greatest trouble in meeting the criteria in time .
The euro will certainly not be weaker than the Deutschmark , certainly not with the Central Bank being more independent than the only existing central banks , including the German one .
A more realistic worry would be that the euro might be too hard at the cost of the Union 's competitive strength and employment situation .
The French debate on this is quite opportune , even although the proposals to tackle it via devaluation are disastrous .
But this problem can be addressed when more specific rules on the exchange rate regime and policy are determined .
That will be the right time and the right opportunity and Parliament will certainly express its views on that occasion .
Madam President , we do not fully understand every aspect of the interaction between monetary policy and budgetary policy . It would appear , however , that monetary policy alone , without the help of budgetary policy , will be unable to maintain monetary stability in stage three of EMU .
That does not mean , however , that budgetary policy should be subordinated exclusively to the goal of monetary stability .
Such a thing would restrict the possibility of conducting an effective general development policy , not just for those Member States that have to make greater efforts to get their economies to converge with the economies of the more developed countries of the Union , but also for the Member States that are concerned about falling competitiveness .
Our reason for pursuing EMU , leaving aside the basic objective of reinforcing the unification of Europe , is to add strength to the single market and thus to the European Union 's competitiveness .
I do not think that can be achieved exclusively by monetary means .
Consequently , in stage three of EMU , it will be necessary to establish a balance between the goal of stability for the single currency and the goal of support for the development efforts of participants and non-participants in EMU .
To secure that balance and avoid the danger of creating competitive tendencies and behaviour , there will have to be harmonization of budgetary policies .
However , the Commission 's proposals not only favour the view that budgetary policy should be totally subordinated to achievement of the objective of monetary stability but also partially alter the overall character of the current arrangements .
They are relatively inflexible and basically seek to have a dissuasive effect .
I do not question the need to secure and maintain budgetary stability . That stability is , of course , absolutely essential .
And monetary stability as well , of course , enshrined as it is as an objective in the Union 's body of law , is an essential requirement for the effective functioning of EMU .
It needs to be said , however , that monetary stability cannot by itself solve all of the economic problems that the Union is facing today and will be called on to face in the future , and nor can it by itself put the European economy on an enduring competitive footing vis-à-vis the Union 's major trading partners .
Extreme positions , whether they be too strict and inflexible and designed to remove every initiative for development from budgetary policy or whether they seek to make the rules excessively flexible and to introduce elements which would ultimately cast the advisability of their adoption into doubt , must therefore be avoided , because in either circumstance the arrangements could not be implemented .
Furthermore , the arrangements that are adopted must accord with the Treaty , and even with the adoption of stricter medium-term objectives they should not make the convergence criteria de facto more stringent and should not impede - instead of strengthening - the convergence efforts of Member States participating in and outside EMU .
Let us not deceive ourselves , ladies and gentlemen .
The effort towards convergence , towards real economic convergence , does not come to an end with fulfilment of criteria for entry to stage three , nor can it be safeguarded with measures of an automatic and mechanistic nature .
Economic and above all monetary phenomena are by their very nature dynamic , and any attempt to restrain them within inflexible and static rules will not have the desired results .
The amendments that we are being asked to support , including the joint motions for resolution and amendments , seek to bring about some improvements in the Commission 's proposals and to keep them as close as possible to economic reality , without , however , distancing them in the slightest degree from the provisions of the Treaty .
If the Commission 's proposals stay as they are , they will , I say again , not be implementable .
I will summarize the main proposals in the amendments for you .
First , incorporation of the convergence programmes in the national budgetary procedures and greater involvement of the national parliaments .
As far as the European Parliament is concerned , the request is for more information to be provided to it before rather than after the event .
Second , the leeway available to the Commission , under Article 104c ( 3 ) , to take account of other factors relevant to the economic and budgetary position of a Member State when monitoring fulfilment of the budgetary criterion is clarified and stressed .
And in view of that leeway , a request is made for the stability programmes to provide clarification of the expected main economic developments , including factors relating to employment creation , government investment expenditure as a ratio to GDP and other aspects , as well as of the objectives .
Third , the definition of the circumstances in which the excess of a budgetary deficit over the reference value is to be considered exceptional and temporary are clarified , augmented and made more realistic .
Fourth , while the imposition of the financial deposit penalty is not contested , its automatic and mechanistic character is to some extent removed .
One of the amendments stipulates that the penalty should not be imposed as a rule but rather could be imposed .
It introduces , that is to say , an element of flexibility , albeit slight , which in no way reduces the powers of scrutiny vested in the Council by the Treaty .
Another amendment stipulates that the amount of the deposit , or of the fine if the deposit becomes a fine , should not be considered as part of the government expenditure in the examination of the public deficit .
Lastly , it has been considered necessary to provide for periodic re-examination of the provisions of the regulations in the light of experience in order to improve their effectiveness and to take account of substantive changes and , possibly , the results of the intergovernmental conference .
Madam President , the Commission must confront these proposals in a spirit of cooperation and understanding , given that our purpose in forwarding them is to make our task easier .
The decisions it takes and the manner in which it approaches the European Parliament 's report must have a clear political character and not be purely technical , and it must take account of the wishes and sensitivities of all of the Member States of the Union .
We are aware of the problems that it has and we are aware of the interests that it may be seeking to serve .
But as its president , Mr Santer , has said , the role of the Commission is political , and it is that political role that we wish it to assume now by accepting the amendments that we have tabled .
Madam President , Commissioner , although Parliament has had insufficient time to give full consideration to all the legal problems raised by the introduction of the euro , our committee and our Parliament can approve the broad lines of the two proposals for Regulations you have put before us .
They both represent a sound basis for moving forward to the biggest monetary event of all time .
Never before in the history of our peoples has there been an operation on such a scale , representing such a radical change affecting so many people .
That is why Parliament cannot overemphasize the need to inform , prepare and reassure the population .
We are a long way behind in this respect - and there is not much time left to make good that shortfall .
The same reasoning leads us to insist that the text should be proof against any legal challenge .
I am sorry to say that it is not .
And the Ecofin council , like the Commission , despite all the opinions obtained from all the lawyers that surround them , have too lightly brushed aside the objection raised regarding the Madrid decision that something laid down by a treaty could be changed by a summit .
No matter how much you use every trick in the lawyer 's book to try to explain that the ECU doesn 't mean an écu , that it means a ' European currency unit ' , it doesn 't stick .
And you will see that it doesn 't .
I am sorry to have to say so .
The same applies to other more important amendments , and in this case I accuse the Commission of having capitulated far too easily .
The euro , after all , is not just the currency of the Member States , it is also the currency of the Community .
You didn 't want that , and why not ?
Because your lawyers said to you , ' The Community is not a state . '
Wrong .
According to the treaties - and as witness the fact that you are creating a currency - a central bank has the power to issue the European currency .
It therefore has the ability to justify it , internally and externally .
And just because two Member States are temporarily seceding by opting out is no reason to give in to them .
Secondly , the decision you have to take on this is based not on Article 235 but on Article 104 , which is an article that can be adopted by a qualified majority .
So the objections of Denmark and the United Kingdom count for nothing in this case .
Let them vote against , we can vote in favour anyway .
So I accuse the Commission of having been unbelievably timid in the defence of its own interests .
That , Madam President , is why I hope that - with the benefit of reflection , with the benefit of careful analysis - you will be able to accept the amendments we are putting to you in this respect .
In addition , I should like to defend two other amendments .
There is the one that says , in particular , that it is the Central Bank that issues the European currency and the national central banks that circulate it .
The objection has been : ' But we 're following the text of the Treaty ! '
Wrong again !
In the text of the Treaty , the statutes of the Central Bank are equivalent to those of the Treaty , and so when there is a contradiction between the statutes of the Central Bank which form part of the Treaty and the text of the Treaty itself , that contradiction has to be reconciled by interpreting the intent of the authors of the texts .
And , in that context , I am quite sure you will also accept our amendment stating that it is the Central Bank which issues the currency and the national banks that circulate it .
That is what should be done - that is what you would have to accept if you were logical and consistent in your own actions .
Finally , my last remark concerns the principle so often stated that the euro involves no obligations but no prohibitions either .
The true interpretation of this principle is to be found not in your text but in ours .
We say that when both parties wish to do so , they can use the euro as they wish ; just because a contract was drawn up at the outset in national currency , especially if it dates from a very long time back , and just because that national currency is now to be replaced by the euro that does not mean that the contract has to be performed in the national currency during the transition period .
The true legal expression of the principle that you have so often declared is reflected better in our text than in yours .
And , here again , I hope that when you have thought about this again and listened more carefully to what Parliament has to say you will take account of it and adopt it .
Those , Madam President , are three comments I wanted to make .
I was pleased to note that the Commission 's intention was to take due account of Parliament 's concerns as far as consumer protection is concerned , and that you were intending to submit proposals on that subject shortly , in a different text .
I welcome that intention .
If that is indeed the case , we should be able to consider with a degree of understanding and a great deal of indulgence the fact that , on this point , you refused our amendments .
Thank you , Mr Herman .
I am sure that the Commissioner will make haste to reply to your vigorous contribution .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , let me start by reminding you that this report by the European Monetary Institute on the changeover to the single currency was presented in November last year to pave the way for the European Council in Madrid in November 1995 to decide in favour of the single European currency .
Verona , Luxembourg and Florence were additional staging posts , at which discussion focused mainly on budgetary discipline and future relations between the Member States inside the euro area and those outside it , within the framework of a possible new EMS II .
The Dublin Council is imminent .
Following a vote in favour by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , my report gives timely consideration to the major questions of the future .
Once again , I should particularly like to emphasize - there is some overlap here , of course - that only a strong , politically stable European Union based on a single currency makes sense as a way of solving the problems affecting the economy and world trade .
The euro must become a catalyst and a sheet anchor for the continuing unification of Europe .
The main value and necessity of the euro , as we also know , is that it is only the coming of the euro that will produce the full flowering of the European single market and will make its various sub-markets purer , more comparable and more calculable , while its products become more economical because they no longer have to bear the costs of foreign exchange and price increases .
Increasingly , the euro will create a financial market offering wide investment and finance options .
The advantage of the euro , as a sheet anchor and reserve currency , will be partly the guarantee it offers of stability and improved performance by European industry .
Speculation will be more effectively fended off , the calculations of Europe 's exporting industry will be placed on a reliable footing , and so further job losses will be prevented .
It is necessary to ensure that the criteria laid down in the Maastricht Treaty for the introduction of monetary union are complied with .
Those contractually agreed criteria must , of course , be binding , and permanently binding .
Shortterm cosmetic operations to enhance the next budgets , the budgets that will be used to assess readiness to join monetary union , must be avoided .
In order to ensure that the necessary budgetary discipline continues after access to economic and monetary union , there must be a stability pact , and that pact must not be a phoney one to set the minds of Europe 's citizens at rest , but one that must contain effective mechanisms .
The general consensus of all Member States in favour of a long-term stability policy at the Dublin Council will be the acid test of whether they do really mean to do as I have just said .
We , as politicians , never weary - as this afternoon clearly illustrates - of debating the euro and all the important elements of successful monetary union .
At least as important is to discuss the subject in depth with the citizen , and provide him with the necessary information .
That is why I particularly welcome the information campaign launched by Parliament , the Commission and the Member States , together with all the information events and future briefings for interested parties .
One final subject , particularly important for us , is the phase of acclimatization to the euro , and especially dual pricing .
The costs of dual pricing as projected by the trade associations will amount to over ECU 25 , 000 million , a gigantic sum if their calculations are even half-way accurate .
Cost-effective answers must be found to this problem before the end of this year , answers which will not only guarantee adequate transparency for consumers but will also keep down the costs of dual pricing , especially in the retail and mail order sectors .
We have always said that when we change over to the euro , the new European currency , there must be no winners and no losers - the costs must not be unilaterally passed on to the consumer .
It would certainly be helpful , during the period between 1999 and 2002 , to suggest in all public sectors , or to make it compulsory , that all salary payments , fees and other cash transactions should be quoted in euros and in the domestic currency , for the purposes of information , to give the citizen a longer period of acclimatization and so , eventually , shorten the period of dual pricing previously agreed on .
I ask you to vote in favour of my report at tomorrow 's voting time , and I believe that the relatively large vote in favour by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy should be reflected in this Parliament .
Mr President , before introducing my report on economic and monetary union , and the impact of monetary policies on the real economy , I would like to comment on the debate on EMU as a whole and its reception in my country , the United Kingdom .
Last week a row blew up in London when the government was rightly pilloried for preventing a debate on EMU in the House of Commons , arising from the presentation of EMU-related papers , including some of those we are debating today .
The surprise for me , however , was the reaction of the House of Commons and its Gemini twin , the London media .
The mother of all parliaments seems to be unaware that its grown-up daughter , the European Parliament , has been debating some of these vital documents for weeks .
The elected British MEPs have been at the heart of this parliamentary scrutiny , defending vigorously British interests while constructively building Europe , through the agency of EMU .
Do they not read the papers ?
But there is the rub : the London based media is at its idle best in reporting the European Parliament , it does not .
From a combination of ignorance , arrogance , laziness , fear and loathing it studiously demotes or denigrates the reasoned response of this Parliament to the concerns and worries of the man and woman in the street in Britain today , not the least anxiety of which is the search for jobs .
Paragraph 13 of my report contests the fashionable view in London 's incestuous media circles that the single currency will not produce jobs .
It will .
And in so doing will wholly comply with the commanding Article 2 of the EU Treaty promoting decent jobs and respect for the environment .
The Maastricht Treaty as we have it has some weaknesses which the Harrison report tries to remedy .
Take the European Central Bank which will engage in so compelling a role in all our lives within a few years .
The voter rightly asks what democratic control , what accountability , will be exercised on the Central Bank governor ?
His role will be pivotal in determining the exchange rates , hence the interest rate and inflation levels which we all sink or swim in as we , as mortgage holders and business people , try to pick our way through the pitfalls of our own local economic environment .
My report in no way threatens the independence of the European Central Bank .
Britain 's experience is vivid of the interfering Mrs Thatcher who ignored Sir Nigel Wicks of the Monetary Committee and fixed the UK entry into the ERM in 1990 at a rate which thereafter crippled British industry .
I suggest that we can strengthen accountability by reaching an inter-institutional agreement with Commission and Council on determining the ECB executive board and Ecofin appointments and by debating the ECB annual report .
Such supplements will be welcome in fleshing out the central proposition of this report , which declares that monetary policy is not neutral .
It does affect the real economy and central bank governors need reminding of that fact from time to time .
A second problem addresses the apparent dislocation in EMU of having a single monetary policy effected by the ECB , whilst complementary fiscal policies will be decided and enacted separately by the 15 Member States .
The EU 's structural funds , the TENs , the work of the European Investment Bank all go some way to close the gap .
Imperative however , and far more influential , is to ensure the very greatest coherence between Member States ' economic and fiscal planning .
This can be done through greater use of the Treaty 's broad economic guidelines and multilateral surveillance procedures .
In both these the European Parliament must be directly involved .
This democratic scrutiny is essential and in part answers the hysterical response of the Tory Eurosceptics ' claim that the European Commission is secretly taking a major role in coordinating Member States ' budgetary and economic planning .
Such coordination is , of course , precisely what the Tory Government signed up to .
Nor does the UK EMU opt-out excuse the UK Government from that responsibility .
The final area that I would like to highlight in my report is the weight lent to aspects of the real economy which are overlooked by the overwhelming concentration on the monetary criteria .
In steering Europe 's economies towards convergence I allude in particular to Article 109j ( 1 ) of the Treaty , where other economic indicators are stipulated which should be then taken into account in assessing the convergence criteria .
To balance the effect of possible contraction of Member States ' growth prospects , due to budgetary consolidation , recognition needs to be made for investment patterns , for the unemployment rate , for studying unit labour costs and , very importantly , for the progress made in completing the single market .
Given these elements their proper emphasis will go some way to dispel the fear of the citizen that EMU is subject only to dry , inhumane monetary criteria .
I return to where I began .
EMU will only succeed if it provides a decent life for our citizens and that is the ultimate goal to which the Harrison report aspires .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . The importance of this current debate cannot easily be overlooked .
What we are doing in my view is setting the economic framework for society in the future .
And so it is important that in this debate we try to reflect the wishes of the general public .
We must therefore always be on our guard that this debate does not deteriorate into a debate among technocrats .
We must ensure , and this is the job of Parliament , that this difficult subject matter is put into terms which are understandable to the public .
What do we say about the content of the stability pact ?
First of all there is general agreement that we must continue to strive towards healthy public finances .
These are the best guarantee for a proper and efficient government and they are indeed the basis for tomorrow 's employment .
Secondly , we must be careful that healthy public finances do not depend solely on the development of expenditure .
We must beware against strong competition between Member States in the field of taxation leading to fiscal erosion which exerts greater pressure on expenditure .
We must create the necessary space so that at certain times the governments and the European institutions are allowed to follow an anti-cyclical policy .
That is why we say that the Commission has undoubtedly taken steps in the right direction in its work on the original proposals which resulted from the Dublin Summit .
In a word , we approve of consolidation of convergence .
We reject the continuing deflationary nature which has accompanied the pursuit of the convergence criteria .
We in the Committee on Budgets ask that special attention be paid to a specific definition of the new source of income which Europe should preferably not enjoy , although it may happen , when deposits of guarantees are made when a number of criteria are transgressed .
Mr President-in-Office , may I appeal to you directly to take into consideration the views of a large majority of the elected representatives in this House in the final decision of the Council of Ministers ?
I believe that is essential if the Europe of tomorrow is to remain credible in the eyes of society .
Mr President , I am grateful that I can speak on these , important issues for the citizens of Europe this afternoon .
There are great issues of principle before us today .
I would not claim that the matters I wish to raise are those which will most preoccupy the statesmen of Europe , but they will preoccupy the citizens of Europe .
The citizens of Europe need to know that their interests are protected when one of the most fundamental changes in their ordinary lives comes about , as I believe it will , sometime over the next five years .
I personally regret the fact that the Consumer Affairs Commissioner , and her team , appear to have little notice and little input at the level of the proposals that were coming before us .
I am grateful to the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee for taking on board so many of the consumer amendments which were put forward by the Environment Committee .
I would just like to make one simple point and that is on the issue of dual pricing in relation to the annual report .
I believe that it is necessary for the citizen to be able to make an easy point of reference to the currency and the values which have become familiar over a lifetime throughout the period of transition when the new currency is being introduced and for a period beyond the point of introduction .
In the United Kingdom we have had over the past few years to adjust to the metrication system which , for all of the other Member States represented here , has been a point of easy familiarity .
We know how difficult it was to make that adjustment , particularly for the old and less well-informed , and that is why we support the proposal of the amendments for the introduction of a dual pricing system which are now to be carried , I hope , in this report .
Mr President , the report from the European Monetary Institute on the transition to the single currency lacks a very important dimension , namely the international consequences of the euro for the European Union .
What are the international consequences for the European Union of the introduction of a common currency ?
First of all the political importance and international role of the European Union in implementing economic and financial policy in an international context is strengthened .
The euro will facilitate the balance in the international monetary system , particularly in relation to the dollar .
Secondly the euro will provide the European Union with better protection against external shocks which means a fundamental improvement on the present European monetary System .
Thirdly the euro will facilitate multilateral dialogue with a view to more effective coordination of the economic policy of the most important trading blocs .
The EU will be better equipped to insist on more balanced macro economic relations in the world .
So the euro will mean greater responsibility for Europe in tackling international economic and monetary problems .
The position of the Union will thereby grow within the financial and economic international organisations as will the need for defining the Union 's participation in these organisations .
Furthermore we think an external reference scenario for the transitional period in the run up to the common currency is absolutely essential .
These last two conclusions are supported by Mr Hoppenstedt and we are grateful to him for that .
The euro therefore puts the Union in a position of being able to play a role in the monetary field which is more in line with its weight in the economic and trade field .
The international consequences of a single currency therefore deserve all our attention .
Mr President , today is an important day in the process of European integration .
The deliberations of Parliament at this part-session will mark another stage in the preparations for economic and monetary union .
I am therefore very pleased to have the opportunity to address you today in my capacity as President-in-Office of the Council of Economic and Finance Ministers .
President , your session today will cover a number of EMU issues , including discussion of the draft Council regulations produced by the European Commission last month in relation to the stability pact and the legal framework of the Euro .
You will also be considering your opinion under Article 109j of the Treaty on European Union . In the latter case you already have before you Ecofin 's recommendation to the European Council under this article .
It will come as no surprise that Ecofin , on 11 November , on the basis of the reports of the Commission and the European Monetary Institute and the recommendation of the Commission , adopted a recommendation to the European Council to decide the following : firstly , that a majority of Member States do not fulfil the necessary conditions for the adoption of the single currency ; secondly , that the Community will not , therefore , enter third stage of EMU in 1997 ; thirdly , that the procedure laid down in Article 109j ( 4 ) , will be applied as early as possible in 1998 .
The Ecofin recommendation of 11 November was sent to Parliament on the very day and Parliament is now formulating its own opinion .
Clearly that opinion is entirely a matter for Parliament itself and as President-in-Office of Ecofin I therefore have nothing more to say about it .
I should , however , take this opportunity to mention that the speed with which Parliament has moved to formulate its opinion , and indeed your willingness to deal promptly with other EMU items before you today is very much appreciated by me as President-in-Office of Ecofin and indeed by all the Members of the Council .
I would now like to give you a brief report on the present state of the work necessary for the launching of EMU on 1 January 1999 .
As you know the European Council in Madrid last December marked a decisive step forward in the preparations for EMU by naming the new currency the Euro and by setting-out a comprehensive timetable for the change-over to it .
Briefly , EMU will begin on 1 January 1999 with the irrevocable fixing of the conversion rates of the currencies of the participating Member States and the Euro will become a currency in its own right .
The monetary policy of the new currency will of course be conducted in Euros from the beginning and new tradeable public debt will be issued in Euros from 1 January 1999 .
There will then be a transitional period until Euro banknotes and coins start to circulate alongside national coins and notes .
The latter will then begin to be withdrawn until the changeover to the Euro is complete .
As well as benefiting from the work of the Madrid European Council , the Irish presidency also benefited from the progress achieved under the Italian presidency , in particular at the informal Council meeting in Verona in April .
On foot of that progress the Florence European Council urged Ecofin , along with the Commission and the EMI in their respective fields of competence , to pursue work on three issues relating to EMU : the relations between participating and non-participating Member States , including a new exchange rate mechanism ; secondly , technical preparatory work on the legal framework for the Euro and thirdly , the fiscal stability in stage 3 of EMU , Ecofin was asked to work with the view to presenting conclusions showing further substantive progress to the European Council in Dublin .
I want to tell you that we have made considerable progress on all three issues .
In Dublin in September I hosted an informal meeting of EU Finance Ministers and central bank governors to review progress and to chart the course to the December Dublin European Council .
The informal meeting ensured that we are well on our way to achieving our presidency objectives .
The momentum provided by that meeting enabled the Commission last month to adopt legislative proposals on the stability pact and on the legal framework for the Euro as well as a draft communication to Council on the relationship between participating and non-participating Member States .
As regards the latter issue , the report from Ecofin to the Dublin European Council will address the new exchange rate mechanism to be put in place on the formation of EMU .
Of course the main features of the new ERM are already known , in particular the fact that the central rates of participating currencies will be set against the Euro only .
Both because of its role as an anchor currency and in order to emphasize the goal of convergence to the Euro area .
The new mechanism will aim to help to protect Member States from excessive exchange rate fluctuations and so will help to underpin the single market .
Work on the details of the new ERM will be put in hand after Dublin , although they cannot of course be finalized until the European Central Bank is set up in 1998 .
Ecofin 's report to Dublin under this heading will also address the arrangements for enhanced surveillance of economic policies with a view to ensuring that they are conducive to the convergence that is essential to monetary stability .
As regards the second part of Ecofin 's work , you will know that the Commission adopted proposals last month for two draft Council regulations on the legal framework of the Euro .
The first draft regulation is based on Article 235 of the Treaty and contains the items which are required to be adopted as a matter of urgency . These include rounding rules , continuity of contracts and one-to-one substitution of the Ecu by the Euro .
The second is based on Article 109l ( 4 ) of the Treaty and contains the other provisions necessary for the legal framework .
As Article 109l ( 4 ) requires Council to act with the unanimity of those Member States without a derogation , this second proposal will not be adopted until later .
A Council Working Group has been examining the two proposals and on 11 November Ecofin noted that substantial progress had been made , particularly on the Article 235 proposal .
Of course progress towards final adoption depends not just on the Council but also on Parliament and I am glad to know that you are dealing so expeditiously with these two draft regulations .
May I further add that I am aware that the Council has expressed its concerns that the consumer dimension to this entire project has to receive adequate attention and indeed we have just had a contribution in that respect from one of the previous speakers .
I expect , therefore , that the Commission will be bringing forward proposals in due course on this particular issue for your consideration .
The third issue before Ecofin concerns securing budget discipline in stage 3 of EMU , in other words the stability pact .
The Commission has also submitted two proposals for Council regulations in this area .
The first deals with the clarification of the excessive deficit procedure under Article 104c and covers the issue of sanctions .
The second proposal deals with the strengthening of the surveillance and coordination of budgetary positions under Article 103 ( 5 ) of the Treaty .
The second proposal will be subject to the cooperation procedure within the European Parliament .
On the first , the Council will consult the European Parliament in conformity with Article 104c ( 14 ) of the Treaty .
The tabling of these two proposals by the Commission indicates that progress has been made towards formulating a stability pact .
There is already wide agreement on many elements .
For example , we have agreed that Member States in EMU will be obliged to submit stability programmes , demonstrating a commitment to orderly management of their public finances and to keeping their deficits below the Treaty reference value of 3 % of GDP over the course of a normal economic cycle .
There is also agreement that there should be an early warning system to help prevent excessive deficits arising .
Work is advancing on the remaining features of the pact .
These include the specification of the sanctions provided for by the Treaty , if a Member State in EMU fails to take effective action to remedy an excessive deficit and the definition of when the excess of a government deficit over the Treaty reference value is to be considered ' exceptional and temporary ' .
Ecofin Ministers had a thorough and fruitful exchange of views at their meeting on 11 November and will be considering the matter again next Monday here in Brussels .
It remains to be seen how far the details of the work on the stability pact can be specified by the end of the Irish presidency though I am hopeful that it would be possible for the Dublin European Council to make further progress on it .
Before concluding my remarks on the stability pact I think I should explain some of the thinking behind it .
Clearly the pact is primarily aimed at ensuring a stable foundation for the Euro , by ensuring that Member States in the Euro area keep their general government deficits below the Treaty ceiling of 3 % of gross domestic product , across a normal economic cycle .
But I should also add that by promoting stability-oriented fiscal policy the pact also aims at creating the conditions in which low interest rates will be consistent with low inflation .
From the Irish experience I can say that low interest rates and low inflation will help to promote investment , thus in turn promoting the objective of all Member States and every Member in this House which is to maximize sustainable growth and employment .
So much for the progress we have been making on EMU at Ecofin and indeed the prospects for the Dublin European Council in December .
But it is not just at Ecofin , or indeed at the European Parliament , that preparations for EMU are being made .
So I think it would be appropriate to end by briefly mentioning some of the things which are going on elsewhere and which provide further evidence of the increasing momentum towards EMU .
First of all , and this may be known to some of you , but not perhaps to all , there are practical preparations going on in the public administrations and in Member States ' banking systems for the change-over to the Euro .
Indeed it is clear that in some Member States these are now at quite an advanced stage .
Evidence that the EMU process has taken hold is also provided by that very cynical institution the financial markets where convergence trades have reduced the differentials between Member States ' interest rates .
Convergence among Member States as regards inflation has also increased significantly , a fact mentioned in recent reports from the Commission and the EMI .
There has also been the recent and indeed very welcome entry of both the Finnish markka and the re-entry of the Italian lire into the exchange rate mechanism .
I speak to you both as a politician and to politicians and it seems to me that the most convincing evidence of the commitment of Members States to EMU is the determination that they are showing in getting their public finances in order across all the Member States .
This determination arises not just from EMU but also because sound public finances make sense in their own right .
I said earlier the example of Ireland shows , if I may say so , that fiscal consolidation does work .
But that does not make it easy and it is the willingness to undertake the hard tasks which demonstrates Member States ' commitment to the EMU process .
Before I conclude , a couple of items were raised in the course of the debate to which I would like to respond .
First and foremost with regard to consumers and the question of a double-pricing , a contribution that was made by Mr Whitehead , I just want to say that from our point of view we intend in Dublin , for the week starting 9 December across the period of the Dublin Council , to request and obtain the cooperation of some of our large retail units , and more importantly our public houses , to introduce a system of double-pricing in order to provide our citizens with a sense of familiarity with this procedure and we expect , subject to final agreement , that the newspaper advertisements running up to the Christmas period for some of the large supermarkets will in fact have dual-pricing mechanisms in place .
I would like to see this process encouraged across the entire 15 Member States of the Community , even indeed , dare I say it , in Great Britain , Mr Harrison .
With regards to the international implications of the Euro , a point made by Mr De Clercq , if I recall correctly , this is something that we all should study in great detail .
At a conference recently in Berlin organized by the Kangaroo Group I offered some of my views in this respect .
Certainly we will be less vulnerable to external economic shocks than we currently are with 14 different currencies at the present time , which is a significant factor .
We will be able to invoice outside the Euro area far more of our customers directly in Euro than is currently the case .
Lastly , and perhaps most importantly , certainly for me speaking as a member of the socialist family of the European Union , we would be able to provide for our former colonial , now independent states in Africa and elsewhere a much more sound currency to have their primary products denoted in , a currency that does not fluctuate in value terms to the same degree as other international currencies , particularly the dollar .
That in turn will help to provide economic stability across the international global market .
However , I do not believe that enough work has yet been done in studying this particular phenomenon of the international dimension of the Euro and it is something that now we have opportunity to so do , having virtually completed a lot of the work in relation to the details of how the currency system will actually function .
My last and final word is to my old friend Freddy Willockx : Yes , you are right .
The European single currency project will not work unless it has the support of the people , the citizens of Europe .
It will not have their support if it does not comply with two overriding objectives .
First of all it has to be perceived and it has to perform as a sound hard currency , and I say that as a socialist .
It has to be seen and it has to perform as a sound hard currency that holds and retains its value .
Secondly , such a sound hard currency combined with sound fiscal and budgetary management of public finances in all of the Member States and within the Commission will create the space and the opportunity within which people will make investment decisions of their own , set against a background of low inflation and low interest rates .
It is against that background that those states who have created a space for themselves would be able to make the kind of interventions in the market systems so as to correct the failures of the market system in the delivery of services or in reaching out to those sectors of the labour market , or in fact those sections of our population , who through no fault of their own have been marginalized or who have been alienated .
A soft currency and high deficits is no friend of the European citizen of the present or the future .
Therefore I believe that the rules and regulations which we are trying to put in place for the single currency is the best friend for the European citizen and the European citizen will in turn recognize it as such and give it the kind of political support which it must have to be a success .
Mr President , can I first of all of behalf of the whole House thank the President of the Ecofin Council for his presentation today and more importantly , for the way in which he has engaged the European Parliament in dialogue since the Irish took over the presidency of the European Union .
I am sure I can speak on behalf of the whole House when I say how much we have valued his participation , not only in the meetings here in the Chamber , but also in Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and of course the informal meetings we have had over the last few months .
I would also like to thank the rapporteurs who have conducted the work on behalf of Parliament in an excellent fashion .
We have been able to coordinate these reports so that we can have this general debate today on what is an extremely important and indeed a historic issue for the European Union .
We have the privilege today of having this debate on the single currency .
We are debating reports which have been discussed in our various committees in Parliament , we have had the chance to discuss them in our political groups and we are now having a public debate on the floor of this House , as indeed we have had on many occasions in the past .
I hope that the President of the Ecofin Council , when he presides over the Finance Ministers on Monday , encourages all his colleagues , to engage in a similar debate in their own national parliaments because that is the way we can defeat the Euroscepticism in Europe that exists at the moment on the single currency , by having public debates in our own parliaments , our national parliaments , and ensuring that these issues are fully aired .
I hope that this House will join with me in condemning any government that prevents the national parliament having a debate on what is of course an absolutely crucial issue for the citizens of the European Union .
In particular he could whisper across the table to Mr Clark and encourage the British Government to have a full debate in the British Parliament in the very near future on this issue .
I would like to deal particularly with the issue of the stability pact .
Let me say on behalf of my group that we remain fully committed to the single currency .
We remain absolutely committed to strong economic coordination , which includes budgetary discipline , and we support the timetable for the implementation of the single currency from 1 January 1999 .
We are not prepared , however , to accept the budgetary straight-jacket that the German Finance Minister is trying to impose on us within the European Union .
We are in favour of having a stability pact that looks at the wider employment and economic implications for Europe , a pact that contain spending and borrowing at reasonable prudent levels , but which allows countries to take the necessary steps to prevent their economies slipping into recession .
We should not be trying to tie the hands of national governments in managing their own economies .
Any stability pact that emerges from the Ecofin Council that does that will be unacceptable not only to this House , but I believe will be unacceptable to the 15 national parliaments within the European Union .
On 16 October the European Commission agreed on the proposal for a stability pact to ensure budgetary discipline during the third phase of EMU .
What was expected to be a fiscal straight-jacket , fully inspired by irrational fears of fiscal irresponsibility rather than rational economic thinking , turned into a more reasonable , albeit still partly unsatisfactory instrument , to respond to a legitimate need for budgetary discipline amongst Member States in a forthcoming monetary union .
By avoiding quantifying significant negative annual real growth in the definition of exceptional and temporary circumstances , whose recognition allows temporary suspension of the obligation of compliance with the budget deficit criterion , the Commission refused to deprive Member States of the required budget flexibility to act promptly and effectively against significantly declining growth .
I commend the European Commission for having refused to tie the hands of Member States .
I hope after the vote in this House tomorrow the Commission will maintain its position .
I have great doubts however about whether the Ecofin Council will maintain the position proposed by the European Commission .
I hope that if this Parliament votes to have a much more general definition tomorrow , combined with the views of the European Commission , then the Ecofin Council will ensure that it does not have a prescriptive definition when it comes to some of these issues associated with the stability pact .
We have to realise that if you have a Member State that suffers from a fall in its real GDP of 1 % in a given year , going inevitably hand-in-hand with increasing unemployment , raising unemployment benefit expenditure and falling tax revenues , in such a difficult situation any country would witness a rapidly deteriorating budget deficit of several percentage points likely to push it over the 3 % deficit ceiling , thus making it excessive .
Even in such a difficult case , if the country 's first priority was to fight a rising deficit , what would then happen is that it would be unable to take the steps to deal with the unemployment problem and the problem of the decline in its economy .
We cannot have that sort of straight-jacket placed on Member States .
We cannot put economies in the European Union in that position and I do not believe that national parliaments will accept it .
We have to accept that over 90 % of Europe 's economy relies on the European market providing for powerful transmission mechanisms and spillover effects between Member States .
You could end up , if you accept the Waigel proposal with a large European recession , and in all probability with the larger Member States affected first .
The big Member States would be attacked by the measures that we might put in place at the Dublin Summit Meeting .
What I want to say to the President-in-Office of the Ecofin Council is yes , have a stability pact but have a stability pact that takes account of economic growth .
Yes , we want to have prudent spending and prudent borrowing .
We want to make sure that Member States do not undermine the single currency when it is created , but be realistic about this .
Do not create a mechanism that is unnecessary and which in the future could push Europe into a deep recession .
The European Parliament will not accept that , Member States will not accept that , and of course , most importantly , the people of Europe will condemn us if we bring that into operation .
Mr President , I should like to start by paying tribute to the Commission - not a common event , but it has to be done sometimes .
I should like to pay tribute to its work on convergence .
It has succeeded in creating a climate of consensus , allowing as many countries as possible to join the single currency when the time comes .
It has also succeeded in complying with the timetable , which is no mean feat , as we know .
So let that be put on record , Commissioner , as something that had to be said .
Now , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to give you my reactions to the ideas of a former high official of the French State , because they are directly associated with our debate .
Calling a spade a spade , he suggests a straightforward devaluation of the franc .
I say without hesitation that a devaluation would be dangerous for France , dangerous for the single currency and dangerous for Europe .
What does devaluation mean ?
In itself , absolutely nothing .
Exchange rates are not imposed by order .
All of us here know that .
We are no longer governed by a system of fixed parities .
The Bretton-Woods agreements do not govern , or no longer govern , the relations between currencies .
If we wanted to reduce the value of the franc , nothing could be easier .
All that would be needed would be for France to return to its former easy-going policies .
If the deficits were once again to be left to run themselves , there is no doubt whatever that the franc would fall .
Is that really a desirable development for France and for Europe ?
If the Bank of France were to return to its former inflationary habits , the franc would dive immediately .
Is that really what we want to see happening for France or for Europe ?
Budgetary and monetary slackness are not the answer to curing the evil of unemployment and the lethargic rate of growth .
Trying to put the principal blame for our tribulations with employment and wealth creation on currency suggests an outmoded and , if I may say so , fantastic view of things .
Yet this is true of every country in the European Union , and the others too .
Another problem associated with our debate , and with Mr Quinn 's comments , is the future value of the euro against the dollar .
This is a serious problem - it will call for careful consideration , and a clear statement from this Parliament .
The euro will fluctuate against the dollar for a long period - there can be no alternative to that .
So there is no such thing as a single international currency - that 's just daydreaming .
The value of the euro will fluctuate , depending on the economic policy followed by the States of the Union , on various fundamental factors and , of course , on the monetary policy pursued by the European Central Bank .
Here again , though , the value of the euro is not going to be determined by a political ukase .
We know that the European Central Bank 's objective will be price stability .
It is going to have to work towards that objective but also it is going to have to create conditions such as to favour strong , sustained growth and a high level of employment , as stipulated in the Treaty on European Union .
To talk about an overvalued euro , as some speakers have been inclined to do today , makes no economic sense and has more to do with cheap rhetoric than with economic reality .
Even though the euro may be essential to promote economic growth in Europe , we must not believe , or lead others to believe , that our unemployment problems are going to vanish at one wave of the magic wand of the single currency , even if it is undervalued relative to the dollar .
Ladies and gentlemen , that is the situation as I see it .
Mr President , I am going to divide my speech into two parts , because we are concerned today with two different aspects of economic policy .
The first concerns the transition to the single currency and the second the introduction and what we hope will be the definitive establishment of the euro as the single European currency .
Regarding the transition to the single currency , my main concern is that the Commission should be able to make every necessary and possible effort to ensure that those Member States which are unable to embark on Stage 3 from the outset can continue their efforts to achieve convergence .
In other words , we must ensure that those States which are now approaching convergence are put in a position where they can undertake a change of direction so that the criteria can be complied with and so that Europe can reckon on the largest possible number of Member States - even if not fifteen - from the moment of introduction of the single currency . This , in fact , will be the first great tangible sign which will enable all Europe 's citizens to see whether and in what form Europe exists .
The single currency is an unrepeatable opportunity : upon the single currency and with the single currency we can build Europe , and we can bring about those things that we have hitherto been unable to bring about .
I do have one great concern , though , and that is that the introduction of the euro may have economic and social consequences which we cannot yet quantify precisely .
Let me clarify that : introducing the euro and explaining it to all its users - which means , ultimately , the consumers - will have very precise costs and conditions .
We and all the European institutions must be in a position to meet those costs and those conditions .
On the one hand , then , we are going to have to think about the information to be provided to the consumer , the citizen , the end user ; and on the other hand we are going to have to think clearly about training the professional users who are going to present the euro : I am talking about the commercial retail sector , because it will be in the shops , the supermarkets , in the restaurants and the travel agencies that the consumer discovers the euro , and that is where he is going to have to find senior and junior staff and officials able to explain it to him and to help him understand how the single currency works .
So we are going to have to operate at two levels : on the one hand the so-called ' major outlets ' , where we are going to have to finance training courses at all levels , from the checkout girl to the warehouseman , and on the other hand the myriad small- and medium-sized enterprises , small businessmen of every magnitude and in every sector who , at their points of sale and within their commercial structures , are going to have to deal with consumers asking ' How does the euro work ?
What 's it worth in terms of my national currency ?
How am I going to do my shopping ? '
There , and only at that time , we shall see the birth of a great single market with 300 million consumers , a market which I prefer to call an ' internal market ' rather than a ' single market ' because it really will be a single great European system , and that will be the moment when the European citizen will finally appreciate that he is a European citizen .
Mr President , I wish to speak on the stability pact on behalf of the ELDR Group .
Firstly , let me say that in spite of the hurried nature of this debate , I welcome the fact that it is taking place .
In this most sensitive and critically important area of Member State budgetary policy and Stage 3 of monetary union it is important , we believe , that it be placed firmly and belong institutionally at the heart of the first pillar .
Given the extent of monetary policy integration foreseen by the single currency project , it is vital that its economic policy counterparts , as they emerge , should involve all the institutions of the Union .
The unfolding economic policy procedures must not be allowed to lapse into an intergovernmental mode .
We cannot contemplate a centralized monetary policy without a coherent parallel economic policy , subject to appropriate democratic control .
I congratulate the Commission on behalf of the Liberal Group for claiming ownership on behalf of all the Union of the stability pact concept and I believe that their proposal exhibits a careful and appropriate balance .
My Group supports the proposal and will vote against most of the amendments proposed , especially against those amendments that in our opinion send the wrong political signal by watering down the deficit criteria essential to a credible currency .
We will judge our final vote in the light of which amendments carry .
The German Government has done the European Union a service by raising this debate and by posing the challenge of how economic policy should be set and governed in Stage 3 of the Union .
In addition we are all conscious of the anxieties in the minds of so many Germans , who twice in living memory have seen their life savings destroyed by hyperinflation , that this should never happen again .
It is proper that these anxieties are listened to , respected and addressed .
But equally we believe that it is important that a well-founded national anxiety should not be transformed into a collective European angst and political deadlock .
Dublin II is fast approaching , to be preceded as we have heard by an Ecofin Council next Monday in Brussels .
Our belief is that there is a clear political and a financial market expectation that Dublin II will deliver the Eurostatute , ERM II and the stability pact .
Not to do so will I believe be perceived as a considerable set-back .
Indeed , if Dublin II does not resolve these issues , why are we rushing them through this Parliament , in this debate , so as to accommodate the other institutions ?
On the outstanding areas of disagreement on the stability pact , what constitutes temporary and exceptional circumstances and the automaticity of fines for errant States , the ELDR supports the room for manoeuvre and judgment indicated by the Commission 's proposal .
We do not accept that the exercise of constraint but real political judgement is a weakness .
Indeed the opposite , we believe it is the strength of the proposal .
Excessive zeal for technical , quantitative definitions runs the economic risk of turning the stability pact into a straight-jacket .
It runs the political risk of making the best the enemy of the good and it runs the Summit risk of snatching defeat from the jaws of victory .
The Commission should hold its line and if Ecofin and the Commission hold that line we will whole-heartedly support them .
Mr President , today 's debate is a further indication of the haste with which the European Union is moving ahead on all of the issues pertaining to admission to the third stage of economic and monetary union .
Following on from the stubborn refusal to put the subject on the agenda at the intergovernmental conference , which would allow account to be taken of the tragic repercussions for the peoples of the Union and for the economies of the weakest countries and make it possible for things other than the infamous nominal criteria to be taken into consideration as conditions for the adoption of the single currency , the European Union is setting the stage for a lengthy period of austerity and budgetary belt-tightening via the German-inspired stability pact .
It was said at the outset that austerity would be necessary until the introduction of the single currency , as a means to not missing the EMU boat , but now austerity is being imposed as a permanent thing . That transformation is not fortuitous .
Some people are trying to sugar the pill , to weaken the discontent and resistance of ordinary people , by attempting to promote improvements of one sort or another in the mechanism of the single monetary policy , as defined in the Maastricht Treaty , and in the ensuing decisions taken by the Community 's institutions .
They can see the impasse to which the EMU decisions are leading and are trying , without , however , distancing themselves from the whole enterprise , to broach certain concerns and worries via requests hinging on the interpretation of the criteria .
Mr Metten 's endeavour is understandable , but it does not really change anything .
A more flexible interpretation of the criteria would , unquestionably , bring more countries into the euro zone . However , it would not resolve the main problem associated with EMU , namely the danger of the establishment of a multi-speed Union , of a core Union surrounded by a wider zone of countries of second class status in terms of their economies and institutional clout , which private circles in the European Union are seeking to bring about .
It offers no help on the issue of the ceding of control over monetary and exchange rate policy and , indeed , of control over economic policy itself , to undemocratic mechanisms totally lacking in transparency , such as the ESCB , whose decisions will have no parliamentary and democratic legitimacy .
The total indifference regarding the consequences that proceeding with EMU will have for workers and employment in the real , wider , economy stands out very starkly .
The reports speak of the need for implementation of EMU , but nowhere does one find any mention of the millions of jobs that will be lost , of the disintegration that will be caused in the countries with diverging economies , of the collapse of labour relations , of the casting-aside of the social model that has been a feature of Europe in the recent decades as a result of the struggles engaged in by the labour movement .
Mr President , the tolerance of working people is running out .
The worries that some people are expressing about the future of the European idea convince no one .
We serve notice yet again that there is big trouble ahead if the warnings sent by the growing mobilization of the peoples of Europe against the theft of their incomes and of their other hard won rights are not heeded pretty quickly .
My group is totally opposed to the enterprise of economic and monetary union that the Maastricht Treaty has set in motion and it resents the stubborn refusal to allow discussion of the subject at the intergovernmental conference .
So it will certainly not be supporting these reports .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased that our debate on monetary union today is not about ' if ' but about ' how ' , and that this applies to all groups .
We have been talking today about the legislative requirements for the independence of the national central banks , the institutional imbalance of the European central banks , public acceptance and the third stage of economic and monetary union .
I should like to endorse , very clearly and positively , what Mr Donnelly said .
Let us have a stability pact by all means , but one geared to the budgetary stability of the individual nations , to employment policy , and absolutely not in the form of the Waigel-style strait-jacket .
I would like to make that absolutely clear on behalf of our group .
The extent to which any such compliance is actually necessary has now developed into a subject of heated debate , because the political concessions made to the opponents of Maastricht , in the form of narrow interpretation and strict compliance , have given added importance to the fiscal convergence criteria - an importance for which there is no basis whatever in the Treaty and no economic justification .
But it should be made quite clear that a stable monetary union is not necessarily tied to strict observance of the stated quotas .
Rather , the issue is the direction thus indicated in which the budgetary policy of the individual Member States should move .
Precisely that can be seen happening everywhere : budgets are being consolidated , excess government deficits are being reduced .
Even today , the gap between the highest and lowest deficits among the EU States has become significantly narrower , and that trend must continue .
In conclusion , I should like to say that a debate on whether to have monetary union would run counter to the present trend of a changeover among banks and small- and medium-sized enterprises , and that I greatly welcome the way today 's debate is being conducted !
Mr President , I would like to remark that one Member of this House , Mr Goldsmith , who rarely favours us with his presence in debates on economic matters or indeed any matters at all , has said with huge media coverage that Europe is sleep-walking into EMU .
I consider that to be a gross insult to this House , to all the rapporteurs , to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , to the President of Ecofin and to President Santer and the Commission .
I would perhaps rather describe our progress as zig-zagging , because if you look at the statements that were made , five States were said to be eligible , then it was four and recent coverage has suggested only two .
I would like to congratulate Ireland on having become the tiger economy of Europe and of being able to qualify .
Now my Group and my party in Scotland is in favour of EMU .
We consider it absurd to have a single market without the accompanying single currency .
I have the speaking time of Mr Sainjon who was taken ill , and I have agreed to say one or two things on his behalf .
He wants to see a single currency working to create employment , and Europe must concentrate its efforts on meeting this objective .
The euro must be regarded as the engine driving economic and social progress .
He says it represents three things for Europe today .
It will help to consolidate peace in our continent and among our peoples , of course any government moving in the right direction should be able to join , and we must watch that we do not overvalue the euro and so destroy a lot of our aims .
All the reports are excellent .
Starting with Mr Metten , I like the confident note in his report .
He is confident that at the third stage we will start with a sufficient number of Member States .
He also points out that an arithmetical application of the criteria is not possible , and if applied there would not be a sufficient number .
In his explanatory statement he points out we could either do this with a big bang or we could do it in the way we are , converging first and then creating the Union .
So we come to the need for flexibility which other speakers have mentioned .
This changes .
For instance , Denmark , which meets the criteria , has an interest rate 1 % higher than some states that do not meet the criteria .
So it looks as if we still have some questions to be answered with regard to exactly what flexibility means .
When is a decline in deficit substantial ?
When is a debt sufficiently diminishing ?
What is a satisfactory pace ?
Is there any limit to flexibility ?
If we take Belgium 's debt as being twice the permitted or suggested amount , would there ever be any limit to be imposed or are we just going to say if we are moving consistently and continuously in the right direction the state can qualify ?
Is there any threat to the date of 1 January ?
I would like to congratulate Mr Christodoulou on taking on board the economic aspects , the quest for job creation .
That was not always the attitude when I lodged amendments to that effect a year ago , but the groups seem to have come round to that .
With regard to the stability pact , I have a question for the Commission .
Are they going to make proposals for the surveillance of the ' outs ' ?
Are we going to treat Britain with an opt-out in the same way as other ' outs ' who want to get in ?
If Britain does not want to get in and uses the opt-out , which I deplore , are they in the same position ?
How many years will the surveillance obligation to report annually continue ?
I agree with Mr Donnelly 's speech in its entirety and particularly his plea that we do fall into the trap of the proposed German strait-jacket .
I would like to congratulate Mr Herman on his passionate speech and on his need to inform , prepare and reassure .
Is it not deplorable that in the State I belong to there is almost no attempt to inform ?
They seem to have opted out of that obligation .
I would like to again repeat a point I have often made about public acceptability of this new currency .
I suggest and cling to the idea that one side of the note and coin should be similar to the existing issuing notes that are issued by banks .
That would go a long way to make the public feel that this was their currency .
In Hoppenstedt , which follows on Metten , he repeats many of the demands and expresses his regrets at some of the statements that are being made that States have to make savings because of Maastricht , that the European ideal has been undermined .
Mr Harrison I thought made his paper very clear and come to life when he emphasized the need for a policy mix between centralized monetary policy and decentralized economic and employment policies .
He mentions in his explanatory statement the rather bad example that followed German unification when a wrong mix of policies caused great hardship indeed .
Mr Harrison explained his report very clearly .
On the doom-and-gloom side of loss of jobs , I wish the people who talk about the loss of jobs would tell us how exactly the jobs are going to be lost . They say this so often as if it is a fact .
The media in Britain say it all the time .
Will there not in fact be extra jobs ?
One speaker talked about the need for training .
There will be the need for computer adjustment , certainly at the beginning there will be some extra jobs .
So would we please pin those critics down .
For exporters , and my country Scotland exports six times as much per head as most other countries , the markets will be more calculable and comparable the tourists will benefit and we will remove exchange costs of ECU 25 billion .
Mr President , today 's monetary debate once again emphasizes that this European Parliament not only insists upon the democratic accountability of monetary institutions and authorities but itself genuinely endeavours to adopt a position which furthers the implementation of monetary union .
I should first mention the European Currency Act , where I am glad to say that both the Commission 's drafts make it very apparent that we want the euro to have a clear legal status - more legal certainty and transparency .
The continuity of the Treaties is a very important signal for us .
Most of all , I welcome the fact that the Commission has tackled these projects in good time , as it was called upon to do in Madrid , and indeed in the Green Paper before Madrid .
We want the public , and the markets too , to be able to adjust to monetary union in good time because , of course , a badly prepared project is a bad project , while a good project must be in all our interests .
With regard to the European monetary laws , if I may so call them , I should like to emphasize that they will be an important instrument for getting the message across to the public and to the economic actors that monetary union is coming .
It really would be a good thing if these regulations - rather than just a subsequent regulation - were to make it completely clear that the transaction costs that monetary union is going to do away with are not suddenly going to crop up again in the form of conversion costs in the reality of the single European market - the reality of European monetary union .
I think it is very important to be clear about that .
It also needs to be completely clear that dual pricing is not only an ideological objective but a necessary step to keep the promise we are constantly making to the public that monetary union will be a technical currency conversion , with no effect on value , and not a currency reform .
That means , obviously , that we must talk to the main players about the form that dual pricing is to take , to make it as clear as we can to all concerned that prices are not going to change because of the Euro and the introduction of the single currency .
We need monetary union , but - as well as making it clear that prices are not going to go up - we also need to enable people to learn a new price awareness , a difficult psychological process but one that is necessary for the success of monetary union .
Let me also say something about the other projects .
It is right that everyone is stressing the independence of the central banks .
It is right that the reports - the Hoppenstedt and Harrison reports , for example - also stress the need to develop ideas in monetary policy which reflect our other objectives and can be integrated into a better policy mix .
But now I come to a problem : I would certainly like all the projects to be adopted by the Dublin Council of European Heads of State and Government , but I would also like the stability pact to be adopted , as we in the European Parliament call for it to be adopted .
Because one thing is clear : a European stability pact that is not concluded by all fifteen Member States , or a European stability council which is not a forum where all fifteen Member States can express an opinion , would be the monetary equivalent of Schengen , something which we in this House reject .
After all , we cannot demand a new European exchange rate mechanism to provide a link between the euro and the other currencies while , at the same time , trying to introduce the possibility of a new form of exclusion !
That must not happen at any price , and that must be made completely clear !
Similarly , my view is that the German Government must unfailingly comply with the European Parliament 's demand that no quantified deficit objectives should be written into the stability pact , because , as I see it , not only would that be politically senseless , not to say damaging , but it would also be economically dubious .
There would also be a problem if the Maastricht Treaty were to be amended , and in my view that would not happen at all without the ratification procedure .
So I should be very glad if the Council and Commission felt able to adopt the ideas in the European Parliament 's proposal regarding the stability pact .
Mr President , Monetary Union , which is to come into being on 1 January 1999 , is a decisive and irreversible step on the road to European integration .
Consequently , it is the duty of the Commission and of this Parliament to guarantee the security and credibility of the path leading us to that Union and also its soundness and stability once achieved .
The Council is shortly to make a pronouncement on three aspects , which are still to be defined , which are fundamental elements of the credibility , security and stability of future Monetary Union .
I refer to the stability pact , to the definition of the future European Monetary System between the euro and the currencies of those Member States not participating in monetary union and the legal scope of the euro .
It is not my intention to speak about the first two aspects , since these have been discussed in previous interventions . I shall restrict my contribution to the third aspect , which is the subject of Mr Herman 's report which we are debating today .
Council regulations relating to the introduction of the euro have a single objective : to give legal security to operators in their financial and commercial operations throughout the process of introducing the euro and the progressive disappearance of national currencies both before and after 1 January 1999 .
In this sense , we feel the approach is the right one .
However , it could be improved in legal terms and we support the amendments Mr Herman proposes in this connection in his report , and we believe that it should be strengthened by a second objective - the objective of offering security and transparency of information to consumers and citizens to explain how their national currency converts into the euro .
This is undoubtedly the spirit and substance of the amendments proposed in the Herman report , which we support .
Planned Monetary Union requires everyone to make an unambiguous pledge to the citizens of Europe .
The change has to be explained and it has to be made easy .
The changeover to the euro must not make anyone uncertain about continued purchasing power and everyone must be capable of understanding the need to offer and conduct transactions expressed both in euros and in their national currency for a certain period .
Commissioner , this endeavour will not end with the approval of these regulations but must commence from their approval , with cooperation and commitment from all Member States .
We must not forget that this is a new currency for all citizens and that society 's attitudes and behaviour are not modified by the mere publication of the Official Journal .
We are well aware that the Commission intends to propose a directive on this subject but we believe that a directive will perhaps be insufficient .
We ought to be speaking in terms of a genuine mobilization plan - this House would undoubtedly welcome the opportunity to discuss this with the Commissioner .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , within the framework of Mr Metten 's report , pursuant to Article 109j ( 2 ) of the Treaty , Parliament has forwarded its opinion to the Heads of State and Government on whether a majority of the Member States fulfil the necessary conditions for the adoption of a single currency .
I should remind the House that the Heads of State and Government decided , at the European Council in Florence , that the assessment called for by Article 109j of the Treaty will not be needed .
Be that as it may , the revised and more realistic version of the report calls for no particular comment , and our group should be able to vote in favour of it .
It is still true , incidentally , that a very restrictive interpretation of the convergence criteria would keep a number of Member States outside monetary union , resulting , at the worst , in a major split in the single market , and might encourage a sudden sharp rise in the value of the euro , whereas a more balanced interpretation would reduce the risk of a split in the single market , thus reducing the grave danger that an overvalued euro would represent .
With regard to the Herman report , the legal status of the European currency will have to be such as to ensure the irreversibility and credibility of the process but also such as to avoid the excess costs resulting from a dual national / euro currency system .
In other words , we will have to avoid the legal coexistence of the euro and the national currencies .
So it will be preferable for the euro to be the only legal tender with effect from 1 January 1999 .
Similarly , there is a consensus to the effect that the legal continuity of contracts must not be affected by the introduction of the single currency , and that is as it should be .
After all , within the framework of an internationally applicable monetary law , we should recall that every State has the sovereign right to define the characteristics of its currency and to define and vary the rate at which the old currency is converted to the new .
Well , the European regulations now being finalized should be a law of that type , so that the universally recognized principle of monetary nominalism will apply .
With regard to contracts that are subject to the law of a third country , the introduction of the euro must , once again , not be seen as a challenge to the equilibrium of the contracts .
Overall , then , the problems posed by the continuity of contracts seem less complex than had initially been thought .
But it is also quite conceivable that defining the legal status of the euro will be a difficult business , at least for the transition period .
Among the Member States , the sticking point at present is defining those exceptional and temporary circumstances that would enable a State to escape the system of sanctions if its budget deficit were to exceed the imposed ceiling of 3 % of GDP .
Our group will , of course , lend its support to Mr Herman 's report , but even so I think it worth recalling that it is the monetary law that will define the name of the Union currency , so that there is no need for us to dwell on that .
Mr President , I welcome these reports which we are debating today .
There is no doubt that we are on track to the single currency .
It will make the internal market work better , creating wealth and jobs .
It will reduce interest rates for countries such as my own and for our citizens it will represent a tangible symbol of European unity .
The Liberal Democrats in this House believe that as time goes on the well-drafted parts of the Maastricht Treaty are proving their worth .
The convergence criteria and the rules to counter excessive deficits , for example , are among these and must be respected .
In my Member State there is a rather strange situation at the moment where members of the governing party are worried that they are about to get a dose of their own medicine .
They have removed financial independence from local government in Britain .
They have capped the spending of local authorities which have spent more than the government thinks they should and they now fear that Britain could have fines imposed on it in a similar way if it exceeds the limit of 3 % ceiling on GDP , like some rate-capped miscreant local authority .
Perhaps if those members stopped behaving like councillors in the London Borough of Wandsworth they would have less to worry about .
I have two specific questions I should like to put tonight , one to the Council and one to the Commission .
Would the President-in-Office of the Council confirm that Monday 's Ecofin will not take decisions , as was reported to the British House of Commons yesterday ?
Would he also confirm that Article 103 excludes any possibility of fines or penalties being imposed on countries which do not join stage 3 of monetary union ?
Would the Commissioner confirm that policies adopted by the Member States for collection of Community-based taxes like VAT and excise duties in their rush to bolster their public finances do not contravene the Treaty requirements to treat Community-based taxes in the same way as Member-State-based taxes .
I should be grateful for an answer to those questions tonight .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must confess to being somewhat disconcerted on reading these reports . When I see the extent to which they disregard the real processes taking place in the various countries , and in Europe as a whole , it is as if the intention were to create a fog of abstract relationships between abstract economies , a fog in which the reality of people 's lives , their real situation , has disappeared .
Thus , monetarism celebrates its triumph in a situation which sees the disappearance not only of social considerations but even of relationships between currencies and growth or stagnation , industrial development policies , even economic trends .
But as soon as we blow away that fog to see what lies behind it , what do we find ?
We find the relationship between the economic policies pursued hitherto and their consequences - a deep-seated social crisis ; the relationship between the pursuit of those very convergence criteria which are once again being proposed , the policies designed to balance national budgets by controlling deficits and indebtedness which have been the sterile end result of those economic policies , and the serious problems sweeping Europe : massive , structural unemployment ; an assault on the bases of the welfare state ; deregulation of the employment market ; constant rescaling of the purchasing power of wages and salaries .
The time has come to see the error of this approach , which lies precisely in its own political and cultural environment . There is an unspoken assumption in these reports , which is the assumption that the relationship between Europe , the single currency and Maastricht really all boils down to Maastricht : Europe ceases to exist as a political and planning arena , and the single currency is simply squeezed and distorted until it fits Maastricht , so that even the stability pact is viewed as an intensification of these trends .
Now some slight degree of flexibility is conceded as a way of rapidly achieving the objective of the single currency , since it is absolutely obvious that that objective cannot be achieved without a critical mass of European States : a mere two or three would not be sufficient to achieve it .
But what is being permitted today , a certain amount of cosmetic surgery on the budget of each State , will tomorrow be squeezed again , perhaps even under threat of sanctions , for any State which does not succeed in complying with them .
So we will be left with an even more severe monetaristic logic , calling into question European civilization as such .
So if we really want to talk about a single currency associated with a positive solution to the real problems of European economies and social conditions , we need to have the courage to separate out what can be separated - in other words , the procedure for approaching the single currency - from the policies of the Maastricht Treaty , by putting on our agenda the one thing that is essential unless we really want to see the European currency achieved by bringing European civilization to its knees : the amendment and correction of the Maastricht Treaty .
Mr President , I should like first of all to say a few words about the Metten report .
In his recommendation he tries most commendably to ensure that as many countries as possible can proceed to the third stage of EMU at the beginning of January 1999 .
Our Group too considers it a precondition for the third stage that as many Member States as possible - at the minimum , a majority of them - should be able to proceed to it .
However , it is not entirely unproblematic in this connection how it proves possible to solve the equation : the solution proposed is that the convergence criteria be interpreted non-arithmetically .
This could also be described as creative interpretation .
However , I should like to draw attention to the fact that , for example , the Director of Eurostat has said in Parliament that there are many grey areas in the Member States with regard to efforts to reduce budget deficits and that all should be clarified before 1998 so that equal treatment of all countries can be ensured .
One example is the inclusion of the French state telephone company Telecom 's pension funds in the calculation of France 's budget deficit .
Using tricks like this really will not result in a stable currency .
I should like to put the following questions to Commissioner de Silguy : is it intended that grey areas and various tricks should be assessed as a matter of urgency ?
Are we not already heading towards a situation in which the stability of the future European currency will be in doubt ?
Mr President , the debate on Europe and the fact that it is being held in the European Parliament are strangely linked by various factors .
Let me illustrate my point .
Parliamentarians complain that Member States are subject to enormous savings ' for the sake of Maastricht ' .
That does not make the concept of Europe more attractive .
But the real reason is that EMU must be implemented at all costs according to the planned schedule .
The strange thing is that the European Parliament is also going along with that idea .
The national budget policy of the Member States is currently aimed at fulfilling the convergence criteria .
To this end some countries are performing accounting contortions which are incompatible with the objectives of real convergence , which is a veritable time bomb under the solid character of EMU .
But strangely enough this is scarcely mentioned in this House .
Amendment No 15 to part II of the Christodoulou report is very strange .
It assumed that Greece should be given special treatment because of its higher expenditure on defence .
So can the Netherlands also be given exceptional treatment on the grounds of the high expenditure needed for dikes and coastal protection work ?
Our Oosterschelde dam costs eight billion guilders .
Other European countries have other kinds of problems .
This kind of discussion illustrates how unsuitable a monetary union is for the European Union .
Finally , is it not rather strange that during the hearing Mr Duisenberg asked that parliamentary representatives participate in the future ECB Council or that confidential documents be sent .
Some Members cannot warm to the idea of an independent central bank .
But strangely enough they are in favour of the euro .
I have yet to meet a member of the public who has any confidence in this whole business .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteurs on these monetary reports .
They have done an excellent job and have covered all the aspects which will be discussed in Dublin .
They have given a very balanced opinion on how we should give guidance to the Commission and the Ministers in Dublin .
I start from the premise of why do we want a single currency .
There are 20 million unemployed across the European Union .
We want improvements in the single market and , as has been said before on many occasions , with something like 20 million small and medium-sized enterprises across Europe and 20 million people unemployed it does not need a mathematician to realize that if every company took on one extra member of staff , unemployment would be slashed right across Europe .
If you ask industry what economic conditions it needs in order to take on another worker , it will say that , firstly , it wants low interest rates so that it can borrow to invest .
Secondly , where trade is across national borders it wants protection from exchange rate variations to improve trade .
Thirdly , it requires a stable currency which can go anywhere in the world .
Obviously the answer to this is the euro and the euro will boost many industries across Europe and help improve the job situation as a whole .
An area close to my heart is that of tourism .
I have the honour to represent an area in the north-west of England , Blackpool and Fylde which is very dependent on tourism .
The euro will benefit that .
20 % of economic activity in Europe is directly or indirectly related to tourism .
Another area which is very important and again a key industry for Europe is the aerospace industry .
This is a large industry in my own constituency in Lancashire and we have the ludicrous situation at the moment where European companies are working closely with one another but all orders for aircraft are made in dollars rather than in Member States ' own currencies or in the euro
How do we get there ?
Clearly , we do so by having a stability pact which will maintain discipline between Member State budgets .
This pact should not have rigid rules but should at least encourage stability .
I do not think fines should be imposed automatically .
A new ERM is essential but should not be a prerequisite to moving to stage 3 .
The UK has problems , mainly political and not economic , which I am sure will be sorted out with a change of government and we will then see the UK ready to move to stage 3 under a socialist government .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there are a few further thoughts I should like to contribute to this extremely important debate , thoughts prompted by the fact that the globalization of financial markets is meaning that economic convergence between the Member States is indispensable even if only to guarantee a balanced growth of their financial markets without drastic consequences for the real economy .
This situation simply must not be a one-off type of result , but must be guaranteed on a permanent basis .
Hence , even without the forthcoming single currency , respect for convergence criteria and some kind of stability pact would be necessary in any case in order not to expose the European economic system and its market - which are more and more closely associated - to the dangers of a shock effect which would have all kinds of serious consequences .
However , the convergence criteria and the stability pact are suffering from an approach which I would venture to call an accountant 's approach , a purely quantitative one , which does not consider the root of the composition of the resources entering and leaving public budgets but is confined to examining them in terms of balances .
As far as income is concerned , the European Parliament has already on previous occasions - for example , recently , in connection with the single market - not only shared the Commission 's concerns regarding the adverse effects of the discrepancies between the Member States and the fiscal competition existing in many sectors but also expressed the opinion that the future of European economic policy will be dominated by a serious imbalance between a common monetary policy , budgetary policies strictly coordinated by the stability pact and diverse , uncoordinated taxation policies .
The need , therefore , is for an approach which is much better coordinated between the Member States , an approach which must of course come into being by stages , and in my view the same requirement also exists for the macro sector of public spending .
This , in the various Member States , not only raises frequent problems of a comprehensive nature , associated with the need to make the role of the State within the economy less cumbersome and to release resources for the market , but also causes distortions within the more important sectors of public spending - welfare , health and public-sector employment - which , with their automated systems and rules , distort spending in such a manner as to make the stability pact either lacking in credibility or a politically intolerable strait-jacket for many countries .
In conclusion , we would point out the need to proceed with clear-headedness , both as regards the problems of coordinating tax revenues and as regards the need to compare different forms of coordination , although the subject is a very difficult one as regards the make-up of public spending .
Mr President , a single currency should result in lower interest rates in many parts of the European Union .
The Irish pound , as one of the smaller currencies in the Union , has sometimes been subject to external pressures which in turn resulted in very high interest rates .
The prospect of Ireland entering a large currency zone capable of withstanding external pressures is one which will be welcomed by most Irish people .
One of the biggest costs confronting small and medium-sized business , where the bulk of today 's jobs are to be found , is the cost of servicing the capital which is being borrowed to fund such things as product development or property and equipment purchases .
Taking out a mortgage to buy a house is usually the largest and most expensive personal financial commitment entered into by most people .
Interest rate fluctuations have meant that borrowing for business expansion or house buying has proven to be a very risky undertaking , often resulting in bankruptcy or house repossessions when interest rates have drifted above the average levels .
A single currency should encourage lower interest and mortgage rates and in the process allow small and mediumsized businesses to operate in a more stable environment and also reduce the pressure on home owners to service their mortgages .
Mr President , on the evening of Sunday , 24 November 1996 , the extraordinary Council of economic and finance ministers worked flat out to arrange for Father Christmas to visit the Italians a month early , and to come up with a brilliant solution - fixing the lira within the exchange mechanism of the European Monetary System at a rate of 990 to the German mark ; it may be remembered that the lira exchange rate a few weeks earlier was 1010-1020 .
This is a worrying development , bearing in mind that this decision will significantly reduce the former encouraging prospects for exports from northern Italy .
Not only that , but these moves impose a further penalty on the incomes of small- and medium-sized enterprises , already persecuted by a perverse tax system - they are going to have to think about their futures and about how to live with an unfavourable exchange rate .
Despite an unfavourable economic climate , the European Union has made significant progress towards monetary convergence in 1996 .
If progress continues at the same pace , virtually all those Member States who wish to do so will be able to join Stage Three of European monetary union on 1 January 1999 .
There is no lack of imagination in the European Union , but there is no concreteness either : the stricter the interpretation of the convergence criteria and the other significant factors , the smaller will be the number of Member States joining , and yet - I must emphasize - the interpretation will once again be a political decision , taken by a two-thirds majority of the Ecofin Council .
What scale can be used to quantify the problems of unemployment , of the cost of running the country , of interest rates and of inflation - which , in Italy , has reached an all-time low only as a result of reduced consumption ?
The determination of every state to become a full member of Europe will not be enough , even the ' Euro-tax ' proposed by Italy will not be enough .
It is essential that all States should subject themselves to rigorous and previously agreed choices , including their tolerance margins .
Mr President , this set of reports by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy is highly significant and reveals the times we are living in , in terms of concepts and approaches .
Just because I am a politician does not mean that I have forgotten my training and professional experience as economist and economics professor . I am therefore particularly sensitive to the strong winds currently blowing .
Indeed I find it difficult and am hard put to take part in this work and assess documents that are transformed into motions for a resolution apparently aimed - judging by their titles - at dealing with the real economy yet ending up with the wood invisible for the trees , i.e. words and concepts such as interest rates , exchange rates , capital markets , inflation , monetary mass , single currency , the statutes and structure of the European Central bank , excessive budget deficits and other nominative aggregates , with no reference by anyone to the use of resources , the employment and deployment of production factors , the degree of meeting social needs , rates of economic growth , economic and social development , the distribution of income , living standards or the well-being of our peoples .
Ten years ago the Commission introduced to the Community playing-field the notions of nominal and real convergence and went through a stage of mixing the two up , confusing economic with nominal , and ending up with a pot pourri or having regard only for nominal convergence , even when the titles of documents seem to suggest the opposite .
It is also interesting that , with the real economy forgotten , these reports reflect the very contemporary concern for flexibility , without spelling it out , something which for years and years was presented as intransigent inflexibility leaving absolutely no room to manoeuvre from a single transnational strategy and single monetary and budget policies .
But that was not enough !
Not without paradox , we leap from flexible assessments to even greater inflexibility on the basis of stability pacts without any regard for the effects on the real economy .
Has the latter not yet been exterminated ?
These reports are typical of the times - they are fashionable , appropriate and obsessive .
But other times are around the corner ...
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is beneficial to have all these reports , providing the opportunity to broaden our consideration of the problems of European monetary union , extending the range of questions and discussing them on a more differentiated basis .
At the same time , though , one result seems to be that honourable Members find something better to do , and I find that a regrettable response to such a fateful question .
At any rate , the bottom line is that we in this Parliament reject Waigel 's notions of simulating strict compliance with the criteria with a European straitjacket designed to replace economic policy throughout the future EU with a purely mechanical book-keeping apparatus .
Mr Ribeiro is right : we must seek out new ways of achieving the objectives of the Treaty to enable us to measure EMU against Europe 's real needs - combatting mass unemployment and overcoming the environmental crisis . We constantly refer to these objectives as our highest priority , without really suiting the action to the word .
The reports contain a number of things on which we can agree , but there are also unresolved questions that are not dealt with : employment problems caused by precipitate budgetary consolidation , saving until there is nothing more to save , taking account of criteria for real convergence that go beyond Mr Christodoulou 's sensible approaches .
There is no reference to the need for binding transnational rules in the social and environment sectors as a precondition for viable economic growth in real terms . Nor is a word said about the various dodges , offsetting of pensions and budgetary fudges that are being used to simulate compliance with the criteria so that , ultimately , the problems will be carried forward unresolved into monetary union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , sometimes we have to reconsider the most basic questions .
Who , today , actually wants monetary union ?
The public don 't seem particularly enthusiastic , as far as I know .
Where are the citizens ' petitions calling for monetary union as a matter of urgency ?
Where is the public clamour for it ?
The fact is that this project has its origin in cosmopolitan ideologies aimed at doing away with national identities .
And the driving forces behind these ideologies are the Christian Democrat and Socialist governments of most of the States of Europe .
The second set of protagonists in this business are the big multinationals , always anxious to nibble away at the existence of independent States that might oppose their decision-taking methods .
Finally , the United States are involved in the same process , because they would rather exercise control over a single European contact than several different national ones .
So there is a political intent behind this business , no doubt about that , but there is no economic necessity .
Is monetary union economically necessary ?
The lessons of history tell us that it is better to have a currency which is used only in a limited territorial area but is adapted to the economy of that area - as is the case with the Swiss franc , for example - rather than a currency which is valid throughout a continent and is more or less soundly managed .
The lessons of history tell us , too , that newly independent countries immediately create their own currency - which is surely not a matter of chance - and often do so successfully , as in the case of Czechoslovakia , or rather the Czech Republic , or Slovenia or Estonia .
And now , in a period when the creation of new currencies in Eastern Europe is endorsing the coming of independence and freedom , we in the West are planning to eliminate our national currencies .
There is a paradox here !
So what are the principles by which we might be guided today ?
The Hoppenstedt report rightly says that the introduction of the euro cannot go ahead against the will of the citizens , which in our view means that it can only be introduced if popular referenda give the go-ahead to the national governments .
Genuine democracy must be our first guiding principle .
In any case , the process of economic growth is , by definition , a process of evolving differentiation - of divergence .
The policy of convergence pursued with a view to monetary union runs counter to this natural reality .
Life always means divergence .
Convergence is for cemeteries .
So we need to choose between two priorities .
Either we go ahead with monetary union at any price , accepting low growth rates , which means convergence , which really means sclerosis , or we go looking for strong , sustainable growth with full employment , in which case we have to abandon monetary union as something that is not necessary .
Since 1945 , growth in Europe , when it was strong , was always based on a variety of currencies .
The United States , at that time , had a single currency and yet a less rapid rate of growth .
So there is no relationship between economic growth and monetary union .
Our second principle , then , is to give priority to growth rather than to European monetary unification .
And our third principle is that it is dangerous to hand over more and more power to the international technocratic authorities .
It follows that the present process of monetary union is antidemocratic , antisocial and antinational .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our congratulations to the rapporteurs must on this occasion be much more than formal .
This debate in the European Parliament is truly historic , although judging by the attendance one might not think so .


Our rapporteurs have done very substantial work , and two of them , Mr Herman and Mr Christodoulou , have been under an unacceptable pressure of time which must not happen again .
Having said that , I would like to endorse Mr Donnelly 's comment about this being an historic debate and Mr Herman 's inspired words emphasizing the momentous nature of this occasion as we observe the single currency moving closer to reality .
I also think that congratulations should be extended to our man from the Commission who has laboured like few others for this common objective of ours and who will continue to do so until the project reaches fruition - at least I hope so .
Our satisfaction would be far greater if only , along with the progress on monetary union , there was some parallel success in the reduction of unemployment and in the limiting of regional inequalities for us to welcome , as there ought to be .
These things are self-contained objectives to which the European Union attaches great importance , especially the reduction of unemployment , which we have elevated to the status of the number one problem - though in words only I fear - , and they are by no means unconnected with the success of the single currency .
Unfortunately , in these areas , in both of them , unemployment and regional inequality , the situation is far from good .
The recent report from Commissioner Wulf-Mathies informed us that the reduction of regional inequalities has come to a halt , and as far as unemployment , which has grown by 60 % in Europe over the last 30 years , is concerned , Mr President , there is no sign of a recovery .
The worst thing of all is that our progress to the single currency has become identified with a certain kind of budgetary policy which is exacerbating the real problems of unemployment and regional inequality for no good reason .
They say that this restrictive budgetary policy is necessary as a means to getting on top of inflation .
What inflation ?
No one on this side of the House is in favour of inflation , which hits working people first and hardest of all .
But with average inflation in Europe stable at around 2 % - leaving aside Greece which has very high inflation , but for only a little longer I hope - the invoking of the need for price stability to justify continuing with a stiflingly tight budgetary policy smacks a little bit of the general staff plans that were devised for the battles of World War I. And we all know what happened to the armies which relied on those plans .
It is particularly worrying that the Commission , instead of contemplating a new policy , seems to be thinking in terms of making these measures even more stringent , if that is possible , via the stability pact which the Christodoulou report deals with specifically .
It has got to be taken on board , Mr President , that in making the 3 % deficit over the reference value an absolute maximum the stability pact effectively revises Article 1 of Protocol 5 and establishes a new reference value of around 1.5 % .
It should also be pointed out that government investment expenditure is not excluded from the calculation of the deficit , which is a violation of the spirit and , in part , of the letter of the Treaty .
I hope that at least the request by Mr Christodoulou that forced expenditure on an expensive arms procurement programme for defence purposes by a Member State will be recognized as an exceptional circumstance .
That , however , is a special issue .
The basic issues , Mr President , are the doubtful legitimacy of the stability pact procedure and the fuelling of unemployment that it will bring with it .
Of course , a number of Members and the representative of the presidency have maintained that high employment and low deficits are entirely compatible .
In a static world in which all economic indicators remained unchanged year after year , in which capital was not accumulated , in which no one was born and no one died , they would be .
But in the real world in which we live , the evolving dynamic world , anyone who maintains that the deficits can be reduced to zero without unemployment being fuelled is being dangerously irresponsible .
Mr President , we have to move forward to the single currency , but in doing we must show sensitivity towards the working people of Europe . The single currency venture needs to have them with it and not against it , because in the final analysis it has to be in their interest .
Let it not begin its career by damaging them .
Mr President , the present period of the run up to the EMU is extremely important .
Now is the time for us as Parliament to give a clear signal to the public and to the financial markets on the future of the euro and conditions which this currency should fulfil .
And that brings me to the Metten report and the following question .
Should we be aiming at a balanced budget or can we accept deficits of more than 3 % ?
The report stipulates that a debt of more than 3 % should be acceptable .
The rapporteur claims that the advantages of this would be greater than the risk of increasing inflation in Europe .
That I very much doubt .
And had we not agreed in the Christodoulou report that we should be aiming at budgets which are pretty much balanced or in surplus ?
I think that Mr Metten 's approach creates only confusion .
The criteria in the Treaty are clear enough .
A deficit of close to 3 % comes under the criteria of the Treaty and should not therefore create any problems .
And then the stability pact also clearly stipulates a maximum of 3 % deficit unless under exceptional and temporary circumstances .
The big question is of course what message Parliament wants to send out with this document .
But I think the least it should be is a clear message that the convergence criteria guarantee a sustainable and stable EMU .
Even if the interpretation margin in the criteria is used it does not mean that the sustainability of the EMU and the currency are at risk .
However , the necessary degree of flexibility has two sides to it .
Not only does it mean that a Member State may allow a public deficit of 3.1 % for example , because the trend behind this figure is reassuring , but it also means that a Member State that reduces its deficit to 2.8 % through all kinds of one-off artificial measures may not meet the criteria .
And then the stability pact , and here I would like to take a closer look at Mr Christodoulou 's report .
I think that the two important issues of the scope of the sanctions and the definition of the exceptional and temporary circumstances should be defined as quickly as possible .
Negotiations on this have already become stuck on several occasions .
But to assure the necessary certainty and a stable currency and to prevent endless discussions after the event these still unclear concepts must be properly defined .
Another matter is the parallel pricing , in the Hoppenstedt report .
Intensive talks with the retail trade have convinced me that a legal obligation on parallel pricing is not a good thing .
I was originally of a different opinion and have been persuaded by retailers that there are many other ways of solving the problems which consumers will face .
I think we should be moving towards a system of full information , but excluding a legal obligation on parallel pricing .
Mr President , at the outset I wish to congratulate the rapporteurs and say that they have made an excellent contribution to the single currency debate .
From an Irish perspective , the real debate relating to the introduction of a single European currency is whether Ireland should join such a monetary union if Britain declines to sign up to EMU membership .
The crunch decision is only around the corner .
Early in 1998 the Council will decide which Member States will qualify for EMU based on the updated economic statistics for 1997 .
It is clear that Ireland will be in a position to join the first tier of European countries which will participate in the new European single currency .
This is due to the fact that our debt / GNP ratio is decreasing annually and that our economy has been growing at a steady rate since 1987 with the assistance of two European structural fund programmes .
The Irish Government should commit itself to acceding to a single currency whether Britain joins or not .
Since 1960 there has been a major change in the pattern of Irish trade .
Our trade with the UK has dropped dramatically and , conversely , our trade with mainland Europe has increased .
Aligning ourselves to the Euro will mean that participation in such a strong and stable monetary union will result in a reduction in interest rates in the medium term .
The benefits of a single currency will include increases in terms of output , employment and trade .
In conclusion , I am somewhat disappointed that the Irish Minister only stays to listen to the rapporteur 's reports and the contributions by the main spokespersons .
I say to the President-in-Office that he should listen to all contributions .
Mr President , the idea of monetary union involves three serious fundamental mistakes : it transfers power from democratic governments to a bureaucratic and closed institution and thus increases the democratic deficit in the Union .
It is based on a policy of constant recession and it compels governments to do nothing in the face of social crisis , just like in Germany between 1930 and 1932 .
However , monetary union is also a mistake from the point of view of economics because it turns a mere detail of the economy into a matter of major concern .
A sound real economy comprises rising incomes , high and rising demand , high productivity and an active financial policy on the part of democratic parliaments and governments .
Currency and interest rates which are here turned into matters of major concern and the driving force of the whole enterprise in a most remarkable way are in reality special factors which are entirely dependent on the above-mentioned major real economic trends .
What this dogmatism , the Commission 's conception of the importance of interest rates and currency , actually means is that one might justifiably borrow the words of the old populist US politician William Jennings Brian , in saying that monetary union will crucify the people of Europe on a cross of gold .
Mr President , the reports by Mr Metten , Mr Herman , Mr Harrison , Mr Christodoulou and Mr Hoppenstedt have once again led us to talk of convergence criteria and the coordination of budgetary policies , so as to get the single currency rolling - rolling into the ' Euro-tunnel ' .
At the heart of these public finances where this monetarist train is taking us , at the heart of these budgetary policies , the question which arises is this : can there still be any such thing as multiple budgetary policies , in view of the facts ?
What we are actually considering here is a single budgetary thought , with restricted spending and austerity on the expenditure side and increased taxation on the income side - Mr Prodi 's tax for Europe , for example .
We had the same budget in Italy , in France , in Spain and in Greece , with the same consequences : a million people demonstrating in Rome , the lorry drivers ' action in France , and unemployment everywhere .
As this policy is obviously an unnatural policy , it has to be imposed .
Hence the sanctions : the extension of Article 104c ( 9 ) to ( 11 ) .
Hence the novelty of a budgetary criminal law , with one improvement , that is to say the stability pact , the two proposals for a Commission Regulation , and fines .
So when the monetary police stop a traveller in a state of budgetary intoxication he has to blow into a bag , and if the GDP reading goes beyond three , then the whole nation gets fined .
And if the GDP reading is ever 0.5 , one can imagine a nation sentenced to pay a fine of 80 , 000 million francs a year in payments to the European Community .
Why not ?
All of this , of course , with an independent central bank .
The little bit of the Eurasian continent that invented democracy is now rediscovering oligarchy in the board of directors of the central bank , with a feeble theoretical justification : the theory of rational anticipation , anticipation by the central actors .
And supposing they had no confidence in the central bank , supposing it were under the control of the public authorities and there was a risk of the wrong kind of anticipation ?
In that case it needs to be independent , and out comes the sad little chart which shows that where central banks are independent there is less inflation .
And there you are .
The only thing being overlooked is that everything depends on individual political histories .
In France , we have the history of Vincent Auriol : lock the banks and lock up the bankers .
And in failing to forget that history , we embark on a series of tragedies .
The first , and most serious , is a neurosis transplant .
Germany has a neurosis , brought to it during the Weimar Republic , and later confirmed by its reunification and the asymmetrical impact .
Germany is afraid of inflation .
Hence the courses of treatment , hence the Basic Law which makes the central bank responsible for ensuring price stability .
But France has a different neurosis - the neurosis of the social struggle , the class struggle .

Just because Mr Kohl is overweight is no reason for Mr Juppé to go on a diet - we 're talking about two different histories .
Another tragedy is the tragedy of the toboggan .
The single currency implies a single tax system , otherwise monetary devaluations will give way to tax devaluations .
And finally , the most dramatic tragedy of all is that the market is global but the single currency will only be European .
No question of a single European currency in Singapore .
No question of a single European currency at the end of the year 2000 .
Mr President , to conclude , this is the tragedy of dead stars .
By the time the light of a star reaches us , the star has already died .
The European strategic star died at the moment when Europe was born .
We are going back to the future , guided by black light .
Mr President , there are times when fate needs a helping hand .
You , Commissioner , are hastening on to keep the deadlines laid down in the Maastricht Treaty .
Your haste may be necessary , but it is not without risk .
The European Council in Madrid recognized the need for legal security to form part of the introduction of the single currency .
Mr Herman has reported to us on two regulations which tackle a number of problems .
Our Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights was unwilling to give an opinion in view of the rushed circumstances under which Parliament was consulted .
Even so , it is concerned about a number of points which I would like to take up .
I am not sure , Commissioner , that legal security is sufficiently catered for by changing the name of the single currency , by the instrument of a regulation based on Article 235 and the technique of interpreting the Treaty .
I think that tidying up the text of the Treaty might have been a better judged approach .
That is the view of Mr Herman , whom I see nodding his approval .
It is the view of my colleagues on the Legal Affairs Committee , and it was the view expressed , for example , by Mr Badinter before the French Senate on 6 October .
You must agree that there is at least room for doubt .
You believe that the political risk of revising the Treaty is greater than the legal risk of the further procedures .
I can understand that .
But let us have no talk of legal security when what lies in wait for us is a storm of appeals whose results we cannot predict .
In particular , the two Regulations say nothing about the essential problem of legal security for the consumer .
They may meet the reasonable expectations of the banks , the exchange dealers and the other major economic actors , but they take little account of the man in the street .
Well , the legal problems are considerable .
We come across them every day - we came across some yesterday , at the Legal Affairs Committee , in connection with a text on consumer credit .
Let me quote a few at random : dual labelling , which has been extensively dealt with , cross-border transfers , price control and the introduction of effective appeal procedures for consumers who suffer damage , the penalization of counterfeiting within the single market but under fifteen separate criminal law systems , the possible revision of the directive on unlawful clauses , the criminalization of fraud .
I might add to that list the ambiguity of the brief article devoted to contracts expressed in national currencies , as are the vast majority of contracts existing today .
These problems are complex , important and fundamental : because of the legal instruments of implementation , first pillar , third pillar , because of the difficult division of legal jurisdiction and political responsibility between the Community and the Member States .
Yet there is no semblance of any answer to these questions in the texts we are considering .
What we expect from you today is not solutions but a commitment to particular methods , and a timetable .
The legal security of the market operators is necessary , certainly , but we have no right to disregard the confidence of the ordinary citizens of the Union .
That would be unacceptable and unwise .
Otherwise , popular support for the euro , the importance of which was recalled just now by the President-in-Office , would melt away and we should be left with the disaster scenario which the previous speaker conjured up with such relish .
Mr President , the fact that we are drawing closer to the time for adopting a single European currency should be a reason for great satisfaction in terms of the gains and the security that should be brought .
But at the same time a cause for paying even more attention to ensure that the process runs smoothly and is maintained well beyond the date when the euro is to enter into circulation .
For Portugal , the benefits are especially sensitive as my country already has a very open economy , with a degree of trade openness exceeded only by the Benelux countries , Ireland and one of the Nordic countries , where small and medium-sized firms dominate , companies already especially penalised by the costs of transition , uncertainty and the calculation stemming from the existence of so many currencies in Europe .
I therefore very much welcome the fact that , as is acknowledged in a recent Commission report , Portugal should be able to enter the vanguard in terms of meeting the nominal convergence criteria set at Maastricht .
This is the result of a successful attempt in recent years to bring inflation down from 13.4 % in 1990 - and it had been up to 24.7 % in 1985 - to 2.6 % in 1996 , to bring the interest rate differential with the EU average down from 7 percentage points to less than 3 , to bring the budget deficit down to 4 % , while public debt , albeit still more than 60 % , should fall further in 1996 / .
Although the unemployment rate did go up in 1994 , it has been kept to just over 7 % , far below the EU average .
It should also be pointed out that this has been brought about despite a change of government from one party to a quite different one which , luckily for my country , is also set on and committed to the process of European integration .
Representing more than 80 % of Portuguese workers in the wake of the recent elections where the process was at the heart of the political campaigns , it could be said that we can count on the strong backing of our people .
Even though Portugal is capable of joining the single currency it cannot stop being sensitive to the advantage for it and the European Union as a whole of allowing as many other countries to join as possible , as properly underscored in the Metten report , as the only way of avoiding the risks and disadvantages - competitive devaluations - despite prohibitions and set penalties , that some of those left out might be tempted by .
That would help to strengthen the euro in the world economy and benefit all concerned .
A single currency , however , would continue to call for greater real approximation between economies .
That is why it is in the general interest to ensure that the structural policies are continued and even strengthened , with less of a requirement of additionality , so that the efforts to be made by the various countries do not call into question the nominal proximity that should be kept up once the single European currency begins to circulate .
This would also help to bring about the vital public acceptance of the euro which , apart from the costly awareness campaigns that we could be involved in , could be felt - in the wake of more realistic , stricter policies - as a factor of progress and social well-being .
Mr President , this afternoon we have debated monetary union , primarily in technical and legal terms .
In actual fact , however , it is a highly political issue which , moreover , has not yet been fully resolved .
There has been some talk here of the need for popular acceptance and to listen to the people , whereas we all know that a majority of the population in a great many of our Member States is today opposed to a common currency .
If we are serious about listening to the people they should be able to say what they think in a referendum .
I should therefore like to congratulate the British Labour Party , which has taken the step of saying that a referendum will be held ; more countries should follow this example .
The common currency is basically a political project .
There are very few strong economic arguments for monetary union .
Some time ago the Swedish Government set up a committee of inquiry comprising prominent economists to look at the effect of monetary union on the Swedish economy .
The committee 's findings were presented recently .
They reveal very small benefits but major economic risks .
They point out in particular the probability of drastically increased unemployment .
In practice it is today very unlikely that Sweden will initially participate in monetary union if it takes effect in 1999 .
EMU is not simply a question of the future , however , it also affects our everyday life today .
After all , the economic policy of EMU already dominates Western Europe now .
The result is not impressive : falling growth , low growth and weak demand in the economy .
The price being paid is high unemployment .
The convergence criteria are being met by Member States making drastic cuts in social provisions and by unnecessary privatisation .
The price for this dogmatic EMU policy is being paid today by the unemployed and by those affected by social cuts .
If monetary union goes ahead it will mean the creation of a system beyond democratic control , where economic policy is decided on the basis of Treaty provisions , the stability pact and an independent central bank .
What the voters think about economic policy when it comes to general elections , however , will no longer be of interest .
This is why monetary union is the opposite of democratisation and this is unacceptable .
Mr President , the convergence criteria are being discussed today in an unfavourable economic climate , and that requires us not to stick to pure mathematical logic , because the stricter that logic is the smaller will be the number of Member States allowed to join .
While noting an impressive level of nominal convergence , we should emphasize that , in point of fact , there are at least ten states which are not able to satisfy all the convergence criteria , criteria that are essential for launching the second stage of economic and monetary union .
A strictly mathematical interpretation of the convergence criteria , then , would not only contradict the spirit of the Treaty but would make the path to monetary union more difficult .
Not only that , but an excessively strict interpretation would result in a split in the single market and would increase the possibility of a rise in the value of the euro , while a more balanced interpretation would reduce the problem of a division within the single market and would lessen the risk of an overvalued euro .
There is also the fact that even Germany , which sees the problem of the single currency as the manifestation of Europe , is not able to meet the convergence criteria : in particular , during 1996 , the ratio between gross domestic product and the budget deficit has been about 3.5-4 % .
Let us not forget that France has incorporated the credit balance of a private para-State enterprise into the State budget in order to achieve the 3 % ratio between gross domestic product and budget deficit .
Let us not forget that unemployment , which has never before reached its present level of around 12 % , must not be further increased by raising the tax burden on manufacturing industry in the Member States , especially in Italy .
That would bring about an economic climate which would certainly increase unemployment dramatically .
Therefore , either the convergence criteria should be amended or , better , the time frame for monetary union should be put back from 1 January 1999 to two years later .
That is a realistic position , and a profoundly European one , taking account of the need to construct a Europe including all the most important and essential States , so that in future we may achieve not merely a tradesmen 's Europe but a great Europe founded on a common foreign and security policy , the common struggle against organized crime and drugs , and economic cooperation .
The real Eurosceptics are those whose exaggerated ideas of stringency obstruct the formation of a political Europe , something that can only be achieved by the simultaneous integration of all fifteen Member States : the real Eurosceptics are those who want a two- or three-speed Europe , or a multi-track Europe .
On that basis , the process of integration will drag on for ever , and the advantage of that will be felt not by the citizens of Europe but by those countries with the strongest economic and political lobbies , countries which - being totally consistent with their policy of defending the leadership of the United States - want to keep their business low-profile .
Mr President , I want to use my three minutes on the completion of EMU and the introduction of the euro to say that I agree with the objective , that I am anxious about the methods being used , and that I have doubts regarding the results unless the economic and monetary union that is now coming into being is rapidly complemented by political and social union .
First , I agree on the objective .
We must indeed complete EMU .
We must introduce the euro in accordance with the planned timetable .
That is the indispensable complement of an economic Europe , the single market and freedom of movement .
I should add that the euro has the potential to be a fantastic vector of unification for the citizens of Europe , and a fundamental element of European citizenship .
So , personally , as far as the euro goes , I am in favour .
Secondly , though , my agreement on the objective goes hand in hand with anxiety about the methods .
An excessively strict interpretation of the convergence criteria and the lack of any political and social approach to that convergence are already proving to have two disadvantages .
First , the convergence criteria are already being used as a scapegoat , taking the blame for every problem in every State of Europe .
People say they are responsible for unemployment , and for the public service problems in France .
Not only that , but these criteria threaten to exclude too many countries , especially all the southern States of our Union .
What is needed , then , as others have said before me , is a less monetarist approach to the convergence - the necessary convergence - of our fifteen economies .
I should add that a quantified , rigid stability pact would , de facto , introduce an additional criterion at the very time when what we need is a more flexible attitude to the criteria already decided upon and ratified by the Member States .
Not only would that be an error , at a time when we are having problems in meeting the existing criteria , but there would even be some question as to the legality of such a pact in the absence of any further ratification by the national representatives of the 15 States .
Agreement on the objective , anxiety about the methods and , thirdly , doubts as to the results .
Let us take care , ladies and gentlemen , as opinion increasingly swings behind the euro , that the European machine does not grind to a halt because of the ravages of unemployment and their effects on electoral decisions in our various States .
Let us take care to avoid an excessively technocratic interpretation which would eliminate the southern States .
Lastly , and most importantly , let us take care that our economic and financial union does not become the orphan child of political and , especially , social union .
Between now and 1998 , then , the IGC must create the political and social Europe of the citizen .
And that , ladies and gentlemen , is a long way off as yet .
To summarize , and in conclusion , in order to achieve the widely shared objective of the euro we therefore need a more flexible approach to the convergence criteria , we need to avoid adding new criteria , we need to fight against unemployment and poverty and in favour of the public services , and above all we need to lay the foundations of a strong political Europe with bold , proactive social policies .
Mr President , the reports on future Economic and Monetary Union which this House will be voting on tomorrow are very important .
In the short time I have available , I wish to refer to the Metten report and , in particular , to the suggested treatment of what is , in my view , one of the most important convergence criteria : the inflation criterion .
This criterion is not strictly accountable in the way interest rates might be .
It is a statistical criterion , obtained by statistical methods .
I would like to take advantage of the fact that Commissioner de Silguy is here in order to remind him that , in Germany , the rate of inflation is calculated in a simple non-arithmetic way .
Bavaria 's inflation is not the same as that of the small länder -city .
Inflation is a weighted mean , in accordance with the size of each land .
This is how the rate of inflation is worked out in Germany and in Spain , and it is the way that Eurostat works out European inflation .
It was precisely Commissioner de Silguy 's reply , in which he suggested that this convergence criterion could possibly be calculated as a strictly arithmetic mean of the three best countries with the lowest inflation rate , which led me , together with a number of colleagues , to table an amendment on that subject , because the inflation criterion is an eminently statistical criterion and is not accountable .
Just as Germany 's rate of inflation is the result of a weighted calculation , the average of the three countries with the lowest inflation rate must also be weighted .
We do not wish to relax the convergence criteria .
What we do want is that there should be no interpretations made which are , as I see it , unnatural .
On 19 November , Mr Franchet , Director of Eurostat , gave the assurance that the formula he uses to calculate inflation is a weighted formula and that if he is asked he will give a weighted mean of the three best countries .
Countries which are making a huge effort to comply with the convergence criteria are entitled to demand a fair interpretation , not an unnatural interpretation , on the part of the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are taking part in a part-session in which matters of great importance for European citizens and Europe as a whole are being debated .
I think that the creation of a single currency will be one of the strongest bonds , not only vital if we are to have a genuine European internal market , but also if we are to bring about economic recovery , investment and create jobs .
It will be a symbol uniting all Europeans who , from 1999 , can and want to adopt the euro .
That is why great importance has been attached by my country 's government 's policy to ensuring that Portugal will enter EMU at the first stage .
A lot of criticism has been levelled at the convergence criteria and the stability pact proposed for the functioning of European Economic and Monetary Union .
I think that this criticism is the result of the inflexibility employed by some to read and interpret the Maastricht Treaty rather than the criteria themselves which are sensible , wellthought out and politically correct .
From this viewpoint , I must refer to a phrase recently penned by the former German Chancellor , Helmut Schmidt , in a letter to the Governor of the Bundesbank and published in Le Monde .
He said that the insistence and tactlessness of his speeches not only make him unpopular , which he accepts , but also make the whole of Germany unpopular , which Germans neither deserve nor are willing to put up with . What I think is that Europe lacks the right social , economic and monetary convergence , analysed with common sense .
With or without Maastricht , it is vital to cut deficits , inflation and interest rates .
It was not in order to achieve these criteria that the evils we are now complaining about - low growth and high unemployment - came about .
The reports that we are jointly debating are fundamental in terms of introducing the euro , dealt with with openness , political common sense and technical skill , that will make them far more acceptable and comprehensible for the citizens of the European Union that we are creating .
Therefore I wish to congratulate the rapporteurs on their work and efforts to reach broad political consensus and I hope they will be adopted by the European Parliament .
These reports heap prestige on our parliament and should be vital working material for the Council of Finance Ministers and heads of state and government for the Councils due to take place in Ireland very soon .
Given the fact that , in such a short time , it is impossible to deal with all these matters , I should like to touch upon some vital aspects : participation by national parliaments and their involvement in and co-responsibility for stability programmes , the multilateral supervision to be carried out .
It is also vital for us that we add to the proposal to the Commission a new article on the Cohesion Fund clearly stipulating that it will be kept in operation during the third phase of EMU as the differences of development justifying its creation are still relevant , and that the amount of money in the fund and the application conditions be set by a Council regulation .
Mr President , much of what is contained in these five reports is good , which is of course the result of the fact that we socialists won the votes in the economic affairs committee .
I myself and a number of my colleagues from the Swedish Social Democratic Party will nevertheless abstain on the Metten , Christodoulou and Herman reports .
Our stance on this issue is determined by our lack of faith in the economic soundness of the EMU project .
This is a view shared by a majority of the Swedish people and , I would venture to say , by a majority of academic economists in the western world .
EMU really does involve a tangible risk that unemployment will rise .
There are two reasons for this .
The first is that efforts to combat inflation will override all other economic objectives .
This will increase unemployment but not because of some kind of Phillips link between inflation and unemployment but simply because zero inflation will force certain businesses to make direct wage cuts in order to bring relative wages into line with supply and demand .
The second reason is the lack of flexibility which will arise when exchange rates are fixed .
This must be compensated for in some way in the long term , either through wage adjustments or migration of the labour force , which would in practice mean unemployed textile workers from Manchester taking jobs as computer consultants in Milan .
I do not believe in this .
Socially , EMU is a high-risk project and it is the low paid and those with few qualifications who will face the risks .
Finally , Mr President , I should like to warn against the stability pact .
The central idea of this pact is that countries which get into economic problems should be fined .
This will exacerbate the problems rather than solving them .
Mr President , we are currently debating a number of reports connected with Economic and Monetary Union which reveal the significance this House attaches to this fundamental fact of passage to a single currency .
Firstly I would like to congratulate the various rapporteurs and then concentrate on a number of matters arising from the stability pact .
In this connection I consider it necessary firstly to recall a number of ideas on the subject of budgetary stability which are frequently forgotten about despite , or possibly because of , the fact that they are so obvious . The first of these is that the public deficit convergence policy is , per se , a good thing .
As the President-in-Office of the ECOFIN Council , Mr Quinn , stated so correctly earlier on , it is an end in itself , with or without Maastricht .
A situation in which , every year , over 5 % , and in some cases even 10 % or more , of the GDP goes to paying off debt interest is an untenable one .
Efforts aimed at consolidating the budget are in themselves beneficial and help to ensure lasting growth .
The timetable set for Monetary Union has , on the one hand , provided the stimulus for achieving this task and not delaying it and , on the other hand , has meant that such efforts are being coordinated in all the various Member States .
Secondly , and I refer here to the stability pact which is already contained in the Treaty on Union , account has to be taken of the fact that it is less important to achieve on time the target of a government deficit that does not exceed 3 % GDP than it is to demonstrate the political will and capability to maintain such a position of equilibrium - or of not excessive disequilibrium - in a sustained and durable manner .
These are the terms in which the Commission is presenting its stability pact recommendation , smoothing off some of the initial German recommendation 's rough edges .
The report by Parliament 's Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee substantially supports the Commission 's recommendation , adding just a few finishing touches which ought to be highlighted and which I will deal with next .
Firstly , the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee points out that greater account should be taken of the economic cycle when deciding whether or not a government deficit is excessive .
The second point is linked to stability requirements and government investment given that , in many countries , attempts are being made to achieve the 3 % limit by placing excessively strict controls on government investment , and , clearly , such a practice cannot continue for very long without compromising the future of our economies .
We therefore firmly support the final touches certain amendments introduce by differentiating between current spending and investment expenditure when assessing each country 's deficit position .
Finally , I would like to refer to the Cohesion Fund which , as you will be aware , is currently available to four Member States .
This Fund was set up during the current convergence stage as an instrument to counteract any negative effects the Union 's weaker economies might experience , in government investment terms , on account of convergence efforts .
Well , the same philosophy on which the Cohesion Fund based its decision to provide assistance during this stage of convergence still applies to the stability programmes , which will continue to require an enormous effort to square government deficit in the economies of the so-called ' Cohesion States ' .
As a representative from one of those States , and on the basis of the notion of solidarity so often invoked in this House , I thought it my duty to emphasize this point which has genuinely been incorporated into the amendments approved in the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee and which I hope will be approved during tomorrow 's sitting .
Mr President , the reports we are debating represent an important stage in the deepening of European integration .
The introduction of the euro and the associated flanking measures are a logical step in the realization of the internal market , enabling it to generate positive effects such as increasing economic output , employment and social stability and to strengthen the dynamism of the European Union as such .
However , this presentation of the potential of the euro should not blind us to other essential aspects of its introduction , and especially to the political and social aspect of some of the technical decisions .
Europe 's citizens will assess the euro and the European Union - and us , in this House - in terms of such yardsticks as the level of unemployment and social stability .
The euro will lighten the burden on industry in various important ways , be an essential factor behind price stability and the predictability of transactions , and limit the risk of speculation .
It will also protect the Union against excessive fluctuations of the dollar parity and stabilize the international monetary structure .
As a result , Europe will become significantly more important as an industrial location .
But if the European Union and the European Parliament want to appear credible and not to drive frustrated citizens , living in fear for their jobs , into the arms of glib populists , the beneficial effects of the introduction of the euro must be felt not only by industry but also , and especially , by the workers of social Europe .
We shall see whether the Christian Social and Conservative politicians represent the citizen or whether they are really just paying lip service to social concerns .
We shall see , too , whether the Liberals sacrifice their principles to the absolute primacy of monetary stability , without regard to employment and the social repercussions .
A purely mathematical interpretation of the convergence criteria , based purely on the value of money , would exacerbate the recession .
It would just raise the pressure on workers and on the job market .
The much vaunted freedom of establishment would become transmuted into a constant pressure to migrate to the current centres of economic activity .
To ensure a positive dynamic , the maximum possible number of states must be involved from the outset in the third stage of economic and monetary union .
Imposing financial penalties is counter-productive , hostile to employment and opposed to economic dynamism .
Other cohesion mechanisms - perhaps loss of the right to vote on questions of monetary policy - would be enough .
If it nevertheless happens that resources are returned to the EU budget , these must obligatorily be used for labour market activities .
Of course , the conversion to the euro must not be handled by publicly owned banks or other areas of enterprise at the expense of the consumer .
Last but not least , I should like to stress the overall social responsibility of the European Central Bank , which goes beyond its obligation merely to safeguard price stability .
So greater accountability to the European Parliament is needed .
Mr President , I too should like to begin by congratulating the draftsmen of the reports on the need to achieve EMU in the conditions provided for in the Maastricht Treaty and in keeping with the set timetables , in order to conduct a policy combining support for the real economy , so as to increase confidence among economic operators , and the kind of investment likeliest to generate large numbers of jobs and high growth .
In preparing the third stage of EMU , some care must be taken , in particular in respect of structural transformations in the financial markets and capital generated by deregulation , information technologies and greater economic interdependence .
We must also bear in mind the process of ' disintermediation ' , according to which the supply and demand of capital operate reciprocally and without need for financial intermediaries , and the institutional agreement needed to allow for coordination between policies , strengthening the independence of the European Central bank , by means of democratic legitimacy , which I see as a linchpin , and the need to appoint the members of the Economic and Financial Committee in terms of greater responsibility , in keeping as it happens with the proposal made by the rapporteurs .
The single currency is a decisive goal , a vital goal in the process of European construction .
But it would be foolish if we were satisfied with reducing Europe to a question of economic and financial construction alone .
The people of Europe and its citizens want far more than that .
Europe must head towards EMU but it also needs to achieve political depth and never lose sight of ways of strengthening social cohesion .
Nobody in Europe today would understand that those who are and were able to define objectives and binding policies in monetary , budgetary and exchange rate terms were able to show such contempt for the people of Europe by not also defining binding objectives in terms of social policy or employment .
The third stage of Economic and Monetary Union is upon us .
The single currency will be a reality , one that I eagerly welcome , but I would be very concerned if , when it comes into effect , we did not also have a pact for employment as a factor of hope for everyone in Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by thanking the European Parliament for its commitment to and support for the introduction of the euro .
The deadlines that make up the timetable for economic and monetary union have given you particularly difficult conditions in which to work , and I must take this opportunity to pay formal tribute to all the committees and rapporteurs - Mr Metten , Mr Christodoulou , Mr Herman , Mr Hoppenstedt and Mr Harrison - for their excellent work on the reports we are considering today .




I can assure you , Mr Christodoulou , that we shall take due account of it , in what you called the spirit of positive cooperation .
With two weeks to go before the European Council in Dublin , this debate on the present status of economic and monetary union gives us an opportunity to take stock of the advances achieved in the course of this year .
I would describe them as substantial and irreversible .
Think back . In December 1995 , thanks to your support , the pattern for the introduction of the single European currency and its name , together with the work programme for the year 1996 , were ratified by the European Council in Madrid .
In accordance with that programme , our task today is to validate all the preparatory work for the introduction of the euro , but this is also an opportunity to determine what progress has been made towards convergence .
Unfortunately , and to my regret , I have no time to consider the five reports and all your suggestions in detail .
With your permission I should like to simplify matters by basing my replies on two main sets of comments , dealing with the progress of convergence and the preparations for the introduction of the euro , which will be completed on time .
Before I say anything about the Commission 's autumn forecasts for 1997 , I should like to dwell for a moment on this year 's progress towards convergence .
The Commission 's reports , and that of the EMI , bear witness to the fact that the various elements of lasting convergence in Europe are becoming stronger and stronger .
While the Commission 's report focuses mainly on the advances achieved in terms of the four - or five - convergence criteria , it also considers , as Mr Metten hoped , the compatibility between national legislation dealing with the national central banks and the stipulations of the Treaty designed to ensure the independence of the European system of central banks .
The report shows that there are a number of cases in which national legislation will need to be adapted .
Substantial progress , moreover , has been achieved in every Member State with regard to every aspect of convergence .
As far as inflation and interest rates are concerned , the results are impressive .
In answer to Mr Pomés Ruiz , I should point out that as far as the inflation criterion is concerned , the Treaty allows the Commission a choice .
We opted for a simple , unweighted average as being the clearest method , though I should add that even if we had used a weighted average the results would be the same .
So the results as regards inflation and as regards interest rates are excellent .
As far as foreign exchange stability is concerned , there have since Sunday been twelve Member States participating in the EMS exchange mechanism .
The Commission welcomes the return of the lira to the EMS .
This is another encouraging signpost along the road to the achievement of the euro , and I should add that the EMS is functioning well , since the gap between the strongest and the weakest currencies in the EMS fluctuation band has narrowed by virtually half since a year ago .
As far as public finances are concerned , convergence has still not gone far enough , even though it is progressing . The Commission agrees with the EMI that only four states - Denmark , Ireland , Luxembourg and the Netherlands - will have kept their 1996 government deficits below 3 % .
Only three - France , Luxembourg and the Netherlands - will have indebtedness of below 60 % .
Thus , and I must stress this point , the European Council in Dublin will find that a sufficiently high degree of convergence has not been achieved by a majority of States .
The procedure laid down in Article 109j ( 2 ) will therefore have to be repeated as early as possible in 1998 .
The European Council will then be in a position to take its decision as a function of the high degree of sustainable convergence that has been achieved .
However , the Commission 's forecasts of November 1996 highlight a revival of growth and an improvement - admittedly hesitant , as yet - in the employment situation .
The growth forecasts are 1.6 % in 1996 , 2.3 % in 1997 and 2.8 % in 1998 .
A study of the components of demand shows that growth in 1997 and 1998 should be balanced .
Exports will play a dynamic part and manufacturing investment , which is expected to grow by 5 % in 1997 and by nearly 7 % in 1998 , should once again become the driving force behind growth .
The changing employment situation between 1996 and 1998 will see the net creation of 2.3 million jobs over three years .
Let me add that , in the medium term , only relatively strong , sustainable growth will enable unemployment to be reduced significantly .
That , incidentally , let me say in answer to several speakers , is why we are introducing the euro .
The euro is conceivable only in the context of a dynamic which creates a framework of stable , sustained growth which will create jobs .
The Commission 's forecasts give some indication of the future prospects .
They are encouraging , showing that a significant number of States are on the right track to be able to join economic and monetary union from the outset ; but I should make it clear that the forecasts are still no more than an initial preselection from the list of States that will adopt the euro on 1 January 1999 .
I must stress the fact that compliance with the convergence criteria , allowing access to the euro , will be verified as early as possible in 1998 on the basis of the final 1997 figures , and also in the light of the past and future performance of the Member States with regard to the various aspects of convergence .
Let me remind you that , according to the Treaty , the States participating in the euro will have to have achieved a high level of sustainable convergence .
I am grateful to Parliament for this debate , which enables us - for the first time , I believe - to clarify those words a little .
For the purposes of assessing the degree of convergence , the Treaty provides five criteria .
Compliance with a particular reference value is not in itself a sufficient condition for selection .
To ensure the sustainability of convergence , it is no use considering one year 's performance in isolation .
That means that one-off measures will have to be backed up by credible commitments to maintaining budgetary stability in subsequent years .
There will be no sleight of hand .
And that is my answer to Mrs Hautala .
The classification , for one year , is a purely technical accounting operation .
It is not a preselection for transition to the euro .
The sustainability of budgetary stability is , indeed , the objective of the stability pact , which , together with the legal status of the euro and the new EMS , make up the three major preparatory tasks necessary for the introduction of the euro .
If I may , let me say a word about the stability pact .
To Mr Willockx my answer is : no , don 't worry , the stability pact will not be deflationary in nature .
There is increasing support , in Europe and elsewhere , for the view that sustained growth is possible only with healthy public finances , allowing interest rates to be reduced permanently .
Budgetary policy might , and should , play a part in stabilizing the economy , and in order for that to be possible budgets will have to be balanced , or show a credit surplus .
That is the very logic on which the stability pact is based .
So I can assure you , Mr Christodoulou , that the stability pact does not mean a German-dominated Europe , or capitulation , or shackles , or excessive rigidity .
It is the economic framework essential for the creation of jobs in tomorrow 's Europe .
Don 't worry , Mr Cox , the Commission will stick to its guns on this point .
First , and to answer Mr Caudron 's point , the stability pact provides a consistent , credible , balanced and pragmatic framework .
In accordance with the Treaty - and there can be no doubt about this , because the text is indeed an integral part of the framework of the Treaty - the Member States shall aim to balance their public finances in the medium term in order to encourage growth and employment .
And , if it is to bring about all these beneficial results , it is essential that this objective should be respected in the long term .
Next , the stability pact is first and foremost preventive .
Its aim is prevention rather than cure .
That is the entire purpose of the rules adopted on the basis of Article 103 ( 5 ) of the Treaty .
It is thanks to the stability programmes , which will be presented by the Member States and approved by the Council , that we shall be able to achieve it .
And I can assure you that the European Parliament will be kept informed about them , because they will be made public .
These programmes will be based on macroeconomic assumptions , including employment , and that is my answer to the various concerns that have been expressed .
The Council will at all times be able to make the appropriate recommendations to ensure that budgetary implementation complies with the objectives .
And , to that end , we shall be instituting an early warning system to detect any discrepancies .
Finally , the stability pact must also have a deterrent effect .
For the benefit of any doubters , let me remind you that a budgetary deficit puts a country - France , let us say - in the situation of a household which is earning 13 , 000 francs a month and spending 15 , 500 - spending , in other words , 20 % more than it brings in .
The Member States must realize that this kind of overspending has to be penalized , and the Treaty has made provision for that , in Article 104c , with the excessive deficit procedure .
I can reassure Mr Watson that no such procedure is possible on the basis of Article 103 .
Article 104c was the basis on which the second proposal for a Regulation designed to make this procedure operational was presented to you .
On sight of the results of budgetary implementation , the Council will decide whether or not an excessive deficit exists , taking various factors into consideration .
Was the situation normal or exceptional in the year in question ?
Should the deficit be considered excessive in the light of all the parameters of the Treaty , and with particular regard to the proportion accounted for by investment expenditure ?
If there is an excessive deficit , everything possible must be done to correct it quickly , in order to safeguard growth and investment .
Also , the Member State will be allowed several months - from March to December - to adopt the necessary measures and have them approved by the Council .
I can assure you , Mr Watson , that the Commission will leave the choice of measures to the Member State - whether to reduce spending or to increase income is a matter for subsidiarity .
I would say that the Regulation allows sufficient flexibility to make allowance for the variety of national parliamentary procedures and hence for the concern of the national parliaments , Mr Christodoulou .
If the Member State in question takes no corrective action , it must be prepared for the Council to apply the provisions of the Treaty , in other words to activate a sanctions mechanism .
I will not describe that mechanism because we have discussed it at length .
I would describe it as balanced and sufficiently flexible .
It is an adequate deterrent , without being so severe as to become counter-productive .
Mr Christodoulou 's report and the compromise amendments that accompany it are , as a whole , consistent with the logic of the stability pact presented by the Commission .
This is a very valuable contribution to the current discussions in preparation for the European Council in Dublin .
As is apparent from Article 5 of its proposal for a Regulation on the basis of Article 103 ( 5 ) , the Commission shares your concerns .
It would like you to be able to study the results of the monitoring procedure .
It is also fully aware of the need to draw up rapidly , as you suggest , its proposal aimed at improving multilateral monitoring for the pre-in States .
But I must add that it considers it inappropriate to extend the scope of application of this proposal by integrating into it policies or instruments other than those which are the object of the stability pact .
In continuing its work , the Commission wishes to take the maximum possible advantage of Parliament 's contribution .
Thus , in the case of the Regulation based on Article 103 ( 5 ) , the Commission can accept Amendment No 21 , together with Amendments Nos 1 and 18 , and compromise Amendment No 2 , subject to certain editorial corrections .
In the case of the other Regulation , based on Article 104c ( 14 ) , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 9 and 13 , together with Amendments Nos 1 and 2 , subject to certain editorial corrections .
The second preparatory task , about which much has been said , concerns the legal status of the euro .
The Commission , like this House - and I should thank the rapporteur for his quick work - has put in a great deal of work on this , in a very short time , I may add .
The draft before you is the draft of the new monetary law for Europe - the monetary law of the year 2000 .
This text , the adoption of which is expected at an early date , is being insistently and urgently demanded by all the future users of the euro who need legal security .
Let me reassure Mr Herman : there has been no capitulation .
I can reassure Mr Cot , too , or at least I hope so : the Commission has surrounded itself by specialist legal opinion and has taken every precaution .
That is no complete guarantee against disputes , but Mr Cot knows as well as I do that lawyers make a living out of our texts , so we can hardly prohibit them .
Because I had also received an amendment , which did not originate with the European Parliament and which I rejected - which was to prohibit the right of appeal .
I thought that might be going a little too far down the antidemocratic road .
That is why we gave priority to legal security although of course we were fully aware that it will not rule out appeals .
That is the normal way in a democracy .
Since much has been said about the name of the currency , I should make it clear that the name euro is a specific version of the generic term ECU .
The fact of clarifying what , in many languages , was no more than an acronym , an abbreviation , is not an amendment to the Treaty , and our legal experts are unanimous on that point .
As regards the Community currency , Mr Herman , my answer to you is that the approach selected is the approach of national sovereignty .
The Regulation gives a new currency to the sovereign States participating in the euro zone .
To say that the euro is the currency of the Community would not be - regrettably , perhaps - but it would not be an accurate reflection of the situation for such time as some Member States choose not to adopt the euro and have the legal option of doing so .
I shall not go into details of the two draft Regulations .
I don 't want to dwell on this , because I think we are quite clear about their content , both as regards the fact that the Union will have only a single currency from 1 January 1999 and as regards the fact that these texts are designed to ensure the continuity of contracts and obligations .
The natural legal basis for this kind of monetary constitution is Article 109l ( 4 ) .
However , this article applies only from the beginning of the third stage .
That is why , at the express request of future users of the euro and in agreement with the Member States , the Commission has proposed that a number of provisions should be made applicable with immediate effect , on the basis of Article 235 .
Thanks to these two Regulations , no court in the world - in New York , even in Singapore - will be unaware of these rules , which establish the transparency and legal security of the introduction of the euro .
This requirement is essential .
It is the very principle of the ' lex monetae ' .
Don 't worry , Mr Areitio Toledo , this is not an end but a beginning .
It will need to be supported by efforts at communication , and thanks to your support we have made a start on those efforts , but we are of course going to develop them and , I would say , go further .
The requirement of legal security must also benefit all Europe 's citizens .
Mrs Randzio-Plath is right , and I share her concern .
The citizen is a taxpayer , a wage-earner , a consumer .
So this security must benefit him , whether it relates to his contracts , his savings , his earnings or his purchasing power .
The Commission has also decided to organize , before next summer , a round table specifically devoted to the practical aspects of the transition to the euro , especially those of interest to trade and the consumer , and of course this House will be involved in that .
I think I can reassure Mr Garosci on that point , and Mr Whitehead too : all the departments concerned were involved in our proposal for a Regulation , and they will be involved in the forthcoming ones as well .
Only when we see the results of a very detailed consultation with all those involved will we be able to tackle the main problems : dual pricing , bank charges , the cost / benefit analysis of the transition to the euro , the conversion of prices to euros and the penalties for fraud , breaches of regulations and counterfeiting .
Following this exhaustive study , we shall then be in a position to assess whether it is necessary to add to existing Community legislation .
Mr Cot asked me for a commitment regarding the methods used and the timetable .
I hope I have replied to that .
I share your concern .
We need to reassure public opinion about the conditions under which the euro will be introduced , and take due account of consumer concerns .
That will be the priority for the Commission 's activities during the coming year .
All these concerns are fundamental , but the only way of responding to them was through this ' lex monetae ' , which is the monetary constitution of Europe , and whose sole purpose is to give maximum legal force to the basic principles : definition of the currency and security of obligations .
The Commission , then , is in no position to broaden the scope of application of its proposal .
However , it can accept all those amendments which strengthen the effect of the ' lex monetae ' .
I am thinking here of Amendment No 3 , together with slightly changed versions of Amendments Nos 1 and 2 and the amendments to the Regulation based on Article 235 .
As regards the Regulation based on Article 109l ( 4 ) , the Commission can accept Amendment No 4 together with Amendments Nos 2 , 16 and 18 , subject to certain editorial corrections .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thanks to your support the timetable laid down by the European Council in Madrid can be met .
Mr Hoppenstedt said just now that Dublin would be the acid test .
I personally hope it will be a success and that we will be able to reach agreement on the substance .
Our remaining task then , on the legal front , will be to adopt the necessary formal provisions .
And then we shall have numerous other tasks to accomplish next year .
Mr De Clercq , you and various others refer to the external aspects of the euro .
I think the time has indeed come to give thought to that .
If you would like to invite me to address your committees on the subject , I shall have the greatest pleasure in accepting .
In conclusion , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we have shown in the last two years that our method of close collaboration between Commission and Parliament has borne fruit .
The institutions - and I will include the Council and the European Monetary Institute - have once again shown their ability to work together in the interests of all European citizens .
There is no denying that much work has been done in the last two years .
It remains for us to take full advantage of the year 1997 to bring this new vessel safely into harbour .
Mr President , to a large extent I am satisfied with what Commissioner de Silguy said but there is one thing that worries me .
It might be a good idea if he were to listen to me .
He would appear to be introducing a new convergence criterion , namely sustainable convergence .
In other words , he more or less said : meeting the criteria in 1997 is not sufficient .
We must also look at past and future performance .
I am also worried because I have also been hearing this view from a number of central bankers this last week .
Just after the Commission presented its autumn forecasts which indicate that countries such as Spain and Portugal might well fulfil the criteria .
Can the Commissioner reassure me ?
Mr President , I too would like to thank the Commissioner for the explanations he has given us .
They are not convincing in every case , but I don 't want to reopen the debate here - I shall do so at a personal level , if you are interested .
I know that you yourself are in no position to decide what is best , because you are constrained by the Member States .
Having said that , I would like to make two comments about the amendments you have received .
There are two errors .
In Amendment No 30 , the euro is not the currency of the Union but the currency of the Community .
I know that will not change your point of view , but it is important to this House , because the Community has a legal personality and the Union has not .
Amendment No 17 also contains an error .
It should be clearly stated what the securities issued by governments are .
So in this case I do not know why you refused it .
On the other hand , I am very surprised at your failure to accept the amendment which states that the euro is the accounting unit of the Community institutions - as if you could draw up your budget in anything other than euros .
In this case I don 't understand why you are refusing to accept something which you cannot in any case refuse .
Mr President , I wish to thank the Commissioner for his analysis .
However , I would also like to say a few things in connection with the amendments that he has not accepted .
I cannot understand why , for example , he has not accepted Amendment No 59 to the first regulation .
And I cannot understand why he has not accepted Amendment No 17 , again to the first regulation , which simply refers to Council decisions or to Council regulations , and Amendment No 20 - I mention these particular amendments just by way of example - to the first regulation , which would , I feel , make his job very much easier if he himself were to be charged with implementing that regulation , as I hope will be the case , if he himself agrees , of course .
I request the Commissioner to look again at these amendments , not just at the ones that I mentioned but at all of them .
I feel that many of them would very greatly facilitate the implementation and the functioning of these two regulations which all of us here regard as essential .
I shall answer briefly , Mr President , because I don 't want to take up your time .
First , let me reassure Mr Metten that we are not creating a new criterion .
There are five criteria in the Treaty , bearing in mind that the public finance criterion is a double one .
Just to quote from Article 109j ( 1 ) : ' The reports of the Commission and the EMI shall also examine the achievement of a high degree of sustainable convergence . '
So this is just an application .
Obviously , it is difficult to find oneself in a situation where an excessive deficit could be rescinded .
You cannot rescind an excessive deficit , if the 1997 deficit is less than 3 % and if you know that the predicted deficit for 1998 is greater than 3 % .
So I don 't think there can be any misunderstanding .
In any case , there is nothing new here as compared with what the Commission has always said .
Mr Herman , there is no problem here .
You ask us , as far as the European institutions and the budgets are concerned , to have the euro established as the accounting unit .
I would say that is automatic , provision has already been made .
You would weaken our position on ECU / euro continuity if you were to ask us to insert such wording into a Regulation .
Finally , one more point on the amendments .
We are not going to reopen the debate now .
I can assure Mr Christodoulou , and the other rapporteurs too , Mr President , that following tomorrow 's vote on the various reports we shall proceed with a careful examination of all the amendments and - in the positive spirit of cooperation I have already mentioned - we shall see what we can do , but if anything can be done you can rely on my support .
( The sitting was suspended at 8.15 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Science and technology in the 21st century
The next item is the report ( A4-0376 / 96 ) by Mr Desama , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on prospects for European science and technology policy in the 21st century .
I now call upon Mr Desama to introduce his report .
You have all the time in the world , Mr Desama , provided you restrict yourself to nine minutes .
Have no fear , Mr President , I shall not overstep this generous time limit .
It may always be useful later !
You never know .
Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report might well have deserved better than this evening meeting at which , of course , there are not many honourable Members here to listen to us .
It 's remarkable , really : we 've just finished a very long debate on the euro , a subject which I doubt will be mentioned by anyone in 2002 or 2003 , yet we are now going to talk about a research and development programme which will certainly shape the future of the European Union for a much longer period .
Anyway , what is the purpose of this own-initiative report ?
Well , basically , the European Parliament would like to play a major part in the preparation of the Fifth Framework Programme which will begin when the present framework programme ends , in other words at the beginning of 1999 .
We have in fact learned the lessons of the Fourth Programme , and we have realized that , ultimately , if Parliament 's intervention followed the traditional parliamentary procedure , in other words if it took place at first reading , we had insufficient time to give detailed consideration to the broad outlines of the programme .
We also wanted to tell the Commission about a number of convictions and viewpoints we had regarding the future of research and development , and thus the future of our European Union .
Taking specific advantage , I may say , of the approach adopted by the Commission itself , which , very early this year , launched a strategy document to provide food for thought for the various Member States , well , Parliament decided to join in and produce its own strategic discussion paper .
That is the purpose of this owninitiative report .
What are the major points made in this report ?
First , that in this day and age the traditional model according to which research and development was organized , what was known as the linear model , with a sequence of basic research followed by applied research followed by innovation , was an obsolescent model and that today we operate it in the context of the systemic or relational model in which , ultimately , basic and applied research were intimately linked . This model also features more and more transdisciplinary research .
This development was initiated by the Fourth Framework Programme .
We should like the Fifth to build on that , being organized around what today , clearly , is the new research and development concept .
With this in mind , we have proposed in this report - which I hope , indeed I feel sure , will be adopted tomorrow by a large majority - an approach which I would call the matrix approach . This comprises blending a number of research sectors covering not only enabling technologies but also scientific research into sectors of future significance such as information technologies and those linked to genetic science .
In other words , a wide variety of fields where basic and applied research could be effectively blended , with the possibility to move first in one direction , then in another , depending on the opportunities and openings each approach offered . However , alongside this major fundamental research effort , there would also be a number of targeted schemes .
This idea , of course , is directly inspired by the initiative adopted by Commissioner Cresson in connection with the refinancing of the Fourth Framework Programme , with the concept of task forces , which certainly did not enjoy unanimous support within this House but was nevertheless a very much more proactive , targeted and organized approach , centring on research projects which were regarded as likely to provide impetus .
Well , our proposals have adopted that idea , and we also hope that these major targeted programmes will raise the profile of research and development as far as public opinion is concerned , and so result in greater public support for research and development efforts at Union level .
So : new organization , new structures and new contents too .
The fact is that hitherto , it must be said , the first four framework programmes have been essentially - I shall not say exclusively , but essentially - devoted to the permanent endeavour to make our industry more competitive .
That is unquestionably a fundamental objective .
It is fundamental because it is enshrined in the Treaty and because we cannot regard the Treaty as just a scrap of paper , but also because it reflects Europe 's powerful ambition to have a strong presence in the major international markets .
Today , though , we believe that , as the European social model changes , it is becoming more and more important for European research and development also to meet a powerful social demand - a demand from society which surely expects us to create a sound industrial structure with industries that function , but also hopes that research will provide answers to the insistent problems that our citizens have to face , problems which do indeed call for additional efforts .
Well , the main message of this report is that today , although we must undoubtedly continue our efforts to improve our industrial potential , we have also got to meet that social demand .
At the same time , too , we are proposing a great many measures - I will not list them all here - to be taken to facilitate the passage from research to innovation .
These problems had already been touched upon in the Commission 's Green Paper , which was supported by Parliament .
Here again we have adopted a number of strong proposals .
We would also like to see the establishment at long last of a large-scale European scientific community , and , in that effort to create that scientific community , we would like to use not only the instruments of the research programme but also the Common Research Centre , which is one of the pillars of European integration although its functions , over the years , have no longer been as clearly apparent as they were at the outset .
It had , as they say , taken a beating ; it is making great efforts at restructuring , and we must pay tribute to that , but it should now be having fresh ambitions , and we have proposed some for it .
Finally , there are financial instruments , since anyone can see that the simple mechanism of the research framework programme is not enough to launch a whole dynamic range of new financing , especially as regards the SMEs .
In that context , we would like to see more inventive formulas for mobilizing risk capital in favour of research and development than for association with private capital .
We have made proposals for new financial instruments , and I feel sure that the Commission will pay very careful attention to these .
Naturally , we support and have once again put forward the idea of improving the management of the programmes and making them more effective .
A great deal of work has already been done here under Mrs Cresson 's predecessor , Mr Ruberti , and Mrs Cresson has followed up and broadened the efforts he made .
But there is still much to be done before we can start to escape from the red tape that sometimes strangles innovation and initiative .
Finally , Commissioner , and my concluding remarks are addressed particularly to you , obviously we would not want this own-initiative report to be just one more document on your table .
We should like the Commission 's preparation of the Fifth Framework Programme to be the opportunity for instituting a major dialogue between Parliament and the Commission , involving the Member States too , if they wish , in the form of what we have referred to as an institutional conference , although we don 't feel strongly about names .
As Alfred de Vigny said , ' What does the bottle matter , provided the contents are intoxicating ? '
Mr President , I should like to start by thanking Mr Desama most sincerely for his report .
This report is by way of preparation for the debate on the Fifth Research Framework Programme and , in the weeks and months ahead , once we have adopted it , it will undoubtedly result in the further enrichment and broadening of the debate , especially once the Commission has submitted its proposals .
It is important to point out that the issue here is not spending money but creating or sustaining a culture - a scientific culture - which has played its part in shaping this Europe of ours over the last three or four hundred years .
I can 't help fearing - and I think I am not alone here - that this scientific culture is gradually giving way , that scientific values are giving way , to a different culture in which the only concern is with the short-term money-oriented evaluation of products and processes .
I feel sure it is worth emphasizing something that all of us know , here in this House , that Europe has eased up in its scientific and technological endeavours .
Yesterday , the British Chancellor presented his budget .
If you look at the science budget , you will see a reduction in real terms .
I could say the same of the science budgets of other Member States - those of France , Germany , Italy and plenty of others .
We had great difficulty in topping up the Fourth Research Framework Programme - we are still having difficulties , we have still not solved the problem .
It is much easier to spend money on areas other than science , education and technology .
What that means is that we have no money for the future .
We are consuming it today , or being forced to pay off debts we incurred in the past .
This lack of vitality may be the main reason for the problems facing Europe today .
That statement has very often been heard in this House , and it is true all the same .
We must work to sustain , and enhance , a scientific culture in Europe .
This applies , too , to the subject we are discussing today - scientific and technological policy in the 21st century .
What is the main change going to be between that century and this ?
That it will not be the century of Europe : the majority of mankind lives outside Europe .
By the middle of the next century , two-thirds of humanity will be living in two countries which are not part of Europe .
Those countries are not going to sit back - they are going to develop their own science and technology , perhaps more successfully than we do .
And Pakistan is unlikely to be confined to a single Nobel laureate , as it has been in the 20th century .
So what is Europe doing ?
What are we investing in ?
What can a young person today identify as an investment in the future ?
Fine new buildings for banks or insurance companies ?
Marble will be too cheap for them .
But what is being invested in science and technology ?
We are wrangling over peanuts , when we should really be committing ourselves to major expenditures !
Europe must ask itself whether it wants to invest in the future - whether it wants to prepare for the 21st century .
If it does , then the Fifth Research Framework Programme - to be more specific - must also have a global aspect .
I can still remember the debate we had in connection with the Fourth Framework Programme .
Unfortunately , we were unsuccessful in our attempt to gain an appropriate level of recognition for global aspects in the Fourth Framework Programme .
I hope that the Fifth Framework Programme will provide us with increased opportunities to see Europe in the context of other cultures , too , to understand other cultures and , once again , to be more receptive to other cultures .
This aspect of globalization must play a major part in science .
Finally , I believe it is a good idea for the Fifth Research Framework Programme to be geared towards visible objectives as well .
The Commission has given some thought to that .
There are other proposals , too .
Parliament has put forward some ideas of its own .
My hope is that we can give science a higher profile , and perhaps increase the number of people who take an enthusiastic interest in it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , once again we are embarking upon preliminary discussions for a framework programme , and that framework programme , like all its predecessors , will be a four-year one .
In other words , it has to be both consistent and flexible , even if that seems to be a contradiction in terms .
I should like to look at three separate points , three specific proposals made by the Desama report , which seem to us to be particularly important .
First , the various policies in the area of research and development must be integrated and coordinated as a matter of urgency .
We need more research and development input into our structural , agricultural and environmental policies , and it must be possible to coordinate that input with the specific sector of research policy .
That is the only way we shall be able to spend the money efficiently , and the only way of making it clear to the citizen that progress is needed everywhere , not just hidden away in one particular programme .
Secondly , research and development are all very well , but we must improve the involvement of the SMEs , not everywhere , not in every instance , but wherever it can be done .
So we must also set measures in train to create easier access to risk capital and new , hybrid forms of financing .
The Union level could provide a valuable stimulus here .
Thirdly , we consider it very important for researchers to be more involved than they had been in the evaluation and further development of research policy .
We must institutionalize the dialogue between researchers and policy makers , and we must also convince our researchers that they have a duty to be politically active , and a duty , too , to inform the citizen , to explain what the issues are .
Bearing in mind the great scarcity of resources , we do need to create much greater public acceptance of what we are doing .
We are not living in a period of exuberant budgetary growth , and so we need to state what we want .
And that implies , too , making it quite clear what we don 't want .
That second point will be the most difficult : it will be difficult to say , no , not that , this instead !
I hope , Commissioner , that you will participate in a constant dialogue with us to help us define what we do want , and that you will listen to the voice of Parliament from the outset .
Finally , it seems very important to us that we should encourage value added creation in Europe .
That will be all we can afford - not , sadly , everything we should like to afford !
Mr President , Commissioner , what are we doing right in the field of research , and what errors are we making ?
Should the great changes that have taken place in scientific knowledge and industrial production during recent years - changes largely associated with the widespread availability of information and advanced communications technologies - prompt us to review and rethink our present structures and policies for research and technological development ?
What can we do about the challenge of social problems , 18 million people unemployed , economic growth , health , the environment ?
We are seeing the consolidation of the model of an information society in which economic , industrial and social aspects interact and combine more and more .
In point of fact , Commissioner , what are the real weak points in this European system of ours ? First and foremost , there is the one to which you referred : the problem of the so-called European paradox .
This refers to the fact that , although Europe has a highly advanced level of basic research , that fundamental research is not being competitively translated into patentable technologies . We need only recall that the European Union and its Member States spend about five times as much as Japan on basic research , but the Japanese actually hold many more patents than we do .
The problem I have just outlined is closely connected with the problem of frequently inadequate financing systems , given the insufficient level of risk capital available for technological innovation .
So what can we do ?
From what has been said , it seems obvious that the first requirement is to adapt the technological research and development model to the social and cultural system .
The issue now is not just to come up with technologically advanced solutions but also to ensure that technology is directed towards meeting the needs of the public .
In the course of the 21st century , European industry will find itself having to confront a competitiveness based on new priorities : education , the quality of life , sustainable development .
We need to take action now to create the conditions in which a new research and development model can meet those needs .
We have to increase the amount of investment capital and create new forms of financing through better mobilization of private and public capital and the cutting out of red tape .
We need to bring about the conditions for the mobility of researchers , encouraging exchanges as an important vehicle for the spread of knowledge .
With this in mind , we need to try to find new organizational forms for Community cooperation projects to prevent their becoming literally a closed circle , thus encouraging the creation of new forms of collaboration and endeavouring to rethink those which already exist .
We must allow much greater flexibility and the possibility of action to correct the programmes in real time , as they progress , and prevent resources from being irrevocably assigned to technological initiatives which may subsequently prove to be dead ends .
We cannot confine ourselves to proposing new , specific research programmes - we must establish a new approach , concentrating on priority themes , which means , to some extent , a fundamental change in the conception of community research .
The starting point is the identification of a specific problem instead of an entire sector of important research .
With this in mind - and we are addressing the Commissioner here - our research committee has declared its support in principle for this new task-force approach which may thus improve Community research results .
Finally , faced with the challenge of the globalization of knowledge , we certainly need to promote new forms of cooperation with the United States , Japan and other technologically advanced nations .
Mr President , Commissioner Cresson , ladies and gentlemen .
I should like on behalf of the Liberal Group to offer Mr Desama our congratulations on his report .
Despite the many amendments it has emerged as a report which is easy to read and points the way clearly to the fifth framework programme .
The fifth framework programme should focus on the competitive strength of European industry , and especially of the small and medium-sized firms .
SMUs still provide the biggest number of jobs and therefore deserve an important place in our European research and technology policy .
But such a policy can only be effective if at the same time investments are made in cars at the national and regional level .
Innovation policy for SMUs is a prime example of responsibility by national and regional authorities for they are in the best position to know the requirements of small and medium-sized companies .
There is no such thing as the small and medium-sized firm in Europe .
SMUs are not a homogenous group of companies but is a composition of firms which are very diverse in their sector and their size .
We must distinguish our approach according to target group if we want to have maximum benefit of SMUs participating in European cooperation projects .
That is why I am pleased my amendment on the subject was accepted .
But on the eve of the 21st century it is wise to pause for a moment and reflect .
Europe produces a great deal of new knowledge , but production of knowledge is not enough .
Not enough original work is being done with that knowledge and what is being done is not producing enough .
Take for example Philips CDI and HDTV .
We should be investing more in product renewal and lay less store by cost effectiveness .
That is why firms must learn to work better together .
Knowledge and experience with successful policy must be better distributed and workers must be better trained in practical and social skills .
The more technical society becomes the more it becomes dependent on human creativity and the capacity to learn .
I shall therefore go into this in greater detail in my report ' Development and applications , information technology in the next decade ' .

Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Desama for having so energetically taken on such a difficult task as on the one hand evaluating the fourth framework programme and on the other attempting to analyse the fifth framework programme .
It is a very important piece of work .
I have already secured many of the important amendments at committee stage but in view of the fact that the vote in committee was complicated I have been compelled to table a number of amendments here in Parliament too and it is these amendments that I am going to talk about .
The first amendment concerns the importance of noting that the fourth framework programme committed a great deal of funding to large enterprises and large institutions , whereas we in Parliament have stated many times that it is small businesses that are important and that we should support .
This is why I want to include some reference to the importance of small enterprises and research going hand in hand .
In the second amendment , No 4 , I refer to the fact that it is not only the social requirements which are important but also those of the environment .
We know that the people of the EU believe the environment to be important and that more research is needed in this field .
That is why it is important that we also mention in our conclusions the social and environmental needs for research .
Amendments Nos 5 and 6 relate to another important aspect , namely the research carried out by the EU and how it can affect or be used in such areas as the military , which infringes the spirit of the rules we have made .
For example , I have here the evaluation of the fusion programme for 1996 which we requested in Parliament in the spring .
It states unequivocally that it is fusion programmes which are important and that there are no problems at all .
This is of course not so at all .
Programmes of this nature that include fusion research can be used for the military development of arms and other matériel equipment for example .
It is therefore important that we do not have these resources and that research funding should have to be repaid if it goes to this type of research .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I support a strong and ambitious R & D policy , striking a balance between horizontal activities involving science and technology and vertical schemes focused on users ' needs .
I support a priority consisting in placing ' viability ' and popular motivation at the centre of an information technologies policy for Europe .
The proposed EU cell recently set as an objective for the year 2000 that of restoring cohesion in European societies .
How can that cohesion be brought about ?
First of all , by creating an initiative bringing together education , training and research .
Only if people are scientifically literate from earliest schooling can people be encouraged to take an interest .
Secondly , by avoiding any excessive concentration of objectives , as I have seen in the fifth framework programme .
In order to avoid negative consequences , we must take a transnational approach to the areas included in the fourth programme , such as information and communication technologies , marine science and technology , and renewable or less-polluting energy resources .
Thirdly , by guaranteeing that small firms take part through support for innovation in terms of products , processes and services offered .
Incentives should not be processed in a single framework , created for them alone , so as not to scare small firms away from strategic areas of research for European industry .
Fourthly , by promoting sustained and broad cooperation with third countries , based on the principle of mutual benefit .
In Africa and Latin America we should go beyond the sectors we have limited ourselves to , health and agriculture , for which first action programmes should be applied .
The development of those countries relies on the internationalisation of their research centres and technology transfers .
Fifthly , by making mobility more widespread and irreversible .
We must give thought to a European doctorate , the status of European scholar , scholarships encouraging people to return to their country of origin and the installation of advanced researchers in less-advanced countries .
Finally I should like to appeal for cooperation to be stepped up between the Union and its Member States , between the Member States and with third countries .
Community programmes and instruments must be coordinated .
That is the only way of fleshing out an autonomous European policy for the 21st century .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the discussions to date within the Research Committee have been very valuable in prompting thoughts about the Fifth Research Framework Programme and resulting in an initial outline plan which takes account of certain fundamental criteria : meeting new needs of society , making research efficient at translating scientific excellence into useful and economically valid applications , and improving the coordination between European and national levels to combat duplication and fragmentation .
Mr Desama 's excellent report considers the need both for continuity - the horizontal schemes - and the need for change - the objectives of an evolving society - and begins to suggest criteria for deciding what our objectives are and who is to be called upon to achieve them .
The rapporteur proposes knowledge-sharing technologies and targeted projects organized in matrix form .
I believe that this structure , inheriting the task-force concept , is a valid one , but what will determine the success of this approach will be the political debate on the subjects and criteria of the choices , the debate we are having now .
To help us see the importance of these criteria , I should like to point out that the European Union has an annual maximum of about 3 , 000 million ECU available , whereas the aggregate expenditure on research in Europe , within the Member States , amounts to about ECU 120 , 000 million : 50 , 000 in the public sector and 70 , 000 by industry .
Thus the European budget , provided it is invested in long-term programmes , becomes numerically significant and can therefore acquire a high profile and strategic significance .
As further support for such an approach , it should be recalled that a long-range programme of technological challenge carries both industry and academic research along with it and is not liable to confusion with an industrial research application programme which may arouse distrust in academic circles .
As for organization and European coordination , I believe the multi-track participation scheme on the lines of the ESA ( European Space Agency ) or EUREKA , may be a suitable model . To facilitate the transition from scientific excellence to practical excellence , I believe provision should be made for high-powered schemes to involve the end users , eliminate technical obstacles and create new instruments to provide finance and link research and innovation , such as venture capital .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first and foremost I must congratulate Mr Desama on his excellent own-initiative report , which puts forward many new ideas and , especially , shows a remarkable understanding of the current modern development of research on the brink of the 21st century .
I should also like to offer my warmest thanks to all the members of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy who have participated in this work .
This is the first time in the history of the framework programme that the European Parliament has taken the initiative and expressed an opinion before any formal proposal has been presented by the Commission .
The advantage of this formula , of course , is that it enables Parliament to put forward its views at a stage of the proceedings when they can be extensively taken into consideration by the Commission .
In the same spirit , incidentally , the Commission waited until the conclusions of Parliament 's efforts were already well known before presenting a first working document on the Fifth Framework Programme , which it did last week .
This document , which specifies and clarifies the broad outlines given in the communication ' Invention Tomorrow ' , is intended to provide added depth to the debate carried on within the institutions .
And I await Parliament 's reactions to this with the greatest interest .
My comments on your report will , with your approval , focus on three points .
First , I shall emphasize the areas of agreement between the views expressed in the report and the Commission 's proposals .
Then I shall give you the Commission 's view of certain points in the motion for a resolution that are not to be found in its own documents .
And , finally , I shall place the report in the context of the procedure for preparing the Fifth Framework Programme by outlining the form which that preparation is to take .
First , the areas of agreement .
The extent to which the own-initiative report and the motion for a resolution agree with the views put forward by the Commission is apparent both in the general approach and in a number of specific points .
Thus , the idea of a framework programme resolutely geared to economic and social needs is at the heart of Parliament 's motion for a resolution as it is at the heart of the Commission 's communication ' Invention Tomorrow ' , which sets out the approaches which the Commission proposes for the Fifth Framework Programme .
The idea behind the matrix approach proposed by Mr Desama , with its intersections between traditional fields and disciplines on the horizontal axis and the major problems facing Europe on the vertical axis , is very well reflected in the way in which the structure of the programmes is defined in the Commission 's first working document on the Fifth Framework Programme .
Furthermore , Parliament and the Commission both place the emphasis on the need for a sustained effort in innovation , technology transfer and financial structuring - that point , incidentally , was emphasized by a number of you , especially Mr Scapagnini - and also on coordination with the Union 's other instruments for intervention and cooperation with the other European technological cooperation initiatives , such as COST and Eureka , which were mentioned in particular by Mr Malerba .

This degree of agreement not only expresses the spontaneous similarity of the approach adopted by our two institutions but , as I said earlier , also bears witness to a positive interaction , the Commission having arranged to take due account of Parliament 's views as and when it became aware of them .
As I said , I shall now move on to make various comments on specific points .
Alongside the views that echo the Commission 's plans , the report by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy also contains a number of other very interesting recommendations which are certainly worthy of attention .
To quote just a few examples relating to activities in the field of training and mobility , I am thinking particularly of the idea of special fellowships for established researchers from technologically advanced countries to work in the South , the idea of research fellowships in industrial and commercial undertakings , and a recommendation that particular attention should be paid to the problems of science teaching in European schools .
In the course of its future work on the Fifth Framework Programme , the Commission will ensure that these suggestions - and a number of others that are equally stimulating - are given due consideration . You must forgive me if I do not quote all these ideas here .
I will note , though , the attention several honourable Members have given to the problems of small- and medium-sized enterprises , for example Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl or Mrs Plooij van Gorsel or Mrs Vaz da Silva .
The report does , however , also contain a number of recommendations which the Commission finds it impossible to adopt in view of the present status of the Treaties and the regulations for implementing the programmes .
These are the recommendations which relate to institutional aspects and the programme management procedures .
In actual fact , the possibility of specifically implementing a number of new ideas will depend on the extent to which the Intergovernmental Conference is going to make it possible to simplify the decision procedures in research matters .
As you know , this is a considerable problem .
Effective implementation of Articles 130k , l and n , for example , which would open the way to multi-track schemes , is hard to imagine except in the event of an extension of qualified majority voting .
Overall , and to summarize , the Commission can only welcome the general content of the report by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , and thank Parliament for this very valuable contribution to the continuing work on the Fifth Framework Programme .
What form is that work going to take ?
This is the third point I should like to bring up .
I have already mentioned the first working document presented by the Commission last Wednesday .
The detailed content of the Fifth Framework Programme is not yet described in that document , but it will be in a second working document which the Commission will be presenting early in 1997 - the formal proposal is planned for March that year .
The intended objective is for the Council to achieve a common position under the Luxembourg presidency in November 1997 and for the new framework programme to be formally adopted in January 1998 .
I must emphasize that compliance with this timetable is essential if we are to avoid any break in the continuity of the European research effort .
To maximize the chances of achieving this , the Commission has decided to structure the institutional debate in a progressive series of stages , allowing elements of consensus to be achieved at every step .
The preparation of the Fifth Framework Programme will occupy us intensively throughout 1997 .
But before we become fully involved in discussing it , we have to settle the question - which has been outstanding for several months now - of the financial complement to the Fourth Framework Programme .
This is not a mere technical point but a political preliminary , especially as regards the task-force concept .
The financial complement introduces a new approach to this point , and we must achieve a consensus on this before going any further .
The advances achieved during recent weeks have brought us considerably closer to a decision , and I am quite hopeful that a policy agreement , perhaps even a common position , can be achieved at the ' research ' council on 5 December .
As I am sure you know , bearing in mind the decision by the Ecofin Council not to revise the financial perspectives for 1997 and 1998 , the sum proposed by the Commission has been revised downward .
The informal trialogue which has just taken place this afternoon has confirmed the intention of the three institutions to go ahead .
So I am quite hopeful that the procedure for adopting this financial complement , for which Parliament has made considerable efforts , can be finalized early next year .
Once again , I should like to say how grateful I am for Parliament 's support on this .
I shall leave it at that .
Let me finish with one final comment .
In the context of the preparations for economic and monetary union there is heavy pressure on national budgets , as many of you have emphasized .
The Council 's discussion of the Fifth Framework Programme is likely to be prolonged and difficult .
The Commission is prepared to engage in the debate .
The price to be paid is not too high if we can be certain of achieving the objective : a framework programme which really differs from its predecessors and contains real substance - and , also , if we are to fortify the European scientific culture as Mr Linkohr so rightly hopes .
The Commission counts on the support of Parliament and the broad convergence between Parliament 's views and its own in a joint effort to ensure that this new programme can be adopted in good time and with a content which , in accordance with a formula to which I believe Parliament fully subscribes , will make it possible for European research to operate in the service of the public .
Thank you , Mrs Cresson .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Public transport
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0289 / 96 by Mr Wijsenbeek , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Commission Green Paper on the Citizens ' Network : fulfilling the potential of public passenger transport in Europe ( COM ( 95 ) 0601 - C40598 / 95 ) ; -A4-0291 / 96 by Mr Killilea , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Regulation laying down the conditions under which non-resident carriers may operate national road passenger transport services within a Member State ( COM ( 95 ) 0729 - C4-0113 / 96-96 / 0002 ( SYN ) ) ; -A4-0292 / 96 by Mr Killilea , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 684 / 92 on common rules for the international carriage of passengers by coach and bus ( COM ( 96 ) 0190 - C4-0338 / 96-96 / 0125 ( SYN ) ) .I now call upon Mr Wijsenbeek , as rapporteur , to speak first .
You have five minutes , Mr Wijsenbeek .
Mr President , the real basis for the Commission 's Green Paper on the Citizens ' Network is our own initiative report on urban transport and congestion of June 1992 .
We were in fact ahead of our time .
Despite that I should like on behalf of the whole House to congratulate Commissioner Kinnock on the fact that he understood the signal from Parliament and society and in the Green Paper is now following up a better management of traffic .
That is why the Union as such is rightly involved in public transport despite the fact that transport is usually a matter for local and regional authorities .
This is the question of subsidiarity .
We in Europe can only protect the public 's freedom to travel on the territory of the Member States , as stipulated in Article 8a of the Treaty , if the public 's mobility is not restricted .
Mobility , as is generally recognised , is thwarted less by all sorts of rules and formal regulations than by physical and organisational restrictions .
We as institutions of the EU together decided on the planning and setting up of the trans-European networks and created a not inconsiderable amount in the budget for it .
I shall refrain here from going into the scandalous approach adopted by the Council to the present budget and the amounts in it for the TENs .
The TENs will only make sense if we can build a reasonable link up to and from the major European transborder infrastructure .
When we look at the list of legal instruments appended to the Green Paper then the instruments to regulate public transport in the Union are already considerable .
The main proposals in the Green Paper are on accessibility , communication , safety , travel comfort and environment .
In each of these categories Parliament has made a number of additions , along with the proposed push and pull measures and the best practices proposals .
In the area of accessibility we , more than the Commission had already done , have focused attention on the 80 million citizens who for physical or functional reasons are less mobile , either permanently or temporarily .
This should mainly be done by adapting material to old and disabled people and by adapting to secondary provisions in the dissemination of information .
We in this House believe that accessibility can be improved not only by adaptations in infrastructure , for example by planning separate provisions for various transport modalities , but also by improving town planning .
Attention should be paid much more than hitherto to traffic from home to the workplace when new houses are built .
When public transport is organised first of all it is , after some initial loss , later more than adequately recouped .
Safety should speak for itself but it cannot be said often enough that the number of traffic victims is unacceptably high .
It is often the fault of differences in traffic legislation in the various Member States .
Travel comfort is not only a matter of better material .
I and Parliament as a whole pay particular attention to the chain approach to transport , by planning connections in major urban conurbations where the majority of our citizens live and work today .
The environment is better protected if we encourage more citizens than is currently the case to use public transport .
This should be done in conjunction with the Green Paper on external costs .
We must be guided in our actions by realism and take an overall look at transport problems , which takes us in this debate to the issues covered by Mr Killilea 's reports .

' Don 't tax car users and harass them out off existence but improve the quality and appeal of collective transport ' .

Mr President , firstly I have to say that the proposal dealt with in report A4-0291 / 96 to a great extent resembles Regulation No 2454 / 92 which was repealed by the Court of Justice in its judgment of 1 June 1994 in Case C-388 / 92 brought by the European Parliament which had not been reconsulted by the Council on a proposal for a regulation which differed considerably from the original Commission proposal .
Having said that , one of the key elements in establishing an internal market is the removal of the artificial barriers to a single market in the transport sector .
The two proposals which I have the honour of presenting to Parliament this evening represent a further step in the development of a single transport market in the European Union .
They will give bus companies from one EU country greater freedom to offer services to passengers in other Member States .
It makes sense for bus companies operating a service from one country to another to be able to pick up passengers at all points along the route .
At present a bus company is allowed to sell tickets to passengers in the country of origin only .
The best example I know is a bus company which operates a service from a part of the west of Ireland which I represent to London and is allowed to pick up passengers within Ireland but is forbidden to take on any new passengers in any of the major cities or towns in north or south Wales or in the north or south-west of England .
Similarly on the return route , the bus company cannot pick up new passengers in any of the towns on the road from the east coast of Ireland to the west coast of Ireland .
These types of restrictions should be removed for a number of reasons .
Firstly , it would allow international bus companies to compete directly with national bus companies on long-haul routes , thereby offering a greater range of services to passengers .
Increased competition should also help to keep down fares charged on long-distance bus routes .
It will of course be far easier to ensure the financial viability of bus routes , particularly those from regions of low population density in the periphery to the major urban centres , if the company providing the service is able to pick up passengers along the route being served by that bus .
In recent years the European Union has taken steps to liberalize air transport and some progress has also been made in opening up the rail market to greater competition .
The proposals before Parliament today will ensure that long-distance bus operations will also be freer to respond to the demands of the market-place and one of the results will be greater pressure on airlines and rail companies to lower their fares on competing routes .
Travellers , particularly those with limited funds , will have a greater range of low-cost travel options than has been the case in the past .
The social benefits of cheap transport to people such as students , migrant workers in low-paying jobs and their families should not be underestimated .
For many years transport costs between peripheral regions and major urban centres of the Union , for example the one I cited between the west of Ireland and London , were artificially high because of the price cartels operated by the airlines and also by the train and ferry companies .
It is worth recalling that in the days of price fixing by , for example Aer Lingus and British Airways , air fares between London and Irish airports were amongst the highest in all Europe .
It is also worth recalling that at the time when bus companies were not allowed to offer services from Ireland to London , the railway and ferry companies also operated a price-fixing arrangement which resulted in unnecessarily very high and exceptional fares .
European legislation at last has ended price fixing on many , but by no means all , air routes .
Long-haul bus companies have gradually developed a network of routes which now compete directly with the railways and the airlines .
As a result , the cost of transport throughout Europe is on the way down with important social benefits for families divided by migration , for employment and , a better example , for educational reasons .
Transport costs are also a key factor in the tourism sector which is something we tend to forget .
The proposals before Parliament today will help to reduce overland transport costs and will help to facilitate growth in tourism , particularly amongst younger people who are often not in a position to pay for air travel .
Finally , greater freedom to pick up passengers will encourage the more efficient use of the buses on a particular route and may reduce the overall number of buses on the roads , thereby reducing congestion and pollution levels along some of the transport corridors .
I welcome the proposals put forward by the Commission , which will help in developing the single transport market within the Union .
The Transport Committee has taken a very positive view of the value of these proposals and as rapporteur , I can assure you , Commissioner , that is the truth .
Together with my colleagues in the Transport Committee , we have tabled a number of amendments which I believe will be supported and improve the text proposed by the Commissioner .
In conclusion may I also say that my own view , and that of the Transport Committee , is that Parliament should support the proposals put forward by the Commission which should also include the amendments adopted in the Transport Committee .
On that point , on report A4-0291 / 96 as the coordinator of the UPE group , I have today withdrawn Amendments Nos 17 and 18 .
In report A4-0292 / 96 we have withdrawn Amendments Nos 29 and 30 leaving , with the exception of the committee 's amendments , only two amendments by the Liberal Group .
Perhaps Mr Wijsenbeek in his wisdom might also withdraw those .
It is important that these two reports and the conclusions from the Commission are before the Council for their final conclusions on 12 December .
We should make every effort to have a common position adopted for that date or at least by the end of this year .
I thank the committee and many of the assistants who helped me to produce these two important reports .
It has taken quite some time and I want to express my appreciation to the staff of the Transport Committee for their wonderful work and support .
It is often forgotten that these people work in a very dedicated way .
The issue here is the attempt to provide optimum cross-border links between the various carriers , and also to use them for cross-border travel .
To achieve this ideal objective of enabling people to travel as efficiently , quickly and far as possible by public transport from any location in Europe is of course a difficult challenge . Yet it is worth making this effort , because the benefits would of course be a reduction in individual transportation , more energy savings , more pooling of transport and better utilization of the infrastructure .
It must be possible to improve coordination and linking between the various carriers that we already have .
An important point here , in the view of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , is that the planning of networked transport systems should also allow flexibility in the forms of enterprise involved .
The networks need not always be operated by state-owned or public enterprises , but there must be scope for flexible models , such as private / public partnerships or the granting of franchises .
Governments should provide the public transport network , but not operate it .
Of course , both governments and the European Union should provide incentives , start-up assistance , and should develop the infrastructure so as to define the area of operations for private initiatives as soon as possible .
In this context , there are one or two ideas I would like to put forward .
In these days of weak economies , consideration should also be given to whether the European Union might not provide additional incentives .
For example , perhaps not at this immediate moment but in the longer term , it might be possible to make a different use of the Structural Funds , when they lie fallow and unused for years at a time .
This use of the resources of the Structural Funds should also be considered in connection with the European Investment Bank .
More flexible options need to be worked out and devised here to enable the infrastructure for the citizens ' networks to be developed throughout the whole of Europe .
In this sense , the citizens ' networks and their realization and gradual implementation will benefit the economic efficiency of Europe and promote opportunities to reduce unemployment .
In principle , this is a worthwhile activity for the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , all of you perhaps future users of short-range public transport !
First , I should like to say how glad I am that this Green Paper has been produced , and to thank the rapporteur for his efforts .
I believe that short-range passenger transport concerns every single citizen of the Union , because involvement in community life depends on access to transport ; and I believe that this is another very important reason why the trans-European networks , the long-range links , should be appropriately supplemented by local networks .
The opinion of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy naturally deals with the points that the Committee spends most time discussing .
When we , the European Union , agree to stabilize CO2 emissions that makes it necessary to plan our energy use much more efficiently .
Road transport offers two particularly good ways of doing this : increased use of public transport , enabling more passengers to be carried for a lower energy input , and developing vehicles which use less energy , or different forms of energy .
Another thing that I believe we need to do , therefore , is to help make public transport more attractive . A particular contribution here can be made by another area covered by the Committee on Technological Development , because the use of telematics to improve the provision of information will make access to and use of transport easier .
One especially important aspect of research , vehicle development , is as I understand it a special interest of the Commissioner for Research , Mrs Cresson , and this is an area where I think a great deal of highly creative work can be done in Europe , which will also help the development of our industry .
There is one final point I would also like to mention : the documentation of especially suitable projects , throughout Europe , should help facilitate access to community life for all European citizens .
Mr President , the aim of establishing a public transport network in Europe that is easily accessible and affordable is one deserving of permanent support .
The idea is to integrate the entire network , conceptually and technically , from the transEuropean networks to the local transport systems .
It is only right , and important , that the users of the transport services should be actively involved in these decision processes .
But what about women ?
The Green Paper makes only marginal mention of them - it talks about pregnant women , for example , or women travelling with pushchairs or small children .
No mention whatever is made of their often severely reduced mobility , an area where the Commission 's document deals only with people with disabilities , and the elderly .
Then there is the matter of safety and security .
This cannot be confined to operational safety , where the Commission has rightly listed a number of standards .
Personal safety is at least as important .
There is an objective and specific risk to women , which is certainly not imaginary , when they have to use ill-lit railway stations or stand waiting for public transport outside the rush hour .
When sections of public transport routes are unmanned , partly because of personnel cuts , and visibility in car parks is poor , the very real fear of attack is absolutely justified .
We need a programme of effective counter-measures , integrating specific local experience from the regions of the Member States .
Is it simply a matter of cost-effectiveness that no night taxis run after the last buses have gone , that there are not enough taxis for women only or reserved seats near the driver on buses and trains , that services are frequent at peak times but otherwise in short supply - or is thoughtlessness a contributory factor too ?
The sad consequence is that many women with work to do at home , with school-age children or in part-time employment feel cut off and isolated , especially in remote rural areas .
The same applies to elderly women and those with disabilities .
All stages of transport policy , from planning through to implementation , must involve appropriate representation for women . In the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights , I have only been able to give a brief outline of what women experience .
Their influence on decisions taken by the social partners must be strengthened .
They must be involved in comprehensive , clearly structured consultations .
Mainstreaming has an important contribution to make to policy and action in the field of transport , as elsewhere .
I have no doubt that the author of this good report on the Green Paper on the citizens ' network , Mr Wijsenbeek , will agree with me .
Mr President , this proposal for a regulation is influenced by the continuous liberalisation of cabotage transport of persons .
The internal market is still a long way from being implemented in this field .
The Council and the Commission do not appear to be making much progress here .
I wonder why the Commission has delayed so long with this proposal since it contains very few changes from the lapsed regulation .
As draftsman of the opinion I have serious doubts about the relevance of Amendments Nos 9 , 13 and 14 from the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
The tiny reluctant step taken by the committee is either held up or set back by these amendments .
And these amendments also mess up the systematic approach of the Commission proposal .
Risks of distortion of competition , social dumping , etc. can lead to the refusal or withdrawal of the licence under Article 4 ( 2 ) .
The Economic Affairs Committee has unnecessarily in its Amendment No 2 proposed that ' threat to the exploitation of transport firms ' be included in the definition of ' serious disruption ' , in Article 9 ( 2 ) .

The rapporteur 's intention to delete Article 4 is completely illogical .
His reasons are groundless and the aim of the amendment is in breach with the environmental interests and principles of the internal market .
And another point is that Amendments Nos 13 and 14 are mutually contradictory .
I urgently advise the House follow the Economic Affairs Committee and reject Amendments Nos 9 , 13 and 14 .
Finally I would like to ask Commissioner Kinnock a question .
Can the Commissioner explain why the models for the documents under Article 6 and the check list or travel documentation under Article 7 are missing ?
I hope that they are not too complicated for the undertakings .
Mr President , I am overwhelmed by the amount of speaking time allocated to me , but it means I can make the point that if public transport in Europe is to be organised with the various reports being cross-debated as we are doing here this evening then never again will a train or bus arrive in time , let alone will the man in the street be able to understand the slightest thing about it all .
On Monday morning there was a tail-back of around 300 km in the relatively small country of the Netherlands despite the fact that at the eleventh hour an agreement was reached which meant the planned rail strike was called off .
The country came to a stand-still just like so many densely populated regions in the European Union do nearly every morning with the growing flood of private cars and lorries .
The problems are recognised as such at all kinds of administrative levels .
Even in Europe there are numerous reports which document the Commission 's and Parliament 's view that a coherent system of public transport is needed to meet the needs of mobility , to provide an alternative to the car and to enable the tens of millions of citizens who do not have or do not want to have a car to function properly in society , and Mr Mann pointed out that there is also a relatively large number of women among them .
The Green Paper on the citizens ' network , the Green Paper on external costs and the White Paper on the future of the railways together form a triple manual on the thinking of the future of the transport of goods and people and indicate that the way ahead is towards a social economic and environmentally responsible transport policy .
While I recognise that the Commission and Parliament agree on the general guidelines I must see that at the same time that are many obstacles to putting the policy into practice .
We shall deal later with the external costs and the railway plans although we are justified in asking how the Commission envisages implementing a more integral transport policy in Europe .
But if I limit myself to the citizens ' network I would like to thank Mr Wijsenbeek for his cooperation on his report .
With the help of the Transport Committee his report contains just about all imaginable points on the subject .
Even for us it is sometimes difficult to stick to the main points .
May I make a few comments ?
First of all , although we should not overestimate the authority of the European Union in drawing up a citizens ' network no-one can dispute that an internal market cannot operate without a coherent system of public transport .
Secondly , the cross-border provisions are of extreme importance in all this .
For the Netherlands , for example , a link to the European network of high speed trains is extremely important , so that a brake can be put on the short and medium term fast growth of air transport , among other things .
Thirdly , it is a big mistake to believe that cross-border transport is restricted solely to trains or planes .
In border regions , for example , regional railways and buses play an important role in communication which is often underestimated .
People without cars in these circumstances are still facing borders which we here imagine have been eliminated .
Fourthly , at the beginning of my speech I made the point that many more people than we realise are dependent on public transport and not the car for access to mobility and society .
The elderly will increasingly turn to public transport .
I would emphatically repeat the point that it is not the market but the relevant authorities that should be approached on both the level of provision and access to facilities .
Now and even more in the future we must consider the needs of all those people who must make their way through life with varying degrees of disability .
The Green Paper on the citizens ' network is proof of the Commission 's responsibility for a system of public transport where the citizens can literally take to their heels .
With subsidiarity in mind I have no over-great expectations of what Europe can do in the peripheral regions .
But noblesse oblige , and the publication of the Green Paper and this public discussion must have a specific follow-up .
I would like to hear what the Commission has to say on that this evening , for it is now time to move to action .
Mr President , I think we should all welcome Mr Castricum back after his absence last week when there was a discussion on the streets of Brussels about the White Paper on the future of the railways .
We regretted that Mr Castricum could not be present to join this ongoing debate outside the European Parliament buildings last week but it is good to see him here tonight .
I congratulate the Commission on its Green Paper ' Citizens ' network for public passenger transport ' and especially congratulate Mr Wijsenbeek on his hard work in bringing this report before the committee and now before the House .
I welcome the emphasis on promoting access to public transport in preference to an increasing obsession with the private car .
It is good to see that research and development programmes at European level have a role to play in particular pursuing telematic projects in public transport .
Mr Wijsenbeek 's report looks especially at the financing of public transport and promoting intermodality .
I welcome the improvements to the environment and public health as well as the assistance to outlying peripheral areas of the Union .
However , I am anxious to adhere to the principle of subsidiarity .
I am also in favour of a subject which is close to Mr Wijsenbeek 's heart , namely promotion of the use of the bicycle .
Perhaps the Commissioner could see fit to promote the greater use of cycle paths throughout the European Union and easier access for bicycles to be carried on trains .
I also see the need for the facilitation of access to public transport for the disabled , the elderly and the less mobile .
I hope the Commissioner and the rapporteur will join with me tonight in looking to support one specific mode of transport which the European Union has consistently supported , namely the Channel Tunnel .
I am sure the Commission and Parliament will share my concern that the recent fire in the tunnel may have been started by a flare thrown from a lorry driver on the blockade at the entry to the tunnel .
Will the Commission tonight promise a full inquiry into the causes of the Channel Tunnel fire and eliminate any potential cause which may be linked to the blockade .
I would like the Commissioner to confirm tonight to the House that he fully supports the new European Union safety competence enshrined in Article 75 of the Treaty of Maastricht .
Turning briefly to Mr Killilea 's excellent report on non-resident carriers being able to operate national road passenger transport services , I welcome the Commission proposal and Mr Killilea 's report , especially to allow cabotage in the course of a regular international service .
For the first time a coach travelling between London and Lisbon will be permitted to pick up and put down passengers in France or Spain .
I welcome this freedom and the greater liberalization which this expresses .
Greater competition in Europe 's cross-national bus and coach services will mean cheaper fares .
That is good news for travellers and for coach companies .
The environment will benefit .
Coaches in future will be able to offer a better , a more competitive service , and will no longer have to travel half-full or empty , adding to the expense of operators and environmental pollution .
In conclusion , I welcome the Wijsenbeek and Killilea reports .
Mr President , we all know that traffic , and especially the use of cars , causes a large proportion of the environmental problems , particularly in the big cities .
The EU and individual Member States also committed themselves at the environmental conference in Rio to reduce carbon dioxide emissions , among other things .
This is a responsibility which we must live up to .
The Commission 's green paper on a transport network for all includes some good and positive ideas but no exact proposals .
The Transport Committee 's report drawn up by Mr Wijsenbeek on the other hand is a very good report which has the full support of the Liberal Group .
Mr President , I should particularly like to draw Commissioner Kinnock 's attention to a number of points :
Railways , waterways , bicycles and public transport must be afforded priority over road bridges and motorways .
Public transport must be cheap , comfortable , punctual , safe and environmentally friendly ; the responsibility for this should lie with local and regional authorities .
Ethanol , methanol , hydrogen gas , electricity and hybrid propulsion systems should take precedence over petrol and diesel .
Park-and-ride facilities , facilities for the disabled , good travel information and flexible working hours can increase the use of public transport .
Support from the EU for transport should in future go only to rail and public transport , not to road transport and motorways .
My congratulations on the report .
Mr President , first of all I must express my surprise , and indeed perhaps also my annoyance , at the reaction of many of the Members of this House when Mrs Mann talked about the position of women in relation to the citizens ' network .
Seldom has there been such a ridiculous sniggering session as we have just witnessed .
Mr Killilea , you should be paying special attention because you are also a member of the Committee on Women 's Rights .
That is the first thing I had to get off my chest .
But the second thing I must take up is the point made by Mr Wijsenbeek in the introduction to his report , for the sting was in the tail .
While he defended his report with many fine words he said at the end that we must not put anything in the way of the car .
I cannot put it better than Mr Castricum has already done , but every day , or nearly every day in Europe the situation has reached a stage that you wonder when the whole show will grind to a halt .
When will we just not be able to move any more , in the Netherlands or in another part of Europe ?
And that time is fast approaching .
We cannot keep on doing nothing to stop the use of the car and saying that we endorse a citizens ' network only if the car can keep going .
And that approach is contained in Mr Wijsenbeek 's report , despite the many fine points .
You will gather that we cannot give our support to this .
I would like to take up the points made by Frits Castricum here this evening .
The Commission has not only published a Green Paper on the citizen 's network .
It has also recently produced a Green Paper on the internalisation of external costs in transport and a Green Paper on sustainable mobility .
And we have also seen what a Green Paper on the urban environment could be like .
All these Green Papers are all very fine and dandy .
They contain an accurate analysis of what the problem is , but unfortunately on the other hand the Commission is also promoting far-reaching liberalisation and far-reaching competition which alas contradicts sometimes the aims described in all these Green Papers .
It would be greatly to the credit of the Commission , and indeed also of this House , if we were once and for all to admit this and make the right choices .
When we talk about the trans-European networks then it is also sensible to see the connection between these four or five Green Papers I have just mentioned and then we would be well advised not just to say blindly that we cannot dictate choices to the hauliers .
We should be saying that we should try with decisions on infrastructure to force the choices in a certain direction , in conformity with the market as far as I am concerned .
But these choices must be channelled in a certain direction , and I must regrettably say that so far despite the wonderful utterances on Rio or Agenda 21 or all these Green Papers , that is not being done .
This Green Paper was a wonderful Green Paper and I hope that the connection is established between this and the other Green Papers so that the right measures are taken to make urban developments really safe for women , and just as good for other members of the public who want to use public transport , and that in addition to all this we manage to turn our towns and cities into pleasant places to live with fresh , clean air , and that means unfortunately that the car will have to take a hearty step backwards .
Mr President , I am sure that none of those , admittedly few , of us present in this Chamber intended the least offence to any other honourable Member of this House .
To go back to the subject we are dealing with at the moment , the Commission document we are currently analysing highlights the potential of public transport in Europe and should be considered in conjunction with the document on external costs arising from use of private vehicles , Mrs Schmidbauer 's report .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs and the Commission for considering in their report the global objective of improving air quality and reducing traffic congestion and thereby the number of accidents and the time required to cross our major cities .
I am glad to note that the Commission does not claim to direct public transport but to stimulate research and promote the development of better practices , thus fully respecting the principle of subsidiarity .
Mr President , the point I would like to emphasize in my intervention is the central role of the public service and of the universal service .
As for the former , it is my understanding that it does not necessarily have to be linked to public companies , since a private transport company can also be obliged to provide certain services which are required by the general public . I am thinking here specifically of rural , peripheral or inter-island regions , which are less profitable .
The obligations deriving from such a service are aimed at guaranteeing that all - absolutely everyone - have access to quality services at an affordable price .
Strict application of this principle to a great extent contributes to the economic and social cohesion of such regions , involving essential principles of operation such as regularity , equality of access , universality and transparency .
In particular , I would like to refer to the content of Paragraph 9 of Mr Wijsenbeek 's report which expresses the hope that not only the Commission but also national and local authorities will make an effort to obtain not just economic profitability but a social benefit , enhancing the mobility of citizens both in peripheral regions and in areas with sparse population density throughout the European Union .
Mr President , I would like to end by quoting a conclusion from the Commission report on the Intergovernmental Conference , which reads as follows : ' Building on a set of values which are common to all European societies , the European project aims to promote said values which combine the characteristic features of democracy with those of an open economy based on market dynamism , solidarity and cohesion .
These values include citizens ' access to universal services or services of general interest which make a contribution to the objectives of solidarity and equality of treatment ' .
Mr Killilea will now speak on a point of order .
Mr President , I hoped to be able to say something before Mrs Van Dijk left .
She criticized my conduct when she said I sniggered at a comment made on the opinion given on the Wijsenbeek report .
I passed a remark .
I said it will raise the antennae of Mrs Van Dijk when she hears that and when I saw her name up to make a statement .
I was not sniggering at the comment .
I do not snigger at any such comments .
Now that she has returned , she might withdraw her statement .
I do not snigger .
I passed a remark and her lop-sided views on such matters should be more balanced in the future .
She should have a better sense of humour on such matters .
Thank you , Mr Killilea .
We will not be entering into a debate on this matter .
Your explanation will appear in the Minutes .
Mr President , at first sight it might strike one as surprising that the Commission is venturing into the field of public transport in urban areas , which is the responsibility of national and local authorities .
But the enormous problem of congestion which has arisen from the massive use of the private car is increasingly hampering the proper operation of the European transport market .
The Commission is to be congratulated on the thorough analysis of the problem which shows yet once more how big a part the private car plays in mobility .
It is also the reason for the snail 's pace at which traffic normally moves in the rush hour .
The major problem is how the quality , safety and speed of public transport can be improved so that the car user has a genuine alternative .
Or to put it in other words , how taxis , bicycles , hired cars and the private car can all be fitted into an integrated mobility system .
The Commission document contains a number of useful ideas , among which the attempt to create managed competition is certainly not the least important .
Public services is undoubtedly a job for central government .
But the lack of any incentive for innovation and market orientation has proved to lead to a practice of large government contributions and frequently substandard quality in the public transport system .
Incidentally , we must make sure that a coherent network remains in place when privatisation takes place with regional concessions being granted .
There are risks in this respect particularly in border regions .
Finally I was happy to see that the Commission appreciates that it is first and foremost the local and national authorities that are responsible for solving the problem of congestion on their territory .
The Committee on Transport has not allowed itself to be overwhelmed by these restrictions .
The resolution has , surprisingly enough with the cooperation of the rapporteur , become unfortunately an over lengthy list of all kinds of ideas and desiderata .
Mr President , I should like to start by congratulating Commissioner Kinnock on this Green Paper , and Mr Wijsenbeek on his report .
Of course , one may wonder what a Green Paper or a parliamentary report can do to change the actual conditions in our cities .
I personally , in my capacity as an elected councillor , have during the past eight years been responsible for transport planning in the city of Vienna , and in part for transport organization , too .
I know , of course , that this kind of Green Paper does play a very important part in informing the general public of all the measures which the cities themselves have to take .
This , of course , carries the seeds of conflict , because however broad a consensus we may have achieved within the committee , or may achieve now in this House , that is not to say that the implementation of the measures that have been mentioned may not give rise to many genuine conflicts .
Agreement in principle is easy enough , but detailed action is more difficult .
However , there are several reasons why I regard the Green Paper as very crucial .
First , as far as the environment is concerned , a lot has been said already .
What has not been sufficiently mentioned is the radical , continuing destruction of our environment , especially around our cities - the overdevelopment that follows when urban growth and the development of a region are not based on public transport .
A great deal of countryside and the relaxation it can offer people is being destroyed in Europe 's regions .
Secondly , there are the social aspects , and these too have already been touched on .
In our cities and countries , we often assume that everyone has a car .
That 's wrong .
Many families do not have a car .
In particular , women , children and older people who have no cars are reliant on public transport .
This makes it important that an efficient public transport system should exist , at a reasonable cost , and that buses , trams and subways should run at short and regular intervals .
Talking of trams , it fills me with pride to see an illustration of a Viennese tram in the Green Paper , though its real message is that forms of transport which a few years ago were considered old-fashioned and obsolete are now back in fashion .
Many American cities are now adding to their existing transport facilities , with the utmost difficulty , the same tram systems that many European cities have been fortunate enough to preserve .
A third aspect which is not sufficiently brought out in the report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy is , of course , the economic one .
Many cities can only remain economically attractive , attractive to investors , if their transport systems work efficiently .
A point which is constantly overlooked is that even personal transport only functions efficiently if a great many people , as many as possible , use public transport .
So there has to be a high modal split , so that , above all , the necessary commercial transport has room on the roads .
My view , then , is that this is not necessarily a contradiction in terms , not a case of pillorying the car , for us to give enthusiastic support to public transport - the point is that appropriate scope should also be provided for necessary private transport .
My third and last point is this : I should like to point out that I believe the various European Union aid programmes should take even more account of public transport . I don 't mean just the research programmes or the specific transport programmes but also , for example , the regional development programmes .
I think that regional development systems such as the railway project or other projects should make more allowance , in particular , for the needs of public transport .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Commission 's proposal and Mr Killilea 's report gave rise to an interesting committee discussion .
Particularly interesting in my view is that this discussion can and must actually be taken further by means of an amendment .
The existing proposal for a Regulation that has been under discussion here leaves various questions unanswered , and both the Commission 's efforts and the report deserve credit for having provided clear answers to some of those questions .
For one thing , they clarify the categories and make a clear distinction between those services that do require authorization and those that do not ; and they also clarify the procedure for taking due account of the technical control of the vehicles - safety , in other words , and social aspects .
In addition , the reports also have important things to say about a common transport policy , by standing up for the user 's right to choose his means of transport ; and they remind us of the need for liberalization to proceed in step with harmonization .
One amendment envisages excluding from the scope of application not only international regular services but also national services at urban , suburban and regional level .
This , in my view , does not harm to the proposal as a whole .
Regular urban and suburban services are usually part of the public service and , accordingly , involve aspects which have their place in a general discussion of public services , or even of the universal service .
We know that some countries have set up public passenger transport systems as a service for the citizen without necessarily going through the tender procedure to ensure compliance with profitability criteria , while in some cases they actually form part of a deliberate employment policy and so would not satisfy any profitability calculation .
The question of whether this is a good or bad thing is , at least , one reason for taking a closer look at this aspect .
We are not trying to avoid this discussion - quite the reverse !
Forthcoming reports will take us to the very heart of it .
So it seems sensible to me , as proposed in this amendment , to conduct the debate within the framework of the general regulations for the granting of public service authorizations .
There is more than one side to this problem - it has various aspects .
One is the elimination of monopolies , including public monopolies .
Another is safety and the environment , and another is employment , and taken together all these add up to a partnership between the state and the private sector .
These aspects are a good enough reason to conduct a separate debate , and we trust that will be done before too long .
Mr President , it is my opinion that the reports we are dealing with today are an extremely good contribution to the development of transport to the benefit of European citizens .
It is partly a matter of inspiration , and partly one of legislation .
One important aspect in this area , however , is that we as a Parliament also consider these matters from a national perspective .
I have heard moving accounts from Ireland and The Netherlands .
I would have liked to ask Mr Killilea - he is no longer here unfortunately - whether there is a bus route linking the Irish pubs around Europe that he is planning to set up , but perhaps we should dismiss this as a humorous comment .
When we formulate the European regulations , we also have an obligation to look at things from different perspectives .
We have city traffic , to which reference was made earlier .
And we have rural traffic .
There are different forms of transport culture , etc .
I am wholly in agreement with liberalisation .
It is a good thing .
But if tenders are invited for a given form of transport and a company wins the right to provide it , it cannot help matters if other companies operate on the same route without a licence .
Some of the ideas referred to in the report by Mr Killilea would in practice have the effect of giving transport companies a free hand , even in cases where a company had been awarded a licence following the invitation to tender .
This affects regional traffic .
Coastal traffic off the individual countries in the form of regional traffic is therefore a matter which requires great attention .
International transport from one country to another and permission to pick up passengers in the context of international transport systems is something quite different .
This has my support , unless the routes in question have already been allocated .
It is unfortunate that we have some situations in which there are parallel routes operated by both trains and several bus services , running half empty , for which fares are constantly reduced in order to win the ' battle ' - just like the airspace situation .
It is therefore very important that we give some thought to this .
I am unable to accept the comments on tax harmonisation made by Mr Killilea .
I am quite prepared to discuss CO2 emission and pollution of the environment , but that is a very different thing .
Mr Lindqvist is right about the priorities involved in viable transport systems .
It therefore makes no sense at all when the rapporteur writes that in general terms one should be able to choose the car when one wants to , if all else fails .
This means it is not collective transport we are providing for ; it is a multiple-choice situation in which personal transport , in the form of a car , will win every time .
It must be assumed that the Council 's attitude is more sophisticated .
I am not clear about what the centralist Commission is about to produce as its final proposal .
But if we want to see development here , it must be a combination of what Mr Killilea is proposing , what the Commission is putting forward and what the Council finally comes up with in its own right .
I would support the development of common transport in Europe and collective traffic arrangements ; and I do not have anything against liberalisation .
But we must respect the different regional transport cultures .
We are obliged to respect the development that has already taken place , otherwise we would actually be hindering something we want .
It is also the case here that we must learn to walk before we can run .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for staying here so late , and thank you too , ladies and gentlemen , my unfortunate colleagues who , as always , find themselves discussing the transport sector at 11 p.m. !
We Christian Democrats naturally welcome and support the Commission 's Green Paper , because it is both right and necessary that the European Union should promote an exchange of experiences between cities and conurbations on ways of improving short-distance public transport , in particular , and should support model projects to increase the intermodality of transport movements .
But we Christian Democrats must also emphasize that we take the principle of subsidiarity in the Union seriously .
That is why we stress the point that primary responsibility for short-distance public transport in both town and country should remain with the municipal and regional authorities and independently administered organizations , because it is they that have the closer view and they who are answerable to the citizen .
Furthermore , we Christian Democrats - unlike those Social Democrats who are still with us - do not want to see any European interference in the affairs of the municipal , city and regional authorities .
We therefore reject , among other things , the following demands by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
We do not regard it as necessary for Europe to require ecobalances to be produced before government grants are made .
We reject the general recommendation - I am overstating this , but if you take it literally it could be interpreted that way - that transport infrastructures must be laid underground .
Why must Europe recommend that to the local and regional authorities ?
Thirdly , we as Christian Democrats also reject the request to the Commission to consider , so far as possible , whether it might come up with additional legal requirements for short-distance public transport .
Mr Kinnock , don 't go to too much trouble !
Don 't interfere with the powers of the local and regional authorities .
I have just two comments on the Killilea report . The completion of the single market is right and necessary , and in that light it is also necessary to open up cross-border passenger transport by bus within the Union .
But , Mr Kinnock , this liberalization must not lead to any ' reverse discrimination ' against enterprises .
It cannot be right , for example , for Dutch enterprises carrying on cross-border activities in Germany to be subject to different regulations , and less strict regulations , than a German enterprise competing with them .
There must be no discrimination here .
My second example illustrates where we have to watch out with the opening-up of market access opportunities .
Simply scrapping the prohibition of cabotage , as Mr Grosch proposes , must not result in the collapse of the existing cross-border short-distance public passenger transport systems .
So this sector should be protected against excessive upheavals by the prior introduction of unambiguous regulations covering the granting of concessions for short-distance public transport services .
Thank you , Mr Jarzembowski .
I support equality between men and women and therefore make no distinction .
If you take a look at that part of the sitting over which I preside , you will see that , at the precise moment the time allotted to you expires , be the speaker male or female , I advise you .
You then extend the time for a greater or lesser period , but this is something you do under your own responsibility .
Therefore I would say again that I support equality between men and women and therefore , in this Chamber , I give you exactly the same treatment , just as I am now going to give to Mr Koch , who has two minutes .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the Commission 's proposal on the introduction of common rules for cross-border passenger traffic by motor bus .
Improved opportunities for motor buses within the single market are not only sensible but long overdue .
Buses , after all , are among the most environment-friendly and safest modes of transport and guarantee mobility which can be sustained in the long run .
In conjunction with the amendments adopted by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , these measures will make it possible , first , to achieve a sensible balance and parallel development between liberalization , the crossborder carriage of passengers and the harmonization of the framework conditions .
Too often in the past we have liberalized things in Europe without harmonizing the foundations and underlying conditions .
That must not happen again !
The second effect will be to improve the safety and security aspects that are so important to all concerned .
I am thinking here not only of transport safety in the technical sense but also of greater planning and investment security for small- and medium-sized enterprises .
Thirdly , I think it is noteworthy that the costs and management expense of bus companies are minimized if they obtain a Community licence .
I congratulate the rapporteur on his success here : while retaining the aims and objectives of this proposal for a Regulation he has managed to clarify it , cut away the red tape and simplify it ; and , in maintaining the citizen 's right to a free choice of mode of transport , he has helped to increase transparency and legal certainty , and so to bring the transport plans closer to the citizen .
Mr President , this has been a very interesting and quite lengthy debate .
It has had a few elements which are worthy of specific reference .
The first is that Mr Swoboda made his maiden speech in this Chamber .
It was a very effective and well-informed speech and I congratulate him on it .
It is what I would expect from someone with his very extensive experience in public transport as the extremely successful chairman of public transport in Vienna for some years past .
May I say that our gain is Vienna 's loss .
I was also very touched by a scene which took place during the course of the debate .
There was a danger at one time that the normal good temper of this House was being slightly fractured by the unlikely dispute that arose between Mrs Van Dijk , who is a very sweet-tempered person , and Mr Killilea , who is conviviality itself .
I am happy to report that after some danger of an acerbic exchange , I witnessed them later on touchingly together .
I am sure that bodes well for the future of parliamentary cooperation .
Today 's discussion has been a joint debate on the Commission Green Paper and on two Commission proposals for legislation .
I understand Parliament 's desire to organize the debate on the citizens ' network in conjunction with the two proposals on road passenger transport which was the subject of Mr Killilea 's reports .
I know that there are others , like me , who hope that the mixture of issues does not distract attention either from the need to reach a consensus on the citizens ' network as we get into the detail of the legislative proposals or distract attention from the important issues relating to Mr Killilea 's reports .
I know that the House will understand if I concentrate my remarks on the citizens ' network although I will , as is the convention of the House , indicate the Commission 's position on each of the amendments in Mr Killilea 's report .
I regret that the variety of issues I have to cover in my intervention will mean a slightly longer contribution than I would have liked .
I begin by congratulating the Committee on Transport and Tourism and their rapporteur Mr Wijsenbeek for the characteristically thoughtful and reasoned report which has been so well presented .
His commitment to developing public transport is well known and it is a determination which is evident right throughout his report .
It is also a commitment which I strongly endorse .
I have to say , however , that when I launched the citizens ' network Green Paper last January there were those who wondered aloud if this was an area where the Commission had an interest .
When I called for a wide-ranging debate on the future development of public passenger transport in the European Union , there were those who felt that only a few special interest groups would actually participate .
I think Parliament would agree with me that the doubters were wrong .
The responses have been numerous , informative and lively and they have come from national , regional and local government , from users and operators , from trades unions and police officers , and from individual citizens .
The debate is far from over and this report is a valuable part of that debate .
Obviously I cannot address every single one of the detailed recommendations of Mr Wijsenbeek 's report but I will readily respond to the main issues .
On competence of the Union , I share the belief that the Union must encourage an integrated planning process for transport systems and I also share the belief that in all cases users must be closely involved in planning and decision-making .
We forcefully made that point in the Green Paper .
It is clear that most of the issues at stake : the kind of urban transport that is chosen , its quality , the fares and other significant features are best dealt with at the responsible local and regional level as Mr Jarzembowski forcefully argued , partly because of subsidiarity and partly also because of plain ordinary decent common sense .
But the Union does have the task of ensuring that the Community legal framework , governing for example the introduction of public services and related exclusive concessions , is the right legal framework .
The Union can also help to focus the discussion on important subjects and facilitate the exchange of information on best available practices which is something we have already been trying to do .
On financing , I agree that , wherever possible , public transport should be financed by revenue from fares .
It is worth stressing , however , that when considering subsidies , the relevant authorities should also take into account the potential cross-sector benefits of aid to public transport , in particular in the way in which public transport can assist with general levels of health and obviously with social welfare .
The House will know I attach the highest importance to the principle and to promotion of intermodality .
That is why the Commission founded the intermodality R & D taskforce .
We will continue to work to develop the integration of all the different transport modes , including private cars .
They are obviously a vital part of the transport chain , especially for those who have access to cars .
However , obviously we need to do everything possible to ensure that the mobility which cars can usefully provide is not stifled or , indeed , eradicated by congestion which , as several speakers have pointed out in the course of debate and elsewhere , is a real danger .
On the specific request in the report for the Commission to publish figures for car use and public transport use by women in the Member States , I have to say , with regret , that such data is not available .
Even without it , I emphasize my commitment which is shared in this House , to promote transport systems which all our citizens feel safe in using both day and night .
Naturally I agree on the need to provide a safe environment in which passengers and operators are free from the fear of physical attack .
That is important for all passengers , not just for women , though their particular concerns must be accepted and acted upon .
They have particular and in many cases justified feelings of vulnerability .
Regarding cycle use , we will consider within the limits of subsidiarity how to encourage this efficient and environmentally-friendly mode of transport which I know is a matter of active and admirable interest to Mr Wijsenbeek as it is to many others .
On the subject of land-use planning I share the view that transport issues must be taken into account at an early stage in discussions on land use and those decisions , by their very nature , are best taken at local level .
However , the Commission will study this subject further in order to provide a useful input into the discussions on how transport considerations can best be taken into account if the character of land use is changed or intensified .
The greater part of the Committee on Transport and Tourism 's report is rightly devoted to the specific topic of public transport .
Many of these suggestions are very specific and I know that honourable Members understand that the Commission , in the spirit of subsidiarity and proportionality , had to confine itself in the Green Paper to those areas where we felt we could bring added value .
That said , however , I agree fully with the report 's comments on staff training and qualifications and on the need to meet the needs of people with the great diversity of mobility impairments that can affect people at different times of their lives .
However , I do not share the view that the concept of universal service provision is appropriate to public transport .
I take that view not through any doctrinaire reason but simply because , while the concept properly exists in the postal and telecommunications sectors in relation to the provision of a specific single service , the sheer diversified nature of public transport does not lend itself to such a concept in practice .
I am puzzled by the criticism that in the Green Paper we neglected the needs of part-time workers .
The concept of the citizens ' network applies to all passengers .
Therefore , we made no distinction between them other than to highlight the specific needs of the mobility-impaired .
On the report 's references to environment and health , I fully support moves to make transport less polluting and I note the support for the different Commission programmes to that end .
I also share the report 's view that there is much that new technology can offer to resolve some significant transport problems and plainly we will continue our efforts with the development of transport telematics , alternative energy technologies and other applications of modern technology that really can alleviate major traffic problems .
To conclude on the citizens ' network , we are now examining the wealth of data contained in the responses to the Green Paper .
Based on that information , in the New Year I shall produce a follow-up communication which will set out actions and measures we propose to undertake at Community level in order to advance the development of the citizens ' network .
In keeping with what I said earlier on subsidiarity in this sector , the action plan for the Commission will necessarily have limitations but it is essential to keep the topic alive in political discussions and we will do that with the cooperation , I trust , of this Parliament .
I now turn very briefly to the two proposals on road passenger transport .
Obviously both proposals are designed to facilitate coach and bus transport , both national and international and are therefore fully consistent with the approach set out in the Green Paper .
I would like to acknowledge the work Mr Killilea has done on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism and acknowledge it with gratitude .



On the first proposal relating to cabotage , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 4 and Amendment No 6 in principle , Amendments Nos 9 and 11 subject to ensuring they are consistent with Article 58 of the Treaty , Amendment No 13 so far as it refers to the exclusion of urban and suburban transport , Amendment No 14 and as a consequence the first parts of Amendments Nos 18 and 16 , paragraph 2 .
The remaining amendments cannot be accepted .

Amendment No 2 because we have accepted Amendment No 1 which is very similar .


Amendment No 5 detracts from our goal of promoting coach and bus transport .
Amendment No 7 is not relevant to this proposal .
We cannot accept Amendment No 8 because we accept Amendment No 9 .


Amendment No 10 is incompatible with freedom to provide services and most of Amendment No 13 would excessively limit cabotage rights .
The new definition introduced in Amendment No 12 is inconsistent with our aim of harmonizing the definition for the two regulations in question .

Finally , Amendment No 15 and the first part of Amendment No 16 cannot be accepted as the information stipulated will be provided in the report envisaged under the proposed Article 16 .
Obviously the date of 31 December 1996 is far too soon for everything except being New Year 's Eve .



On the second proposal relating to international carriage , the Commission can accept Amendment No 1 , the second part of Amendment No 5 , Amendments Nos 6 and 11 so far as they refer to the exclusion of urban and suburban transport , Amendment No 7 in principle , the new definitions introduced in Amendments Nos 12 and 13 , and Amendment Nos 17 , 18 and 28 .


I have to say that the remaining amendments are unacceptable .
I will conclude my remarks now but gladly provide the reasoning behind our view .
The dates proposed in Amendments Nos 24 , 25 and 26 are too soon .
Finally , the call for both the Council and Commission regulations to be codified cannot be supported as this is outside the scope of the proposal .
I am not sure Mr Killilea will necessarily feel that I have done full justice to his reports by limiting my comments to the Commission 's position on the amendments proposed .
I regret that but he understands the reasons why I have to take this approach .
I hope therefore that on this occasion he will accept my thanks for his thorough work and appreciate my reasons for my attempted brevity , especially at this late hour .
However , I expect that he like me will have appreciated the fact that I had a backing chorus for part of my speech .
Thank you , Mr Kinnock .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Summer time
The next item is the report ( A4-0333 / 96 ) by Mr Belleré , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for an eighth European Parliament and Council Directive on summer-time arrangements ( COM ( 96 ) 0106 - C4-0252 / 96-96 / 0082 COD ) .
Mr Belleré , you have the floor for five minutes .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on the proposal for an eighth European Parliament and Council Directive on summer-time arrangements , I , as the rapporteur , agree with the draft opinion produced by Mr Blokland as the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , especially when he states at the end of his opinion that summer time has been a common benefit in Europe for many years now .
This is no place for a history of the directives dealing with these problems , but I remind the House that no fewer than 16 years have passed since the first directive in 1980 , the seventh , dated 30 May 1994 , having come into force only in 1996 and being valid until 1997 , under which official summer time begins on the last Sunday in March and ends on the last Sunday in October for all Member States .
The eighth directive proposed by the Council and the European Parliament defining summer time as beginning on the last Sunday in March and ending on the last Sunday in October has my agreement , since I believe it is a priority for the period of summer time to be harmonized .
I must however make a number of points which emerge from an analysis of the amendments tabled .
First , the summer-time argument lends itself to differences of opinion because of the different experiences of each Member State .
Consequently , the opinion drafted by me takes account of my own experiences , and I am well aware that it is difficult to have a single yardstick for the problem and that it is hardly possible to satisfy everybody .
Invoking the principle of subsidiarity , therefore , I believe that any changes to the summer-time system , and the decision whether or not to implement it , should be entirely a matter for each Member State .
Furthermore , the very great majority of the public favours retaining summer time .
That was the conclusion reached by a survey commissioned by me and involving a sample of more than 1000 people in a number of Member States , belonging to various social classes ; no fewer than 84 % were in favour of summer time .
The fact is that the availability of an extra hour 's daylight benefits all kinds of activities , from sport and recreation to the activities of the tourist services , especially in the southern European countries where the days are shorter .
In some Mediterranean States the so-called ' open-air museums ' allow visitors to enter until twilight , which is beneficial for leisure time and so-called ' cultural ' tourism .
Another point is the saving of energy , especially in the evenings .
In Italy , which unlike France or Austria is not self-sufficient in energy , the 1996 saving was assessed at about 900 million kWh .
On the other hand , I regard as negligible the harmful effects on sleep rhythm and the serious consequences , about which such fears have been expressed , for the health of young schoolchildren and babies .
There is no real evidence of any of this , nor is there any evidence for the adverse effects of summer time on road safety .
Common sense inclines me to the view that better light is likely to improve road safety .
As regards nitrogen levels , we would need reliable statistics and data from the various Member States .
Finally , however , it is necessary to bear in mind the Eastern European time zone which includes Finland , Greece and those eastern countries that have already applied for membership of the European Union ; for those countries , it is not realistic to hold out any prospect of a European Community , in the near future , with a uniform timetable for summer time .
In conclusion , I applaud the initiative of the Commission in making this proposal , and I emphasize that , over and above the differences of opinion , it is a matter for each Member State , while endeavouring to achieve a maximum of harmonization , to decide which summer-time system to apply , always bearing in mind that common sense must incline us to believe that time differences between contiguous Member States - and this was the sense of the amendment tabled by Mr Wijsenbeek - should not exceed one hour .
Mr President , when the present directive on summertime was debated in Parliament , the Committee on the Environment was requested to study the non-economic effects of summertime , the effects on the environment , public health , safety of traffic and consumer interest .
That study has meanwhile been done and the results of it published .
The results have not produced any startling surprises , in other words it confirms to a large extent the views on the pros and cons which were already familiar .
My conclusion is therefore that there are no convincing arguments from the point of view of either public health , the environment or consumer protection to justify abolishing summertime .
So the Environment Committee supports the Commission proposal .
We know that there is a strong lobby in France against summertime ; it claims that the majority of the French people want to abolish it .
Now I cannot prove it , but I would argue that none of the studies which have been done into problems of sleep , the environment , energy consumption and traffic safety have produced any convincing results in support of the alleged disadvantages .
On the contrary , public opinion in Europe as a whole has come out strongly in favour of summertime .
That is seen by the mere fact that for donkeys ' years now a large number of Member States , including France , has been using summertime .
Indeed it was also France that come up with the idea of saving energy during the oil crisis .
I personally still find energy savings the most important reason for keeping summertime .
The advantages of it for recreation purposes are well documented .
The Committee on the Environment therefore agrees with the rapporteur , Mr Belleré , that summertime is a good thing .
European travellers would also find it a big nuisance if France were unilaterally to abolish summertime .
There are four high speed trains from the Netherlands to Paris alone every day .
In a time of high speed trains , where everyone is trying to save minutes , we cannot afford to have time differences of maybe up to two hours between countries .
That just does not make sense .
Finally the Belleré report contains three amendments which open the possibility of any country introducing summertime or not , as it wants .
I do not think that is very sensible .
Any country that does not want to do so is free so to decide , but it does not need to be written into the text of the directive .
That only creates confusion .
Thank you , Mr Blokland .
Ladies and gentlemen , the wonderful and sophisticated electronics with which this Chamber is endowed often gives us problems and the electronic clock is currently not working .
You will have to rely on my personal judgement when I advise you that your allotted time has expired .
The first person to have to rely on this is Mr Waidelich , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
Mr Waidelich , you have four minutes .
Mr President , there are many good arguments in favour of summer time , including the fact that , as the rapporteur stated earlier , we extend the day and have lighter evenings ; there is also the fact that summer time has a positive effect on tourism , recreational activities and the service industries .
There are also studies which demonstrate that summer time can contribute to both energy saving and greater road safety .
A majority of the people in the EU are also in favour of keeping summer time .
Nevertheless , one does sometimes hear strange arguments against summer time , such as that children in the North cannot sleep and that they go to bed late , that is to say only once it gets dark .
If darkness were the crucial factor for sleep children in Sweden , for example , would scarcely sleep an hour in mid-summer but 18-19 hours in mid-winter .
This demonstrates that there is a certain lack of reason in the debate .
This report and the Commission 's proposal do not question the idea of summer time .
They are concerned with having summer time start and end on the same date throughout the EU , which it should be pointed out is already the case as of this year .
Despite the fact that the system is already in operation it is now being said that the Council of Ministers is considering abandoning the principle of a common summer time throughout the EU .
I believe this would be ill-advised , firstly as a matter of principle : if summer time were abolished in some countries we might forgo the positive effects , such as energy savings and road safety .
Secondly , and more tangibly , differing summer time arrangements - for example if the common date for starting and ending summer time were abandoned in certain EU countries - could be prejudicial to the free movement of goods and services .
It could also lead to increased inconvenience in sectors such as transport and telecommunications .
There are already enough complications in the EU today with three different time zones .
It would therefore be interesting to hear now whether Commissioner Kinnock and the Commission have any further information on the Council of Ministers ' deliberations or any observations on the subject .
Otherwise we must wait for the Council to make a proposal to Parliament in due course .
In conclusion may I , on behalf of the Socialist Group , applaud the report and the amendments proposed by the committee .
Thank you , Mr Waidelich .
You have acted just as if you were a stopwatch and have finished exactly on four minutes .
If there are any further problems with the clock , we will use you as a timer-keeper , but as the clock is now working I can guarantee that our next speaker , Mrs Bennasar , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , will have her allotted period of three minutes measured with complete accuracy .
Mr President , Commissioner , to speak about summer time at 11.30 at night in winter instils a degree of nostalgia in one .
However , I would nevertheless like to congratulate Mr Belleré on his favourable report on the proposal for an eighth Parliament and Council Directive on summer-time arrangements .
At the time of the first oil crisis , in 1973 , governments the world over had to seek energy-saving measures and , in 1976 , Europe began its summer-time experiment . Over the years since then , this scheme has revealed objective situational differences in Member States of the European Union .
With the present directive , the European Union is reexamining the economic advantages of time changes together with the subtle disadvantages which barely affect people and their work output , for example .
There may be a few small alterations but there are no major disruptions as such .
For some , the energy saving arising from the clocks being put forward should be accompanied by parallel measures , such as systematic programmes for limiting domestic consumption .
Be that as it may , this proposal for an 8th directive analyses the results of an extra hour of daylight and comes to the conclusion that the majority of citizens are in favour of its continuing .
As has already been stated , an extra hour of daylight is especially beneficial to leisure , open-air activities , tourism , public health , energy and road safety .
In Spain , the annual energy saving amounts to 11 , 500 million pesetas , equivalent to 600 million kilowatts / hour .
The 7th directive contains the proposal to harmonize the period of application : from 1 a.m. on the last Sunday in March to 1 a.m. on the last Sunday in October .
Implementation of this measure will end the chaos which , especially for transport , tourism and telecommunications , causes various countries to effect the time change on different dates .
The previous directive already advised Members of the Community that , in 1996 , the time-change would not take place until 27 October .
Until that time , 10 European countries made the changeover at the end of September and the rest at the end of October .
I would therefore , on behalf of the European People 's Party , like to express my Group 's support for this report which , whilst respecting subsidiarity , proposes something which is indeed within the competence of the Community : full harmonization of dates and summer time , since the time system and its application is the exclusive competence of each Member State .
Congratulations to the rapporteur for the common sense he has shown .
Mr President , I used to be quite orthodox .
And I say that to Mr Blokland , but not to agree with him .
I used to think it necessary for all Member States to stick to one and the same time .
That was in the old days when the EEC was still small and unspoiled .
But since then we have expanded from Six to Nine , then Twelve , then Fifteen .
After the IGC is finished we will be moving to even greater expansion .
This is not the time nor place to go into that .
But it is an uncontroversial fact that this has meant that summertime in the Union has changed quite considerably .
And I am leaving aside such exotic places as the Azores or the Canaries which in geographical terms belong to the American and African continents respectively .
If we decide in the future united states of Europe to have different time zones such as in the present United States of America , then that is all right by me .
And I would even be consistent and not object to any Member State refusing to bring in summertime or wintertime .
If that is what some countries want , then that is equally acceptable .
But that does not mean to say that for reasons of traffic or other practical purposes one single time in Europe would not be simpler .
Against that you must realise , and I make this point unlike the rapporteur , whom I incidentally congratulate , that traffic safety has also disadvantages in summertime , especially as we have had to give in to British stubbornness and allow them to wait until October before changing over .
For then it is dark in the early morning when children go off to school .
Finally I urge you to accept my amendment which the committee took on board to allow a maximum of one hour 's time difference between each Member State and I would like to hear the Commission 's view on the proposal for limitrophe countries .
Mr President , this is one of these very sensitive questions in some parts of Europe and the further north you go the more sensitive it becomes .
Ironically , not where Santa Claus lives right up in the Arctic Circle but in the intermediate zone and Scotland in particular , and especially in the islands like Shetland and the Western Isles , this has become a very hot potato indeed .
It has all been swallowed up in the feeling that somehow Brussels is going to dictate to us and we are going to have one time-zone imposed on .
So I am delighted to see that on this occasion Brussels is actually being very sympathetic and sensible and not trying to impose a single zone from the Canary Islands across to Finland .
What is proposed is a very sensible measure that the change-over from summer-time to winter-time will be the same throughout Europe , so you do not have the nonsense of a few weeks in which the time-tables are different in a different time zone .
It is good to see Brussels being sympathetic and I think this Parliament will support it .
There are sensible opt-outs for Guyana , the Canary Isles and so on and we should support this unreservedly .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have been living with summertime for quite a while now , and we are not really consciously aware of its adverse effects .
The tiresome changeover twice a year is , I believe , a negligible problem .
When summertime was introduced in Austria , it came in for some very heated criticism .
For example , there were people who predicted that there might be or would be problems for farmers , because nature is no respecter of clocks and farmers would not really derive any benefit from summertime .
No doubt it would be easier to leave the time unchanged throughout the year .
Even so , we should be conscious of the advantages of summertime , and especially the advantages of a standardized arrangement .
I am committed to the single market , and without a uniform arrangement there can be no question of a functional single market , which is the necessary basis for greater cohesion in Europe .
Consequently , the set dates for the start and the end of summertime are to be welcomed .
In addition , we currently have three time zones within the Community .
It is important to ensure that the time difference between countries is never more than one hour , which actually is already too much .
First and foremost , our concern must be to protect consumers .
It is in the interest of consumers - travellers , for example - to have arrangements that are as standardized and simple as possible , another argument in favour of an EU-wide arrangement .
In the countries of central and southern Europe , summertime offers advantages for the consumer , and for industry too .
Longer days open up additional opportunities in leisure planning and so have a beneficial effect on the leisure industry .
Longer days are also important to the tourist industry in central and southern Europe : many museums and tourist leisure facilities benefit from the extra daylight , and this in turn benefits the tourists themselves .
Then there are also those matters of transport safety that have already been mentioned .
The fact remains , in any case , that summertime is very popular with a large proportion of Europe 's population .
Let us simply make the framework as simple as possible and so agree to the Commission 's proposal .
Mr President , summertime benefits tourism and recreation and undoubtedly encourages leisure activities and sport .
It also fits well into a policy on energy savings and promoting safety in traffic .
Surveys indicate that the majority of our citizens want summertime .
And so we must retain it .
Summertime must be retained in all Member States of the European Union in its present composition .
I do not agree with the French approach that Member States themselves should be allowed to chose whether to introduce it or not .
Will the Commissioner promise to fight that French request ?
It would really be quite remarkable if in a citizens ' Europe one of the Member States in the heart of the European Union were not to swim with the tide , with all the resultant problems for international transport and traffic .
My second question to the Commission is whether it would not benefit traffic safety if the end of summertime were to be brought forward , by a month or at least a week or two ?
May I in conclusion congratulate the rapporteur on his report which was adopted unanimously in the Committee on Transport and Tourism ?
Mr President , again this has been a memorable debate , probably most memorable for Mr Blokland .
He will recall that when he was speaking on summer-time in the European Parliament time actually stood still .
This was a memorable and earth-shattering event and I am sure it is marked in his memory for ever .
The one thing I regret in what was an altogether positive and informative debate was the fact that , whilst eight or nine Member States were represented here by elected Members of Parliament , sadly there was no French Member .
We know of the great interest in these affairs which is said to exist in the Republic of France .
As the House will know , the summer-time regime was originally introduced by a national decision in several Member States mostly at the end of the 1970s .
The objective of the first directive of the Community which entered into force in 1981 was the gradual harmonization of the timetable of the summer-time period to set common dates for the beginning and the end of this period in all Community Member States .
The main purpose of the Community arrangements was to remove obstacles to the free movement of goods , services and people provided by the differing national summer-time arrangements .
Full harmonization was finally achieved with the seventh Directive of 1994 which specified that in 1996 and 1997 the summer-time period would begin on the last Sunday in March and end on the last Sunday in October in all Members States without exception .
In the meanwhile almost all other European third countries , interestingly , have introduced a summer-time regime and are applying it in step with the Community directive .
There could be no finer vindication of the points made by several Members in the course of this debate .
The findings of a study carried out on behalf of the Commission last year on the effects of the application of summer-time in the European Union have recalled important benefits generated by summer-time particularly in tourism , in the leisure industry as well as in public health and road safety .
Moreover , the various sectors which were consulted by the Commission at a hearing held in September 1995 expressed themselves largely in favour of the system provided that the timetable is fully harmonized throughout the Union .
Therefore , the proposal for an eighth Directive which is being considered tonight lays down the same arrangements as introduced by the seventh Directive for 1996 and 1997 .
For reasons of timetabling , particularly in the transport and communications sectors which expressed their wish to have a sufficiently long programming period , it is also suggested that we set the summer-timetable for a four-year period , that is for 1998 , 1999 , 2000 and 2001 .
I should like to thank the rapporteur Mr Belleré for his accurate and thorough examination of the issue and in particular of the reports submitted by the Commission on the application of summer-time .
Naturally I am very pleased to note that the rapporteur shares most of the conclusions of our report and has so effectively supported the Commission proposal .
All that being said , I must confess some surprise at the amendments tabled for the approval of this House .
On Amendments Nos 1 and 2 , the Commission would like to point out that any arrangement enabling any Member State not to apply a summer-time regime would be contrary to the objective of harmonization which is the main purpose of the summer-time directive .
As a matter of fact , the abandonment of summer-time by one or several Member States while the directive is in force would certainly create the same negative effects as those generated in the past in the transport and communications sectors when there was no Community legislation in this matter .
The points made on that specific aspect of the issue by Members in the course of this debate have been very telling .
In this respect I should like to remind the House of the findings of a study carried out in 1993 on the costs of different dates for return to winter-time .
The study showed that the main negative effects fell on airlines , railways and ferry companies though a range of other organizations such as port operators , travel agencies and financial organizations were also identified as potentially being affected disadvantageously .
Therefore , the Commission considers that the reintroduction of divergencies would constitute a backward step in the harmonization that the Community achieved with the seventh Directive and would affect not only the good functioning of the internal market but also transport and communications with European third countries which are applying the summer-time regime .
For all those reasons the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 and 2 .
On Amendment No 3 the Commission considers that it goes beyond the scope of this proposal which is limited to harmonizing the timetable of the summer-time period .
The arrangements proposed in the report would limit national decisions regarding time arrangements other than the application of a summer-time regime .
That would be contrary to the principle of subsidiarity according to which any decision regarding other time arrangements , falls within Member States ' competence and their competence alone .
Consequently , the Commission cannot accept that particular amendment .
In conclusion , the Commission maintains its directive proposal as it stands because it complies fully with the mission of harmonization which was given to the Commission by Member States in order to remove any obstacles to the free movement of goods , services and people throughout the Community .
That position will remain .
I would only add one sentence of strictly personal emphasis .
It is my view that harmonization of this kind , as several Members have said , has had measurable advantages in the reduction of road dangers and in the considerable saving of energy resources and the costs that go with it .
I remain vehemently in favour of the kind of arrangement we have and I hope that carries the view of the House .
I am grateful to Mr Belleré and to those associated with him on the production of a very good report .
Thank you , Mr Kinnock .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Pan-European transport policy
The next item is the report ( A4-0334 / 96 ) by Mr Lüttge , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the pan-European transport policy .
Mr President , now that morning is almost upon us and honourable Members from nine different countries have given us their detailed opinions on summertime , we have only a few minutes left before midnight if - as I assume - we are going to keep to our time , just a few minutes in which to discuss and debate a subject like pan-European transport policy .
Georg Jarzembowski , Petrus Cornelissen , a few others and even Commissioner Kinnock - if we take the overall view , transport policy is the basis of everything we are discussing here .
Because the report was initially listed as the last one on the agenda , I said , look , let 's at least get as far as completing the draft of the poster for the conference , on the assumption that honourable Members will agree tomorrow to hold the conference in Helsinki on the date proposed .
Commissioner , the draft is ready - Georg Jarzembowski - and as usual red is the dominant colour and the basis of this whole debate .
( Heckling from Mr Jarzembowski ) Well , he must be colour-blind .
It 's blue , not black !
Ladies and gentlemen , although time is short , I would like to remind you that it was this European Parliament which - because there was no pan-European transport policy at that time - crucially influenced the debate in the late 1980s .
The impetus for the pan-European conferences came from this Parliament , and I have no reservations in admitting , once again , that we received vital support from the Commission ; the Commissioner at that time was Mr van Miert .
I am pleased to put it on record , Commissioner Kinnock , that this tradition of cooperation and support - because this is a common concern - was continued by you immediately after you entered office .
The same can be said of your staff - Ottokar Hahn and Dino Stasinopolis , to name but two . They played a critical part , too , at least as far as Mr Hahn is concerned - now that he is gone we can say that - and the same tradition is being carried on by others .
I recall that we held the conferences in Prague and in Crete , and it can certainly be said today that we still have something of a deficit to make up in terms of achieving what we wanted to achieve .
Overall , though , contrary to expectation , the consequences and results of those conferences have been far more good than bad .
Even the very generalized declaration of Prague , dating from 1991 , formed the basis for the further development of European transport policy as a whole , partly in conjunction with the regional conferences and sectoral conferences which have taken place in ever-increasing numbers .
A very important contribution has also been made by our Steering Committee .
This is a unique institution , bringing together representatives of the European Parliament , the Commission , the Council of Ministers and other organizations relevant to the further development of a pan-European transport policy - for example , the Council of Transport Ministers , the United Nations Economic Commission , the Economic and Social Committee and the Civil Aviation Authority .
We have even involved industry - and this is a new departure - in the preparations for the Helsinki conference .
At that conference , too , industry will for the first time play a very important part , because we believe that it is one of the protagonists .
In May 1997 there is to be a big transport exhibition in Helsinki , which is thematically linked to the third pan-European Transport Conference to be held in that city 's Finlandia Hall in June next year .
As far as the agenda is concerned , it was actually clear to us from the start , when we began the preparatory work , that we would have to go into greater detail in order to achieve more concrete results , and that is reflected in the agenda .
At all events , the public , the persons concerned , and indeed people throughout Europe expect more specific statements about the financing of future infrastructure projects , about the intelligent use of transport systems , about transport safety - let me remind you of the situation at the borders , which has not been satisfactorily resolved , and of the various cases of fraud that have taken place in cross-border transport .
We are expecting about 800 to 1000 people to attend - politicians , experts and representatives from over 50 countries , from the entire continent of Europe including the Mediterranean area , from North African countries , from the Near and Middle East , from states with observer status and the world 's industrialized nations - all of whom have approached us about the possibility of participating .
This conference is to conclude with a Helsinki Declaration , which will go into greater detail and provide a genuine basis for future work on the pan-European transport policy .
This Helsinki Declaration is not intended to be in the nature of a charter but - in the same way as the previous Prague and Crete declarations - to provide a basis through a voluntary commitment .
We have had good experience of this .
Finally , I ask : are we on the right course ?
I say yes , and I believe that other honourable Members will share that view .
But , in the development of the panEuropean transport policy , with the assistance of all those who are willing and able to cooperate , there still remains a great deal to be done .
Mr President , I welcome this opportunity to debate the third pan-European conference on transport .
I was involved in the beginning of the preparatory work group .
Then our erstwhile colleague Mr Pelttari took over as the conference was to take place in Finland .
He remained active , but unfortunately he had to leave us again after the elections .
So I am speaking now on behalf of my group .
The first and second conferences were so successful that we now see ourselves forced to continue ad infinitum this project led by our colleague Mr Lüttge , with not inconsiderable Community finance .
Any critical or parsimonious person would have to call a halt to it !
Anyone who believes in the future expansion towards countries of central and eastern Europe , who wants progress to be made in the introduction of the acquis communautaire in those countries , who values the expansion of intermodal objectives which we in the European Parliament as a whole want to see implemented , must welcome it !
We must , however , beware of making the same old mistakes .
We must not merely talk about money , as we did in Prague , essential as that is for the former eastern bloc .
We must not act as if we had a monopoly on wisdom and dictate to the CCEEs in matters of the environment , which even we have not managed properly , but we can help them in the right direction as they are starting from scratch .
Let us hope that a useful exchange of views can take place and that these conferences do not become an interminable repetitive obligation but only occur when there is something worthwhile to discuss .
Mr President , I would like first of all to congratulate Mr Lüttge and also thank him for his work on the preparation for the third pan-European transport conference in Helsinki .
I am sure it will not have escaped his attention that on the German text of the Helsinki poster it was not the red but the blue part that was highlighted .
I welcome the opportunity at this conference of examining the action taken on the agreements reached in 1994 in Crete .
I also think it important to consult with the countries of central and eastern Europe on the desired European transport policy for the coming years .
If such a policy is to be successful it must be supported by as many countries as possible , not just in the European Union but also in central and eastern Europe .
I should like to draw your attention to two points .
First of all we are continually increasing our demands - and quite rightly so - on transport in terms of energy consumption , environmental pollution and road safety .
I think it essential that these demands should also apply to vehicles from non-EU countries which use our roads .
Our environment is entitled to that and road safety demands it .
I think our road hauliers are also entitled to it from the point of view of fair competition .
Does the Commissioner share this view and how does he envisage it could be put into practice and by what means ?
My second point concerns the serious obstacles and delays facing road traffic at the border between the European Union and Poland , for example , and at the borders between countries in eastern Europe .
Recent weeks have also seen the nonsense at the Russian border .
I read an article in a Dutch newspaper with the headlines ' Off to Belarus at 75 metres per hour ' .
I think that what is currently happening there , Mr President , especially in view of the widespread cowboy tactics being used to extort money from drivers , is completely intolerable .
Is the Commissioner prepared to discuss this untenable situation in the Commission and to raise it specifically in contacts between the Commission and the various governments and authorities in eastern Europe and to come back and inform us of the outcome ?
We cannot go to Helsinki if there is not a considerable improvement in those matters .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Lüttge for his excellent report , initiating formal preparations for the Third Pan-European Transport Conference .
The Commission has from the beginning fully supported this initiative jointly with Parliament in every practical way .
The Economic and Social Committee , the Economic Commission for Europe and the European Conference of Ministers of Transport are , together with Parliament and the Commission , members of the Steering Committee .
My staff are already hard at work with those of Parliament and in close cooperation with the host country , Finland , to ensure satisfactory organizational arrangements .
I have to say too that there is widespread interest in the approach to the conference and in the substance of the conference itself .
I was yesterday in Russia in the company of Ottokar Hahn who has been mentioned in the debate , I have to say that Ottokar is so busy in a variety of developments that it is true to say he has wider coverage in Russia than does snow .
His work is very constructive and he , together with the Russians , are making a variety of preparations to ensure their effective participation in the conference .
Amongst the issues which they are concerned with is one just mentioned by Mr Cornelissen and that is the question of border hold-ups over a huge number of border crossings between the Union and other parts of Europe and beyond .
I think it would be fitting if that subject was to receive very strong attention in the appropriate parts of the agenda in Helsinki .
On the substance of the conference a programme has , as suggested in the report , been drawn up focusing on three key areas : the stock-taking of developments in transport policy since the Greek conference of 1994 , financing of transport infrastructure and thirdly the intelligent use of transport systems .
The exact coverage of the debate in each area still obviously needs to be agreed but I am confident that we can ensure that environmental and safety issues will be satisfactorily addressed .
We will also be able to discuss how to ensure improved modal split as well as the implications of intermodal transport of dangerous goods .
All matters which rightly are at the front of the concern of Parliament .
The Third Pan-European Conference will , as Mr Lüttge correctly pointed out , provide representatives from the European transport industry with a particular opportunity to put forward not only their ideas in a variety of areas but also their products because they will have the opportunity to exhibit them .
I believe that this will in a variety of ways enrich the conference as will the participation of a number of organizations that are not strictly governmental or industrial but certainly have experience and well-authenticated views to put in the context of a conference like the one that will be held in Helsinki .
As in the past , we felt in the Commission , and indeed this is a view shared by this House , that the most appropriate result for the conference would be the adoption by all participants of a non-binding political declaration . That should set out broad principles for the conduct of transport policy without of course committing the European Union , its Member States or institutions to specific legislative action or to negotiations on international agreements .
If the Union wishes to act to implement any part of the declaration , that will have to be done in accordance with the appropriate Union procedures .
The second conference held in Crete in March of 1994 endorsed , as the House will know , nine intermodal transport corridors as a basis for further work on infrastructure development .
Since then work on the nine corridors has been pursued in the G24 Transport Group as well as in workshops on specific corridors .
My staff have recently begun consultations at expert level with all of the participating countries , the relevant international organizations and the international financial institutions in order to review the work done so far and to report to the conference .
That report will summarize the work undertaken on the different corridors ; it will assess the need for any adjustment to the corridors ; it will suggest issues to be addressed in further work on corridor development such as multimodality or the intelligent use of infrastructure .
The work will continue after the conference and Community institutions will be involved in accordance with our internal procedures .
In concluding , I would like to stress the importance that the Commission attaches to the success of the conference .
I hope that the debate and the proceedings of that conference will provide a new impetus towards the further development of transport systems , clearly a matter of vital importance for European integration and economic and social development .
I am grateful to you , Mr President , and indeed to those who have stayed to this late hour such as the interpreters , we could not do without them .
I regret the passage past midnight but their work is all the more valuable .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his promise that the problems at the borders in eastern Europe will be an important item at Helsinki .
But that is not enough for me .
That will take another six months . What I want is for the Commission to discuss it and take it up in all contacts between the Commission and the governments of eastern Europe .
This kind of nonsense means that the public in our countries is becoming less willing to keep on pumping millions by way of financial support to eastern Europe .
Mr President , I am grateful to Mr Cornelissen for raising the point , I only failed to mention it earlier because of a desire to save time .
There is no occasion in Council or in contacts with Member States , or other States in Eastern and Central Europe and beyond , where we fail to mention the awful problems encountered by those wishing to pass international borders .
Those problems are in some respects intensifying .
They figured very substantially in the discussions I had with the Russians over the last two days .
Mr Cornelissen can be confident that not only do we take opportunities to raise and press the issue , we actually make a lot of opportunities as well .
Thank you , Mr Kinnock .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
I would like to thank everyone for their cheerful company and cooperation in making Parliament 's work run smoothly .
I would also , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of all of you , like to extend special thanks to this Chamber 's services , which have been most cooperative , and , as the Commissioner has already begun doing , to the interpreters who have had a long day of intense work and whom we have ' rewarded ' with 10 extra minutes .
I therefore not only express my thanks but ask your forgiveness since this Presidency has not been firm enough when measuring the times allotted for speaking .
( The sitting was closed at 12.10 a.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , not specifically on the Minutes but on the Brussels Notebook which we have just found in our pigeonholes .
This is a small but serious point : the notebook from the Session News Unit refers to important debates on economic and monetary union last evening .
Obviously there is a good deal of interest in this Parliament on the British position on this subject .
However , the printers of the relevant British parliamentary records and documents this week announced major redundancies with hundreds being made redundant in Norwich and elsewhere .
That could seriously threaten the future availability of the information to this parliament and our Members .
I would ask you to join me in contacting the newly privatized Stationery Office in Britain to seek clear assurances from them that all Members of this Parliament will be able to obtain the same service that has existed for our Members when it was a public body , namely proper access to all relevant documents of the British Parliament and Government , for example on economic and monetary union .
I do not think that the matter you have raised is within this Parliament 's competence .
We will look into the matter and see if there is anything that we can do .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Employment - social security - structural measures
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0369 / 96 by Mr Wolf , on behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , on the Commission report : ' Employment in Europe - 1996 ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0485 - C4-0553 / 96 ) and on the communication from the Commission on the Action for Employment in Europe : a confidence pact ( CSE ( 96 ) 0001 - C4-0341 / 96 ) ; -A4-0278 / 96 by Mr Ribeiro , on behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 95 ) 0735 - C4-0108 / 96-96 / 0001 ( CNS ) ) amending , for the benefit of beneficiaries of pre-retirement benefits , Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 on the application of social security schemes to employed persons , to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community , and Regulation ( EEC ) No 574 / 72 laying down the procedure for implementing Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 ; -A4-0358 / 96 by Mr Lage , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the communication from the Commission ( COM ( 96 ) 0109 - C4-0230 / 96 ) on Community structural assistance and employment .


Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , President Santer , I believe that the subject we are debating today really is the central , fateful subject facing the European Union .
If the European Union can succeed in making it clear to its citizens that it can overcome the scourge of mass unemployment and that it can make a major contribution to solving the problem , then the European Union has a promising future .
But if it fails to do so , and if its citizens increasingly gain the impression that the European Union is itself a part of the problem , then we are going to have to prepare for hard times as far as European integration is concerned .
Let me once again remind the House of what the Greens regard as the three principal tasks that we have to tackle , with the problem of employment being , as it were , the knot that has to be untied before we can even begin .
The first of these problems is the ecological crisis , which calls for the ecological reconstruction of our production methods .
The second is the problem of the destruction of social cohesion and solidarity within our societies during the last fifteen years , and here we need a new social contract and contract between the sexes in order to reconstruct social solidarity on a sustainable basis .
Thirdly , there is a task which specifically faces us in the European Parliament and the other European institutions - the final establishment of European unity on a socially and ecologically sustainable foundation .
As I said , employment is the first step here , the first central issue that we must resolve before we can move on to any others .
Since the Ad hoc Committee on Employment , the European Parliament has developed the outlines of an independent employment policy , which I have once again supported and presented in my report . That policy is aimed at all who say that employment is the automatic by-product of economic growth and monetary stability , all those who say , ' We have to wait until the economy revives , and perhaps do something to help it , we have to achieve monetary union , and then the employment problem will somehow solve itself . '
Among all those who argue thus , the European Parliament has hitherto consistently called for an independent , active employment policy as an integral part of a policy mix which takes employment seriously as an independent objective of action in the field of economic policy .
The following elements of this policy mix , this independent dimension of employment policy , have been identified . First , ecologically sustainable investment in the future , which also needs to be specifically financed and stimulated at European level .
Secondly , the reorganization , shortening and flexibilization of working hours as a way of redistributing employment .
Thirdly , the creation of a third sector , a third system of social economics between market and state , which will open up new opportunities for qualified employment to secure the livelihoods of many people who are presently unable to find employment in industry , where the availability of jobs is being restricted by rationalization and by world market competition .
Important aspects here , requiring independent reinforcement , are qualifications and basic and further training .
In addition , this report strongly emphasizes once again that , after fifteen years of a policy which has accepted mass unemployment , we now have a situation of social disintegration which calls for special efforts at reconstruction .
With these elements we have , I believe , also plotted the broad outlines of an independent proposal by the European Parliament as to the form a European employment policy might take .
In doing so , we have also created the basis to provide critical support for Mr Santer 's initiative aimed at genuine utilization of potentials at European level through cooperation between the social partners .
By voting in favour of my report , the European Parliament will have the opportunity to clarify and confirm its position as the European coordinator of employment policy , and so to give the Commission the critical support it urgently needs in this area .
I ask the House to vote in favour of the report , and especially , too , to vote in favour of our amendment emphasizing the need to accept the pressure exerted by demonstrations against mass unemployment , which are being organized throughout Europe during the coming year , as welcome support .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , unusually I have enough time to present the motion for a resolution resulting from the report for which I was responsible .
The document deals only with extending the scope of application for coordination of social schemes , in respect of the right to free movement of workers , to cover in the scope the beneficiaries of pre-retirement benefits , as the European Parliament had already asked last year ( Oomen-Ruijten report ) .
The Commission proposal should therefore deserve the plenary 's support and there is no justification for holding up the extension of the application of the right to free movement to a group of workers already prevented from leaving the country where they started to receive pre-retirement benefits as that would imply the loss of the right to their respective financial benefits .
The execution arrangements are dealt with by the Commission in the terms that deserved , on the proposal of my report , the agreement of the Committee on Social Affairs .
The only amendment attached to our agreement with the Commission proposal is aimed at taking this opportunity to raise the question of frontier workers , also already tackled in 1995 in the aforementioned Oomen-Ruijten report . Here we are improving the situation of those workers in respect of coordination of social security schemes just dealt with by cooperation among the Member States , particularly in respect of quotas and the right to payments and benefits .
To sum up , a proposal that I hope will be easily and expeditiously approved by this plenary so that we can swiftly advance to an extension of a right which is of no trifling importance for many workers who leave their home countries and are then thrown out of work and also to recall a special situation , that of frontier workers , which calls for a concerted solution .
I should like to use some of the time remaining to take part in the joint debate and to put forward some remarks about the Wolf report , which will be harder put to reach a consensus , despite the importance of the subject and the balance and pertinence of the preamble and the proposals contained therein .

I must begin by complimenting Mr Wolf on his report , and the fact that he managed to reach after much laborious effort a wording and compromises that enabled the report to be resoundingly approved in Committee , without giving ground on any of the principles or key ideas on employment and unemployment which underpin the social aspect . They go against the current grain of subordinating the social aspect and refuse to get bogged down in grey areas or scanty means of subsidiarity .
Secondly , I should like to emphasise the visible cooperation with the Committee on Economic Affairs , as their opinion was discussed in the Committee on Social Affairs in conditions that ideally would always be reciprocated .
We should fight for this reciprocity in order to end the way in which the European Parliament always tends to give economics priority over the social , forgetting who is responsible for such a procedure - obviously not confined to the European Parliament - and that economics is a social science and not just an interesting and useful ( no more than that ! ) financial and budgetary technique .
Thirdly , I welcome the fact that the Committee on Social Affairs , following the debate on the opinion by the Committee on Economic Affairs defended by its author , Mr Cassidy , should have unequivocally rejected the proposal to change the name to ' report on unemployment ' , since this is not only a matter of developments in unemployment rates , the quantity of workers out of work ( those who can and want to work ) but also the ' quality ' of work for those in work , in terms of training , content , stability , security and working conditions .
I am even happier to see that certain amendments have been approved that tend to bring out the quality aspect of employment .
We are debating and preparing to vote on an important report about a question that everyone claims to be concerned about but concerning which few people , in accordance with that concern , at least subscribe to positions of principle in which they could actually influence a policy that has actually been increasing unemployment and lowering the quality of employment .
Therefore I hope that the approval of the Wolf report will be a clear demonstration of the European Parliament 's desire to take a serious stance of discussion and action about unemployment-related problems and about the broader issue of employment on the basis of studying and criticising the Commission document , which is yet more proof of the disappointing results of recent years in terms of growth and employment .
This is necessary but more still is necessary , and this motion for a resolution is substantially more .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Hegelian dialectic saw man as a product of his own work .
The emancipating idea of work resulting from this notion is in total contrast with the Biblical curse condemning man to win his bread with the sweat of his brow just because he ate the fruit of the tree of knowledge .
But could not man return to the mythical era of the golden age when he did not have to work and when poetry and labour were one and the same ?
Until the golden age returns , perhaps carried on the wings of science and technology , our true condemnation lies in being deprived of a job or having to do unpleasant work .
The discovery by the Europeans of the phenomenon of mass or long-term unemployment is shaking the very founding principles of western societies , citizenship and solidarity .
Therefore the European Union must profoundly commit itself to a global strategy to fight unemployment , involving everyone , states and citizens alike .
But the strategy and discourse of the European Union , which ought to be ambitious and innovative , should avoid two traps in my view .
First of all , that discourse should avoid making the European Union responsible for areas that , in terms of employment , are essentially those of the national states .
This does not mean ignoring the implications of the single market , Community policies or EMU for employment , but it means not giving in to the rhetorical temptation of exaggerating the responsibilities of the European Union so that blame can be transferred , turning it into a scapegoat .
The second trap into which the Community discourse should not fall consists in trying to focus the Structural Funds exclusively on employment .
This idea , albeit well-intentioned , seems to me to be one of the recent ' drifts ' of the Commission 's discourse over which considerable care ought to be taken - a measure that I can say in all honesty does not concern the Commission communication with which my report deals .
The logical consequence of this ' drift ' in Community discourse would be that , in the future , the level of unemployment could be seen as a means for deciding how to distribute resources .
That would be highly unfair and even perverse as poorer regions with lower unemployment would be neglected in favour of richer ones with higher levels of unemployment .
The central idea contained in the Commission communication and which my report approves is positive and balanced .
It intends to enhance the employment content by 170 billion ECU , including the Cohesion Fund at 1995 prices , helping to create jobs once the European economy is revived and the sources of growth are revitalised , once Community funds are absorbed more efficiently , which is not the case at present , and to redirect them , not only to speed up economic growth but so that its content should be richer in lasting and sustainable jobs .
Then the whole effort to redirect investment will be positive if , without abandoning the creation of infrastructures vital for development , as I said , we boost initiatives aimed at improving access to education and training , if support is given to small companies , if local employment initiatives are encouraged , if an active policy in favour of quality tourism is enhanced , if culture-related industries are supported , if environment-friendly activities are backed .
We should add to all of this a dose of sexual equality , and equality between the various regions of the European Union .
A monetary Europe without a social Europe will not be a Europe at all and an economic and social Europe without territorial cohesion would be unfair and unviable .
Mr President , I am grateful to have arrived in time to hear that interesting exposition by the President of the Commission .
I would refer the Commission President and Commissioner Flynn to pages 18 to 20 of the Wolf report and in particular to three items in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy 's opinion on employment which unfortunately did not find their way into the final resolution from the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment .
Incidentally , I should add that Mr Wolf and I have worked very closely together on the report on employment as we worked closely together earlier on this year on the annual economic report .
Mr Wolf has done an excellent job .
He came along to the Economic Committee and voted on and supported all the conclusions of that committee .
I know that he is as disappointed as I am that the Social Affairs Committee did not see fit to include in its resolution for example the view of the Economic Committee that the Annual Report from the Commission on Employment in Europe should in future be referred to as the Annual Report on Unemployment in Europe .
After all , unemployment is what concerns us all .
The second point which the Social Affairs Committee unfortunately felt unable to take up is paragraph 14 of the Economic Committee 's conclusions which states : ' The Economic Committee is of the opinion that the European Union and its Member States should not be too proud to look critically at the shortcomings of the European social pattern , nor to learn from the success of other countries , notably the United States , Japan and Norway , in creating jobs and achieving a low level of unemployment and poverty . ' It is a matter of regret that is not in .
My final point is that we specifically identified ageism - discrimination against the over-40s in the workforce - in paragraph 15 of our resolution and we particularly ask the institutions of the European Community to set a good example in that respect .
Sadly the Social Affairs Committee did not take that point up explicitly .
Mr President , unemployment is a very serious problem and it hardly needs to be said that we should be utilizing the potential of the structural funds to the full in striving to combat it .
The action of the Commission in issuing this communication on structural assistance and employment is therefore highly commendable .
Even so , there are two things that we really ought to keep in mind .
First , that the structural funds are not a panacea to the unemployment ills .
When all is said and done they have to operate with just 0.46 % of the Community 's GDP , and that leaves very little room for manoeuvre .
The same applies to the European Social Fund which deploys around 30 % of the total structural fund appropriations in the endeavour to match supply to demand in the employment market .
The second thing to remember is that we do not know the impact of the structural funds on job creation because there is no accurate methodology for ascertaining it .
That must be rectified , even though it is , of course , extremely difficult .
So what can be done ?
There are two things : all of the structural fund deflator reserve can be used for combatting unemployment and , secondly , the new programming negotiations for 1997-1999 offer scope for steering all of the Objective 2 money towards employment actions .
And , of course , attention should be paid henceforth to particular areas , some of which the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment has indicated , such as active employment policies , measures on working time flexibility , the tailoring of initiatives to local employment conditions , actions on the environment , which need to be strengthened , the placing of emphasis on projects which take into account technological change and the creation of information networks via which supply and demand in employment markets at the European level can be brought into better equilibrium .
Mr President , as Mr Wolf rightly pointed out , it is a question of the EU 's credibility in tackling unemployment and it is a fact that the EU overall has an appalling record on job creation .
From the perspective of my political group , cohesion and solidarity is our objective and we believe that it is severely undermined by chronic unemployment .
I therefore welcome today 's debate and I welcome the positive contribution we are trying to make in combating unemployment .
I also welcome the proposals in Mr Lage 's report relating to the structural funds .
Structural funds are a key financial instrument .
They can have an impact .
But I would appeal to Member States to work closely with the Commission in helping to focus and target these actions to get better results .
I would also appeal to Member States to spend the funds which are there to spend and not to continue with the increasing underspending and delays and bureaucracy .
The Commission 's first cohesion report outlines and highlights the problem of continuing regional disparities in unemployment .
It highlights the dramatic rise and increase in employment in Sweden and Finland and the problems in Spain where 1 in 5 continue to be unemployed .
Between 1983 and 1993 25 regions with the lowest unemployment rate managed to improve from 4.8 % to 4.6 % but the picture for the 25 worst regions was more devastating with an increase of 17.2 % to 22.4 % .
The reality is a picture of widening disparities in regional unemployment in Europe .
Therefore I welcome the initiatives from the discussion of structural funds and employment opportunities at the Madrid informal Council in December 1995 to the final communication in March 1996 .
We have kept it alive .
We have kept it on the agenda .
I welcome President Santer 's initiative on territorial , regional and local employment pacts .
I particularly welcome that he wants to include the social partners and the trade unions in this .
I welcome the commitment and enthusiasm that the Irish presidency has brought to this debate and the personal commitment of the Irish Finance Minister , Mr Quinn .
However , I have to say that I am disappointed that the UK is not prepared to implement the territorial employment pacts and I ask Commissioner Flynn what he is prepared to do in order to gain its support .
If we cannot get the Member States to support that , I would ask that we allow the regions and local authorities which wish to participate to come directly to the Commissioner in Brussels and get actively involved in those pacts .
I am particularly annoyed and vexed by the fact that in the UK it is said that its record employment rates are second to none in the EU .
I am concerned that we are creating jobs which are low paid , part-time and creating a new underclass of the working poor who are existing on in-work benefits and family credit .
I am asking the Commissioner , given that the UK now has the highest poverty rate in the EU - one in three babies is born into families in poverty - to look at the model of job creation and sustainable high-value , highproductivity jobs to give EU regions a competitive edge in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . Any debate on employment covers not only jobs as such but also flexibility , training and education , taxation , research and development , economic growth in particular and social development .
Any debate on labour market policy also covers competition policy , trade policy , industrial policy , monetary policy and so on .
In a word , combatting unemployment and curing the ills of the labour market cannot be seen as separate objectives - quite the opposite .
This approach has only a chance of success if the measures taken by the Member States are also accompanied by a European policy and both the Commission report ' Employment in Europe in 1996 ' and the confidence pact of Commission President Santer serve this purpose .
These two important documents argue not only for active rather than passive measures , but also for private initiatives in addition to public measures .
My impression is that the Wolf report concentrates solely on public measures and ignores very important other areas , particularly of the report ' Employment in Europe in 1996 ' , of which I shall speak to three .
First of all the Commission report makes a double comparison between the United States and the European Union in relation to the services sector on the one hand and the industrial and agricultural sectors on the other hand .
An increase in the European Union of 18 million jobs and in the USA of 22 million jobs from 1980 to 1993 is an acceptable comparison .
But a loss during this same period of two million jobs in the USA and 13 million jobs in the EU in the industrial and agricultural sector is quite a different kettle of fish .
This has been completely ignored in the Wolf report .
How can we manage to restore jobs in industry in the Union ?
Let me give you two examples , the question of professional mobility and flexibility and the question of wage costs .
That too has been largely ignored in the report .
And a third example : vulnerable groups in society .
Young people who have no access to the labour market and for whom I want to see a generalisation of the system of training places in firms so that the training they have had is put to good use .
I think we must also review our policy on people in their fifties .
There are mass redundancies affecting people aged between 50 and 55 .
I think that is a big mistake both in social terms and in terms of loss of experience , knowhow and competence in companies .
I would also like to raise the question of structural unemployment but I have run out of speaking time .
I support what Commission President Santer has just said : it is time to move from words to actions .
It is time to do so in Dublin , and I hope , Commissioner , that definitive decisions will be taken there on the confidence pact and that we can look to Dublin for the implementation of an overall strategy for employment .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , 11 per cent of the active population of Europe , 18 million people , are reason enough for the European Parliament to take a decision . When these figures refer to people without jobs , then we should keep on deciding , as often as is necessary .
With reference to the Wolf report , we too must praise all the Commission 's action to coordinate and encourage the Member States ' employment policies in order to define new measures and activities for stepping up the fight against this plague , not easy to solve , in the short or medium term .
Similarly we back support for creating tiny and small firms and cottage industries , now that everyone recognises that this is one avenue to go down .
Nor do we want to slacken up this approach as the main plank of the fight for and maintenance of jobs , since this report places special emphasis on the peripheral regions , the ultraperipheral regions and the islands of the European Union , where the phenomenon of underemployment is very significant .
There is always an if , of course - and we have , I assure you , no special animosity towards Mr Wolf - but there are two questions to which we must express our deepest objections .
The first refers to the creation of alternative sources of funding for social benefits , especially concerning CO2 emissions and energy .
If we take away this tax with one hand and take it away with a reduction in European industrial competitiveness , then Europe will be left with the tax and the Americans and Japanese will have competitiveness .
We are fed up with the others exporting liberalism and importing protectionism .
Let us prefer ourselves to the others , for once .
The social Europe must be given other financial supports in order to take a definite path .
The second question is that of reductions in working time .
The principle seems a good one in the long term but history teaches us that to introduce it immediately and abruptly is doubtful and a cause for hesitation .
We would opt instead for more flexibility in this area in labour negotiations in the various Member States , which would undoubtedly not create greater difficulties of a social nature in Europe 's economic activity .
For both these reasons my group will be voting against this report if it stays as it is .
After all its positive aspects are already safeguarded in countless Community institutions ' resolutions and , realistically and in full awareness , the proposal does nothing to tackle the problem at the roots . That problem is employment .
We must create jobs and urgently so , in all Member States and in all sectors .
But we must also do everything we can to maintain those in existence which means that employment maintenance is also extremely important .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
I think we are honoured that Mr Santer has taken the trouble to come here this morning and explain to us what he is doing about the problem of employment .
I do not think it is the Commission that is to blame for our not making much progress on this score , but rather the fact that the Member States have been unwilling to take such measures as are absolutely essential , some of which are described in Mr Wolf 's report and some in other reports , and some were aired yesterday in the debate on a single currency .
Mr Santer said we need to modernise our social security , taxation and labour market .
I and my group agree with him .
But when we talk about modernisation then we should be brave enough to tackle the tricky issues and here I disagree with Mr Vieira that we should not be thinking in terms of shifting taxing labour to other aims .
I think that we could well make a start with such things as a CO2 tax as long as we do it throughout the whole of Europe .
Another point we are uncomfortable with , and it could well be a reason for our group as a whole to vote against the Wolf report , is the proposal to introduce a tax on speculation .
We think that is in breach of the Treaty and of free movement of capital and we also think that it could produce a counter effect .
I would invite Mr Wolf to move in our direction on that point .
I would underline what Mr Sander said on the statute of the European company .
This afternoon the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee is leaving for The Hague to have talks with a number of ministers on the preparations for the Dutch presidency next year .
I think we should put on our agenda the points that Mr Santer raised this morning , including the European statute and the financing of transEuropean networks .
I wish to draw attention to a few other matters .
One is the question of the development of the countryside and the other is urban policy .
When we debate unemployment then I think it very important that we consider a statute or charter for the countryside and also for the urban environment , and establish a link between the two .
We have ideas on the competitive strength of industry .
We have ideas on the competitive strength of our technology policy , but we have never developed really good plans on the role of major cities while some 80 % of the population in the Union lives in towns and cities .
I would invite Mr Flynn to put this point on the Dublin agenda .
Mr President , the Wolf report takes up and points out major deficiencies with regard to measures and dealing with the European Union 's gigantic problem : unemployment .
Estimates of the number of people unemployed which one hears mentioned here range from 18-20 to as many as 30 million .
I should like to point out that the figure is considerably higher even than this , including namely all the women who today are not entitled or able to provide for themselves but who unselfishly and without pay support large sections of the community through their care of children , the elderly and their husbands .
Each day we see and hear about strikes and demonstrations in the Member States , where angry and often desperate people express their dissatisfaction with the policies currently being pursued in the Member States .
It is high time we listened to these protestors .
Unlike the representatives of capitalist market forces , they are in fact showing us what is needed in society , needs which , if we were to attend to them , would bring a great many sustainable and necessary jobs .
It is time for us here in this House to realise that deregulation , privatisation and the much vaunted flexibility do not in fact result in any new jobs but instead widen the gulfs between the classes and increase the social tensions in our communities .
The policies being pursued cause greater regional imbalances , increasing structural unemployment , increased unemployment among poorly educated women , a continuing increase in the number of disabled people without work .
Mr President , the situation is catastrophic .
I am not saying that there are any easy solutions but I should like in any event to take the opportunity to point out a few options .
In study after study the Swedish people maintain that they are prepared to pay more tax to improve the quality of and access to health care services , care for the elderly and public education of all kinds .
Let us do something about this !
In almost all the Member States there is a glaring lack of childcare .
Let us ensure that it is expanded and made more accessible !
As regards the environment , there is much to be done , from the sorting of waste and recycling to the conversion of energy systems .
Let us make a start on this crucial work !
Let us set in motion structural changes to people 's working lives and introduce a six-hour working day with limits on the amount of overtime which can be worked but with retention of full pay to maintain purchasing power .
Let us set about repairing and converting people 's homes , building hew housing and raising the standards applicable .
Do not emasculate trades union movements but give them greater opportunities to help create security for working people so that their creativity and participation guide industry in new and much-needed directions .
We would have to make changes in the banking system to ensure better credit and easier access to risk capital for new companies and for environmental investments .
We would also have to steer company profits towards investment rather than speculation or passive , short-term profit interests .
Finally , I would like us to follow the advice which came from the European unemployed persons ' network when it held its conference in Ireland a few weeks ago , namely that we should put the plans for economic and monetary union to one side and set to work on the problems with which the people are struggling .
Mr President , this report by Friedrich Otto Wolf on the Commission 's report on employment in Europe in 1996 should perhaps , as Mr Cassidy suggested , really be called unemployment in Europe .
I agree totally with the rapporteur 's criticism of the Commission 's lack of progress with respect to analyses and strategies since the 1995 report .
At the same time I should like to say that I believe the rapporteur has been all the more successful as regards the formulation of analyses and the proposal of strategies too .
I perhaps do not need to repeat that unemployment is a serious problem in Europe and that it is so serious that it really is creating social and political unrest and threatening our democracy .
In this connection , when we discuss what we can do to reduce unemployment we must also realise that there is a paradox involved , because the Union itself is also creating unemployment and exclusion through the tight schedule for monetary union and through the convergence criteria which compel the Member States to tighten their budgets and force cuts in social welfare .
I also agree that we perhaps should not spend so much time beating our breasts and examining our own navels . Rather we should have a look at what other countries have done .
For example , what has been done in Norway , where there is very low unemployment ?
What can be done then ?
I nonetheless believe that the report indicates the paths to be followed for a new strategy .
I am therefore very much in favour of it .
We must also look at certain matters , such as shortening working hours and early retirement , which is mentioned in the Ribeiro report , because we know that more jobs will not be created , even if we have increased growth and increased investment .
A new strategy must involve ecological conversion and green innovation , tax reforms based on the principle of solidarity , and strong local economies .
In my view this should not result in a common labour market policy , since the regions are so different , but we must nevertheless work together , the Union and the Member States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
First of all I wish to offer my warm congratulations to Mr Wolf who has done sterling work , as is seen in the fact that his report was adopted in the Committee on Social Affairs with a very large measure of support .
The debate on unemployment has become a ritual we are going through for the nth time .

Let me just remind you of the Delors White Paper , for example , the Santer confidence pact , the annual reports on employment and the reports from the Council of Ministers of Social Affairs and of Finance .
That is where things are being held up because they cannot agree .
The official figure on unemployment is 18 to 20 million .
In reality it is much higher , as we all well know .
There are many categories which do not even appear in the statistics .
I am thinking for example of people bridging the period until they receive their old age pension , people who are made redundant at the age of 50 or 55 .
What really upsets me in many people 's approach to unemployment is the far too one-sided way they emphasize growth .
Economic growth is automatically expected to lead to increased employment .
We all know that is manifestly untrue .
The rapporteur , Mr Wolf , is on the right track when he criticises the current macro-economic approach .
That indeed aims at trying to fulfil the convergence criteria .
A macro-economic approach puts that kind of criteria at the centre and employment criteria lag far behind .
The Wolf report contains a whole series of practical and excellent proposals , for example , reducing indirect labour costs below the wage scale , highlighting small and medium-sized firms , part-time work , or even shortening working time and re-distributing labour .
We like the emphasis he lays on additional training and re-training and his focus on the third sector of social and cultural services .
There is a whole series of proposals which really must be discussed and eventually approved by the Council .
We fully support this report and wish to congratulate Mr Wolf again on this excellent work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Wolf 's report has some interesting things to say , especially about the structural policies .
But I should like to say something about the subjects he has passed over - subjects he has been unwilling or unable to tackle .
He rightly refers to the European social model , and we believe that this European social model is , in reality , deeply incompatible with the doctrines of globalism which now govern the world economy .
First , globalism implies global free trade .
That free trade , as has now been demonstrated by a number of economists , is reflected by a deterioration in the working conditions of the less qualified workers in the most highly industrialized countries .
This argument has been advanced , in particular , by Professor Maurice Allais , the French Nobel Prize winner .
This is an area where , as we know , the interests of the European States diverge from those of America .
The question , then , is whether we would be politically capable of countering American diplomacy or not .
We are extremely sceptical about what has happened so far in this area .
Secondly , globalism implies indifference to migration phenomena .
This is an absolutely forbidden subject today , amazingly enough .
Immigration is a factor that aggravates unemployment , for two reasons .
First , either the immigrants work , in which case they increase a labour supply which is already in excess of demand , or in the alternative scenario they don 't work , in which case they are financed by the welfare systems , at a cost which has been quantified in the Milloz report in France and undermines the global competitiveness of the economy .
One cannot simply ignore this subject .
Thirdly , the globalist ideology is now leading to the creation of integrated continental institutions .
That is the context in which European monetary union is envisaged .
Well , growth is a process of divergence , as is life itself , and the objective of monetary convergence implies a brake on growth .
On those three points , then , it is important to go beyond dogmas and sacred cows .
The only way to reduce unemployment is by questioning these globalist dogmas .
Mr President , the subject of employment has indeed come up again in our debates , on this occasion to send a message to the Council which the latter should take on board and heed .
I believe that on 2 December there will be a joint meeting of the ECOFIN and Social Affairs Councils , an important meeting which is due to finalize the degree of clear progress that has been made in terms of employment policies so that , a few days later , these advances can be adopted at the Dublin Summit .
The joint ECOFIN and Social Affairs Council must look at the basic contents of the reports we are debating today : reduction in indirect labour costs without reducing social protection and seeking other sources of finance ; promotion and sustained support for small and medium-sized undertakings as sources of new jobs ; reorganization and reduction of working time , a very specific subject which has to be looked at most carefully and , I believe , urgently ; reduction in barriers to innovation ; promotion of large-scale investment in human resources ; the penalizing of financial speculation and the search for productive investment of savings ; emphasis on local-employment potential , etc .
This joint Council must also fulfil the serious undertaking to support employment being incorporated into the revised Treaty , the right to employment being recognized in constitutional terms in the Treaty on Union , and the ' cohesion ' concept being upheld as one which shapes and inspires the entire Treaty on European Union .
The qualitative and quantitative trends of the labour market and of Member States ' employment policies must be evaluated on the basis of common indicators , and the recommendations of previous European Councils , such as those arising from the meetings in Essen or Madrid , must be promoted and looked at much more closely .
Employment is an element which is fundamental to maintaining the welfare state , giving financial solidity to the social-protection system and dealing with the appearance of new forms of poverty and exclusion .
Structural unemployment figures exist , and we are unable to reduce them even in times of economic growth .
We must therefore be bold in our actions - the old formulae which might have been useful in the past are no longer valid .
Stressing the coordination of efforts and experiences is insufficient to tackle our societies ' principal problem .
The European Union must be capable of enhancing national efforts at creating employment , providing motivation for and further developing active employment policies , providing the incentive for innovative policies and coordinating policies in order to produce positive effects on productive investment and employment .
Mr President , Commissioner , employment policy and social security go hand in hand .
It is thus logical for us to hold a joint debate on the 1996 employment report and on the amendment to the European Union 's most important social insurance legislation - Regulation 1408 .
High levels of unemployment jeopardize our social systems .
There is no shortcut to combatting unemployment - the only way is by the countless short steps proposed in the White Paper on employment and in many other European Union documents on the confidence pact , for example flexible work organization , positive flexibility of working hours and part-time working .
This is certainly not confined to dividing up the day , but also includes dividing up one 's working life : older employees are given the opportunity of a progressive transition to retirement .
In Germany , pre-retirement benefits are paid on the basis of a law on part-time working for older employees .
If the employer tops up the remuneration for part-time working and the pension insurance contributions , the Federal Institute for Labour reimburses the employer for these benefits if he takes on an unemployed person or trainee .
Regulation 1408 , which I mentioned earlier , is intended to coordinate the statutory social security systems for workers who move from one state to another .
This coordination has not hitherto included the harmonization of the widely differing pre-retirement arrangements that have been introduced in seven EU States .
The Ribeiro report provides a very good description of the problems that have arisen as a result of this and as a result of the increasing number of systems , especially if the employee 's job and place of residence are in different countries , as with frontier workers , or if the worker moves his place of residence to another Member State , as when he returns to his home country .
The intention of the Commission 's draft to extend the scope of Regulation 1408 to pre-retirement benefits is obligatory , and collectively agreed arrangements are also to be included .
The Commission has proposed sensible solutions , such as for example the right to export the benefit from the country of last employment , in which the entitlement was acquired .
The controversial provision of benefit by the labour authority in the country of residence would cause serious problems for EU States that have not introduced the preretirement status .

In Amendment No 1 and in the explanatory statement , the rapporteur goes beyond the problems of preretirement to suggest prospects for the coordination of the special civil service systems and non-statutory social security systems , though I am convinced that excessively detailed European regulations would be counter-productive here .
The Ribeiro report makes an important contribution to planning the social dimension of the Union , and the Group of the European People 's Party will vote in favour of it .
Mr President , employment and unemployment is the title of this morning 's debate , which shows that this House does not want to concentrate exclusively on the negative implication of unemployment .
But despite this there is a feeling here of déjà vu , of keeping a welfare Europe with a social face by means of all the earlier White Papers , European Councils and stability pacts .
One positive aspect is that the small and medium-sized firms have created the most jobs .
The downside is that pick of Europe , young people under the age of 25 , are unfortunately unemployed .
And alas the Ecofin is more of a hindrance than a help here .
That must not be allowed to continue .
The Lage report stipulates that economic growth alone cannot create lasting employment .
Should we not be asking ourselves why in the same world-wide economic situation Japan and the United States have managed to turn growth into jobs ?
Contemplating our Euro-centred navel should not blind us to the lessons to be learned from elsewhere .
But that of course does not mean to say that we should allow a free for all on our labour market .
The Ribeiro report takes a concrete step beyond national borders in Europe , but there are still contradictions in our approach here and there .
The Wolf report calls for shorter working time , the Lage report says that well educated women are not satisfied with part-time work and even talks about wasting sources of aid .
Just as liberalisation can lead to fewer jobs so can shortening of working time .
In the fifties our parents had a more flexible approach to work .
And in the nineties we cannot expect everything to be settled from on high .
Let us give workers and employers the necessary space to find their solutions .
Governments have the job of linking active and passive measures together in a strategy of policy options .
That is the most important task for the Dublin Summit and for the incoming Dutch presidency .
Mr President , this House is currently debating the most fundamental problem facing the European Union today : work and employment .
As Mr Wolf said when introducing his report , European citizens will appreciate European citizenship more if it contributes to solving the unemployment problem .
In my view , this is and must be the European Union 's main concern and I am therefore pleased that the President of the Commission , Mr Santer , has been present here today during this debate .
Some earlier speakers have already stated that there is no magic solution to the problem of unemployment - in fact , a number of effective solutions must be sought .
I therefore feel that the territorial employment pacts are a very positive move in terms of what they signify , namely cooperation between the governments of Member States , social agents , regional and local authorities and the European Union .
I believe the greatest possible emphasis ought to be given to the subject of local and regional authority cooperation , in application of the principle of subsidiarity , since this may go some way to solving the problem of unemployment and job creation .
Another important topic , I believe , is progressive harmonization of legislation in the labour and socialsecurity field , to enable the European Union to create jobs in any State in the Union and to prevent borders creating an obstacle to finding work on the other side .
This obviously requires harmonization of labour legislation in the different Member States .
I also feel it is important for the European Union to advocate greater flexibility when contracting for labour .
In our world as it now is , with all the technological changes we are seeing , only jobs which offer sufficient flexibility will contribute to better employment prospects .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are agreed , are we not , that we are talking about politics here , not a natural process .
Politics is not just about government , and certainly not just about the authorities : democratic politics also makes certain demands on what the political authorities are required to do .
The Carlos Lage report indicates realistic opportunities for action , following up the requirement stated by Commissioner Wulf-Mathies and also , in his own field , Commissioner Flynn for a structural policy to benefit employment , and especially to benefit equality of opportunity , because as we known women are particularly seriously affected by mass unemployment .
We can and must really take advantage of financial , innovative and administrative potentials .
Because the fact is that a more effective use , a better targeted application , of the existing instruments is the very first thing we must always do .
In combination , after all , they will achieve something .
But we also need a genuine first step away from the neo-liberal plan , which by combatting unemployment results in a reduction of wages , the deterioration of working conditions and social marginalization , towards - and I entirely agree with Mr Cassidy here - a European counterpart , a counterpart based on solidarity , negotiation and equilibrium , to the American model of income and labour sharing .
In the USA , that was achieved without any compensation or solidarity mechanism .
We want to plan it on the basis of solidarity instead of non-solidarity , fragmentation and marginalization , which is what I believe has happened in the United Kingdom .
That means , of course , that we first need to bank on solidarity in employment , but of course we must also provide the appropriate public funding for it , and there must also be a share of the increased productivity for employment .
Otherwise it won 't work !
Mr President , this is no place to go into the detail of the various reports that have been debated this morning . Instead , we should welcome , in general terms , the clear priority that has now been given to the problem of employment .
However , because we feel sure that there are still new avenues to be explored and further ground to be covered , we would like to make a few suggestions at this point .
First , in his excellent report , Mr Lage said that the time has not yet come to discuss the reform of the Structural Funds .
However , because , as is particularly emphasized in this report , action on employment always seems more effective when it involves the economic and social actors and the local authorities , we would like the Commission to think about the possibility of at least partially regionalizing , in future , the appropriations which are at present allocated within the framework of the Structural Funds , Objectives 3 and 4 .
As a second avenue , we would like the Commission to take a more detailed look at the possibility of creating and developing jobs which benefit the community and the public , to be linked to its objective of creating or preserving general interest services in the European Community , because we believe that the market alone will not solve the problem of employment , at least as it stands today .
We need to think not just about the market of today but about the market of tomorrow .
Finally , my third suggestion is this : as far as communication is concerned , we think that the Community should make it more obvious what it is doing about employment , perhaps by creating a kind of ' European employment label ' which could be attached to any job that has in fact been created through the actions of the European Union .
Mr President , there are many occasions during the year when we find ourselves debating this fundamental subject of employment .
There is one aspect on which this Parliament and the European institutions in general seem to be in agreement : the fact that things are not working , and the results - when there are any results - are extremely disappointing .
In this respect , I should like to say to President Santer - who , I should add , has both my respect and my sympathy - that when he states in Parliament that positive advances have been achieved in respect of the five employment priorities agreed upon at Essen , and then restated at all the subsequent Council meetings , he should also recall that at the same time , sadly , unemployment has also advanced .
This should suggest , to say the least , doubts as to whether the treatment envisaged at Essen may perhaps be entirely ineffective in curing the disease from which we are suffering .
I personally am convinced , in fact , that the traditional medicine chest in which we are looking for a cure for unemployment no longer contains any remedies that will meet the case .
And there is one basic reason for that : the main cause of structural unemployment , which is the problem we face , is a technological revolution , a huge transformation , a vast technological innovation which in its scale , intensity and quantity has no precedent in history and whose result is this : by comparison with the past , we can now obtain more products and more services with less labour .
If we are in agreement on this fact , on this assessment , we must draw two conclusions from it : first , that we need to reduce working hours and arrange a different distribution of work .
Two months ago this House adopted a resolution tabled by Mr Rocard which committed the Commission to implementing a research and analysis project : all that has come of it so far has been a statement by Commissioner Bangemann in which he says that he doesn 't believe in instruments of that type .
The other thing that should be done , Mr President , is to eliminate the paradox of a society full of unsatisfied social needs and growing unemployment .
In other words , we need to set people to work healing the environment , our cultural heritage and the individual , because by following that road we can probably make an important contribution to solving the problem of unemployment .
Mr President , I have nothing to add to the many sensible remarks that have been made ; what has been said before need not be repeated .
The issue for all of us is what instruments we can find to combat unemployment .
Mr Wolf said that we did not want to recreate American conditions here , and he is undoubtedly right .
On the other hand , we don 't want interventionist governments , and especially not an interventionist Europe !
I come from a part of Germany which suffered under socialism for 40 years , and I have no desire to experience European socialism .
So it is wrong , as I see it , if indeed there should be a chapter on employment in the Treaty , that - as Mr Lage writes in his report - the Treaty should make it obligatory to coordinate Community policy for the creation of jobs ; but if there is a chapter on employment in the Treaty , then at the most it should create an obligation to coordinate the national employment policies .
To be on the safe side , I should like to ask honourable Members to vote in favour of my amendment to the Lage report , tabled on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , which is Amendment No 1 , and to delete the entire passage relating to the insertion of an employment chapter into the Treaty .
Mr President , I would like to respond to Mr Ribeiro 's comments on redundancy pay .
By way of introduction I would like to say that the National Movement did not vote in favour of the report during the Social Committee 's deliberations at the meeting of 10 September , as would appear to be the case , incorrectly , from the report .
We voted against it .
And I will do the same again when we come to vote on the report here in Parliament .
Nor , indeed , can I imagine any other Danish Members being able to vote in favour of this report , since the proposal before us will undermine the basis for Danish redundancy pay .
This is designed so that there are strict rules as to when Danish A-Cash members fulfil the conditions for entitlement to redundancy pay .
Thus entitlement only applies to Danes when they fulfil these strict conditions and is not therefore an automatic universal right .
My point is that this report overlooks the differences that exist between EU countries , in addition to overlooking the EU 's inexperience in the area of social policy .
This is intensified by the fact that , through its implementation , the redundancy pay regulations will open the way for the introduction of a whole series of non-compulsory insurance provisions .
The Commission 's proposal also applies to redundancy pay provisions based on agreements which , to use the Social Committee 's own words , are not traditionally covered by Community regulations .
From the Danish perspective I must say that this appears to be something of an extraordinary new creation if the EU is adopting regulations which are able to alter the conditions and scope of the agreements entered into by those involved in the employment market .
Against such a background we cannot vote in favour of this report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , unemployment is obviously the principal problem facing Europe at this time .
It is also obvious that Structural Funds have to be used to their full potential in order to solve the problem because economic growth alone will not enable us to reduce unemployment rates although , as the rapporteur , Mr Lage , states , we cannot know precisely what the effect of structural expenditure on employment will be .
In the future , we will have to improve assessment of the impact of regional policies on employment , seek new indicators and , if necessary , reform the Structural Funds in order to maximize their potential , simplify procedures , and focus resources and objectives .
We have to do all this whilst bearing in mind that nominal convergence and genuine convergence always have to progress in parallel .
Emphasis must also be placed on the importance of local and regional authority participation and that of social agents as motivating forces . Of equal significance is the fact that we should continue striving to find new sources of employment - in culture , the environment , proximity services - and means of supporting small and medium-sized undertakings , which I consider to be of capital importance .
Lastly , I would like to refer to the importance this document accords to equality of opportunity .
We cannot forget that unemployment is especially detrimental to the status of women .
Male unemployment in the Union is currently running at 9.5 % , whilst female unemployment is 12.4 % .
In some countries , such as Spain , the figures are 18 % for men and 30 % for women .
We therefore need to make an extra effort to reduce these disparities .
I have no more to say except that I would like to congratulate Mr Lage on his excellent report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the high level of unemployment is a continuing major challenge to the European Union .
The achievements of European employment strategy to date have been disappointing .
Despite all their protestations at the Council , the Member States are not doing enough to support the efforts of the Commission and the European Parliament .
Until the proposals in the confidence pact - regional employment pacts , reduced ancillary wage costs , integration of young people , avoidance of long-term unemployment , equality of opportunity for men and women - are implemented energetically and more swiftly , we shall achieve no progress in the employment sector .
Changing the title of the Commission 's report from ' employment ' to ' unemployment ' would do nothing to change this situation .
What we need to change is the situation whereby the good proposals - and I emphasize the good proposals - in the three reports are no more than words on paper ; we must see that they are implemented throughout Europe .
The time has come for employers and employees to realize that they are all in the same boat .
They should stop trying to outdo each other in moaning about how bad conditions are in Europe - they should get together , roll up their sleeves and take an optimistic approach to the task of creating better employment conditions .
This means that one side must abandon thinking solely in terms of shareholder value , while the other must negotiate not only in the employees ' interests but also in those of the unemployed .
The appeal must be made not just to governments , Mr Wolf , but also to the solidarity of the social partners for the common good in Europe , and beyond the boundaries of the European Union .
Mr President , the need to maintain areas of convergence , price stability , growth and social solidarity , together with the economic crisis which restricts the capacity for increasing production and consumption , are the reasons for the present lull in the struggle against the employment crisis within the Union .
If we are to succeed in sending a clear signal to the public , a chapter on employment policy should be inserted into the new Treaty : a chapter which provides for a less restrictive monetary policy , reasonable budgetary discipline and tax measures designed ultimately to promote the creation of employment .
This is the only way to move forward from mere good intentions to specific signals .
The time has come to move on from words to concrete facts .
Our major industries have been radically computerized and modernized in recent years , leading to a big reduction in the size of the workforce .
We must act resolutely to promote schemes which will create small- and medium-sized enterprises , especially in the service sector , to ease the employment situation ; at the same time , we need to strengthen the vocational training programmes aimed at young people , women and the long-term unemployed but not at slackers and loafers .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Wolf for an altogether excellent report ; it really is very good .
One must acknowledge that Europe has failed where unemployment is concerned .
It is not true that there has been a lack of analysis , proposals or declarations - we have had more than enough of those since I arrived here in Parliament .
They have come from the Council , the Commission and from this Parliament .
It is , however , the results which will be measured and where results are concerned one has to acknowledge that the EU has so far failed .
Is it therefore the EU in its capacity as an institution that has failed ?
No , the battle against unemployment today is a purely national matter .
What we lack is coordination at European level .
The economic policies which the Member States have pursued individually have been similar but at the same time a disaster .
They have tried to concentrate on exports and rein in domestic demand .
This has been good for nobody because in reality we all trade with one another .
This has made economic policy as a whole a failure .
No individual country has been able to deviate from this policy .
If an individual country , Sweden say , did so , it would mean only that capital would stream out of the country .
This is why we need coordination at European level .
Can this be achieved ?
We have at least demonstrated that as regards monetary policy there is a common policy which has brought down inflation and reduced budget deficits and interest rates .
This policy must now be offset by a policy on employment which assumes the same weight and the same importance .
I am referring here to the proposal which the government in my country made to the IGC .
It is important now that the EU should coordinate its efforts as regards employment too in the Treaty and in practice .
Is there a conflict between the monetary policy and employment policy , as some maintain ?
In the long term there is no such conflict : low inflation , low budget deficits and low interest rates are in the long term good for employment .
If , however , we apply the convergence criteria wrongly , too quickly and at the wrong time , they may have a negative effect on employment .
We must therefore find a balance quickly .
By way of a summary I should like to draw attention to the following : the battle against unemployment must be conducted at all levels , that is to say , local , regional , national and also EU .
We must have greater coordination of macro-economic and labour market policies .
We must have more active measures as part of labour market policy .
Taxation must be changed so that work is taxed less and the environment more .
We must have shorter working hours and we must keep abreast of technological developments so that Europe can keep up with its competitors .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , given the situation of structural unemployment that we are facing , it is vital to ensure that stable jobs are created . We all agree on this point , of course .
It therefore makes sense to introduce this concern over employment into European policies .
We should especially consider the impact of the structural funds on the creation of jobs . We should also debate ways of better using the funds bearing in mind this challenge .
The analysis must be accurate . If we are to be thorough we must make sure that figures on unemployment rates are reliable .
At present , they are not . The criteria vary and the Member States consider that they are carried out by certain official services alone .
What about wage levels or underemployment ? Or the various rates of female employment ?
If we are to be thorough nor should we play down the territorial dimension of the structural funds .
The basic aim of the funds is to contribute to economic and social cohesion by supporting the less developed regions , in order to ensure effective equality of opportunities for all European citizens .
To assess the impact of the structural funds on employment is important ; however , the levels of unemployment cannot be a criterion for making funds available .
Fighting unemployment as a reference is right but to transform that action into the basis for awarding funds is a grave error .
It is unthinkable that regions with high GDP per capita rates should be the major beneficiaries of structural funds .
It is the old dichotomy between ' places prosperity ' and ' peoples prosperity ' .
We must opt for the former or otherwise the richest regions will go on getting richer and the poorer ones poorer , with all the consequences - mainly demographic - that would result .
Obviously , it is necessary to encourage the creation of companies , access to education and vocational training , and this should meet the real market needs .
Obviously states are responsible ; the public and private sectors must both be involved , as well as regional and local authorities , since everyone must take part in this process .
Mr President , I would like to concentrate on Mr Lage 's report on the relationship between Structural Funds and employment .
I believe that one of the main features of Mr Lage 's fine report is its balance and absence of rhetoric - any attentive reader can appreciate the important distinction made in this report between social policy and structural policy .
Optimizing Structural Fund capabilities vis-à-vis employment to their maximum extent is indeed a fundamental aim .
As far as the Structural Funds are concerned , we cannot squander or fritter away anything which may result in an improved employment picture in the European Union .
It is , however , extremely important to understand that structural policy is not guided by job creation as the fundamental and urgent criterion and that structural transfers are transfers for improving human resources and infrastructures and for increasing productive investment - that is , for a genuine employment policy which improves the environment where investment will subsequently be targeted .
If this is not the case , if we were to confuse social policy with structural policy , we would reach a conclusion which I wish to avoid in future debates and in debates on forthcoming financial developments , and it is this : that appraisals of unemployment concentrating on major towns and cities , on major towns and cities in prosperous countries , are capable of attracting the greater part of investment in Structural Funds .
We must avoid this just as Mr Lage 's report avoids it .
Mr President , is the commitment to create economic and social cohesion in Europe suitable only for times of growth ?
The solidarity between generations and between Member States evaporates as times grow harder .
When all we hear is how Europe is finished as a location for industry , investors look elsewhere and public confidence falters .
We must see the Commission 's yearly report as an opportunity not for further discussion of the crisis but for discussion of opportunities .
First , the European social model is not an optional extra .
Secondly , the dialogue between the social partners , the alliance for work and the Round Table are too valuable to be casually abandoned .
Thirdly , the prospects of employment for our most important resource -people - must be improved .
Every ECU today and every euro tomorrow that , contrary to the misgivings expressed in the Wolf report , arrives at the right time and place to promote stability , every investment in qualified basic and further training and retraining , and in lifelong learning , increases our fitness for globalization .
LEONARDO and SOCRATES , ADAPT and NOW and more effective use of the structural funds are a reality , not an illusion .
Fourthly , the market opportunities for the SMEs must be improved .
After all , they have substance , flexibility , a spirit of innovation and sound social structures .
However , improved access to capital and research results are still an illusion , not a reality .
Fifthly , we must build up long-term confidence .
The necessary chapter on employment must not arouse any false hopes .
We must not release the Member States from their responsibilities .
But we can develop guidelines which lead to improved coordination .
The comprehensive strategy for cooperation between the Member States , adopted in Essen , investment in vocational training , increasing the intensity of employment - these are the right foundations .
Europe has the brains , the capacity and the creativity .
Let 's use them !
Mr President , I could begin my intervention by referring to all the initiatives , documents and reports which pass through this House and which we are currently debating here and which , in addition , aim to make further advances concerning a solution to the problem of unemployment , but my allotted two minutes would be used up and I would not have commented on even a small part of them .
Since the first oil crisis , the problem of unemployment has been near the top , if not the first item , on our governments ' agendas .
We have been tackling this problem for 20 years and it looks very much like pessimism is beginning to set in in many social sectors .
Given these circumstances , my intention , honourable colleagues , is to offer a note of optimism , a well-founded note of optimism , optimism based on the following facts :
Firstly , unemployment is not a worldwide problem .
Unemployment has not become globalized - trade and competitiveness have become globalized .
Unemployment with the specific characteristics it assumes within the European Union is a unique problem .
It is incorrect to say that machines are taking jobs away from people . People have to be trained to use machines and therefore investment in education and training is necessary .
At the world level , more jobs are created than are lost every year .
In addition , there are still too many unsatisfied human needs .
Secondly , Europe is not a continent which is closed to foreign trade .
It can never adopt such a stance since we are not self-sufficient and need raw materials that we do not possess .
The only way to acquire them lies in our economy 's capability to offer our consumers and consumers in third countries goods and services which are competitive on international markets .
We are already competitive on many markets .
In terms of the most important factor of production - the human factor - we have top-quality resources .
The level of training of European citizens is as high as anywhere you may care to mention , although this does not mean we should become complacent - in such matters there is always room for progress .
And , thirdly , Europe is emerging from its most recent economic crisis but is doing so more slowly than we would have liked .
Yet the optimism I referred to earlier is due to the fact that , if we take the view that we have the best-educated human resources on the planet and combine this with the fact that we are constructing an environment of top-quality macroeconomic stability , we obtain a clear result .
We already have the agents and will soon have the means .
The means to which I am referring , ladies and gentlemen , is Economic and Monetary Union .
The stable framework which will be created by EMU will enable our agents to compete at least on the basis of equal conditions .
I would like to end my contribution by asking you to continue cooperating with governments to achieve the objectives set out and would also call upon all of us to continue the work of making the public more aware of why we are undertaking a project of such historic proportions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ' feminizing ' the Structural Funds and incorporating equality of opportunity into their application criteria form the recommendation submitted by the Committee on Women 's Rights and the Group of the European People 's Party regarding this communication on structural intervention and employment .
The aim of the Structural Funds is to reduce regional disparities determined as a function of income and unemployment .
And it is obvious that unemployment affects women to a much greater degree .
We are therefore calling for innovative criteria and greater flexibility in the application of the Structural Funds .
There is a need to simplify the rules which govern the Funds , which are highly restrictive and bureaucratic . There is also a need to promote equality of opportunity as a human-quality criterion in the use of the Funds and also equality of opportunity in vocational training and education in the use of new technologies , craft-based industries and the setting-up of new enterprises .
A review of the conditions of application of the Funds would entail changes in their use , perhaps moving them away from major infrastructural investments in order to focus more on work which is economically productive , human resources and local employment initiatives .
We would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Lage , who , in his report , has taken the opportunity to expand on special measures aimed at supporting unemployed women , reorganizing working time , part-time working and supporting and monitoring small and medium-sized undertakings created by women .
Job creation goes hand-in-hand with the development of infrastructures and services which make it possible to combine work with domestic responsibilities , in order to make women less socially isolated and to seek new alternatives to traditional working structures .
We women are pioneering new concepts for organizing work which are essential and necessary if employment , by means of a coordinated focusing of economic and structural measures , is to be transformed into the ' confidence pact ' we all desire .
It is within this innovative framework that we are calling for equality of opportunity to be incorporated into policies for promoting employment and local development , through the Structural Funds , since women constitute the sector most disadvantaged by unemployment .
Mr President , I would like to thank all those who have contributed to the debate and say a special word of thanks to Mr Wolf for his excellent report .
Employment is not only a very important problem for the Union it is also a very complicated one with many interrelated aspects , as the very interesting debate has shown this morning .
Mr Wolf has put forward a careful and thorough analysis of the Commission 's Employment in Europe Report and I am particularly pleased that we agree on so many aspects of the strategy that we are pursuing .
Mr Wolf and many other honourable Members have put forward a number of additional proposals and some criticisms .
I welcome both and I believe they form a basis for us to carry our strategy further in the future .
The Employment in Europe Report has become a major event in the Commission 's annual calendar and it has changed in recent times both in structure and in presentation .
The changes respond to many of the remarks made by the European Parliament in previous years .
It is a shorter document and it deals with policy reflections based on the analysis .
In particular it deals with the following : to present a succinct description of the main analytical messages of the report , to give a flavour of the main stance of policy in Member States and in the different policy areas and finally , and most importantly , to present the Commission 's views of the main policy conclusions which we have called ' The Need for Action ' .
Many speakers have stressed the need for action and have given an impressive list of actions which could and should be carried out by the Member States .
All have to be involved in this process and you will be pleased to know that the multi-annual programmes take up that very point and have submitted such to the Commission of recent date .
So we are making progress but we are not making enough progress .
Mr Wolf 's report rightly suggests that the macro-economic aspects of the strategy give rise to some causes of concern and Member States face constraints in the conduct of their policy .
They face difficult choices but we must persevere or we will continue to lose credibility in this area .
Member States have now integrated the strategy in their multi-annual programmes and we are committed to action on employment .
We hope that will be progressed greatly in Dublin , where the impetus will be to take all of this further forward .
The Lage report must bring us to the point that the employment problem is not just about macro-economic aspects only , the Lage report takes us into other structural aspects of the strategy .
I would like to compliment Mr Lage on the excellent document .
We accept the main thrust of the resulting resolution and we would like to make a few comments on it .
Parliament has fully grasped the Commission 's aim as far as increasing the employment content of the structural funds is concerned .
Many of those who contributed today talked about getting better value and making better use of the structural funds and I agree .
Mr Lage stresses also that this is a policy for the long term and he particularly highlights the need to develop local development and for the creation of small business .
We also agree .
This aim can be achieved most effectively through partnership .
Partnership with the Member States which part-finance the programmes that are linked to the structural assistance .
Partnership with the monitoring committee to strengthen their management of the programmes .
The Commission favours a deepening and broadening of the partnership to embrace all those involved in the social and economic spheres .
The territorial pacts have been specifically mentioned by many of the Members who have contributed today .
About 60 pilot measures are contemplated and I would like to say to Mrs McCarthy the only country that has not yet submitted its pilot project is the United Kingdom , but we are working and hoping we can change that .
Equally important is the need for the improvement in the arrangements for measuring the impact of assistance on employment .
This is a complex subject , dealing with jobs created and safeguarded , direct and indirectly created jobs , permanent and temporary jobs , full-time and part-time work , the question about displacement and of course the dead-weight effect .
The Commission intends to make progress on this question through the Interdepartmental Working Party on assessment and through the Means Programme .
In this connection it is worth noting that the Commission has proposed quantified guidelines to the Member States for the new Objective II period , in order to improve prior and ex-post assessment of this assistance on the creation and on the maintenance of employment .
The Commission will take the opportunity presented in the mid-term review to put emphasis particularly on the implementation of the points set out in the Commission 's communication .
To conclude on this report , I would like again to express my thanks to Parliament and to Mr Lage for the backing which it has given to the Commission through this report .
Finally , the Ribeiro Report and the question of pre-retirement benefits .
The Commission welcomes the positive attitude of the European Parliament on this proposal and we fully share the Commission 's opinion that the Community coordination of the national security schemes should be extended to pre-retirement benefits .
The national schemes introducing this kind of benefit to unemployed workers who have not reached retirement age differ greatly and the lack of coordination between them can indeed cause difficulties for such workers who reside in a Member State other than the Member State in which the benefit is awarded .
In this report Mr Ribeiro proposed to make it a priority task of the administrative commission on social security for migrant workers to deal with problems of frontier workers .
The Commission is fully aware of the necessity to deal with this category of workers in particular .
However , the administrative commission is already competent to deal with all of the problems in relation to the application of the Community coordination system , including those of frontier workers .
In the Commission 's view it does not seem appropriate to mention within its task a specific category without making reference to others such as pensioners and posted workers and students and in the circumstances the Commission would not be disposed to follow the rapporteur 's amendment to the point .
I would like to finish by saying to Mr Cassidy that I would not support the re-naming of the report .
I rather look at it from a more positive point of view where we can deal with the difficulties arising as far as unemployment is concerned and genuinely have an employment report to talk about when we come before Parliament on a continuing basis .
I wholeheartedly agree with the point he has made about aging and I believe that is a matter that will have to dominate a lot of debate in this House in the future .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to voting time .
Votes
Mr President , during the debate yesterday Commissioner de Silguy agreed to look again at the amendments that have been adopted today with a view to accepting more of them than he was prepared to accept then .
I hope that that will be done and that a large number of the amendments adopted today will be accepted .
I must emphasize again that our purpose in tabling them was to make the Commission 's task easier and to render these two regulations implementable , because implementing them in form in which they were presented would just not be possible .
I request the Commissioner to have another think about the matter .
He will be informed of the Member 's concerns .
Mr President , I appreciate that you want to go through the votes quickly and I respect that .
But I must insist that when you speak of committee amendments you speak of the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am going to have to ask for your forbearance here .
We really did have to negotiate this report rather quickly within the Committee , and then there were still a few compromise negotiations .
I was able to reach an agreement with the Liberals to the effect that their amendment would be adopted although in modified form .
It would then read as follows , and I quote from the English text on which the negotiations were based : ' ... are leading to extraordinary increases in productivity ' .
The remainder is deleted and replaced by the following : ' ... so that a policy is needed to make sure that there is a positive balance between productivity development and job creation ' .
That is also clearer than the original text .
So I recommend the House to adopt it in that form .
This may not be completely satisfactory for the Liberals , but most of them will probably accept it .
Mr President , that is what we agreed .
That is correct .
On paragraph 19 :
Mr President , the problem we had here was that difficulties arose regarding the greater emphasis in the amendment , and we agreed on a compromise .
The second part of the sentence then reads : ' ... reiterates its call for seriously studying new models of taxation capable of counteracting this tendency as well as an improved control of derivatives ' .
This insertion ' seriously studying new models of taxation capable of counteracting this tendency ' replaces the disputed wording contained in the original text ; it is capable of producing a consensus , and it would satisfy me too .
Mr President , derivatives were not agreed , and I would appreciate it if we first voted on our amendment , and if that falls then we shall accept this text .
This is absolutely essential because it will determine our final vote .
Then could I ask Mrs Boogerd-Quaak whether she will agree to take a separate vote on the words ' as well as improved control of derivatives ' and use that as the basis for the compromise .
Mr President , I should like to protest against the procedure being followed .
What is happening here is something that should be done in committee , and it seems totally irregular to me for quarrels between Groups to be brought before Parliament at voting time , when we are actually in the process of voting .
I ask you to follow the Rules of Procedure , meaning that we should simply vote , without spending hours voting on phraseology about which the Groups cannot agree .
Mr President , we had just agreed , with the support of all , that we would no longer discuss oral amendments .
So this cannot be put to the vote .
Either we vote on the original text or on something else .
Mr President , if you put something else to the vote then we shall all stand up and make a vote impossible .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
First , I should like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent report .
The importance of the agreement for the European fisheries sector is clearly shown .
The number of vessels to be permitted to fish in Mauretanian waters in future is significantly increased ; and the permitted gross register tonnage is much more than doubled .
The agreement secures a great many direct jobs and even more indirect jobs in Europe and Mauretania .
So my group will vote for the agreement today .
There is , however , one area that causes us great concern .
This time , it is not so much the fact that the Council has passed this Regulation to Parliament far too late that is making our work here in Parliament so difficult .
Parliament 's participation in the decision process is being turned into a farce .
The rush caused by the Council also means that we are having to decide today on this important agreement without a debate .
We do not and will not accept this contempt for the rights of the European Parliament .
There is another point I should like to raise : the legal basis .
The European Commission had selected the assent procedure as the legal basis for this Regulation .
And there was good reason for that choice : this fisheries agreement is not just the second most important between the European Community and a third country - this agreement is costing the EC no less than ECU 266.8 million , in annual instalments of more than ECU 55 million .
But the Council has changed the Commission 's chosen legal basis to a simple consultation procedure .
We must protest most strenuously about this .
At the recommendation of our Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , the Committee on Fisheries gave its opinion on the basis of the assent procedure .
If the Council were not to accept this , we would have to consider what action to take .
I have been pursuing this legal area for some considerable time .
Back at the time of the Greenland agreement , the EU in its modest wisdom avoided going to the European Court of Justice so that the shortcoming in the interpretation of Article 228 could be made good by the process of an interinstitutional agreement .
At the time when I wrote the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries regarding the intergovernmental conference , the generalized use of the assent procedure was a central requirement for international agreements .
Unfortunately , we have not received any positive signs regarding this from the intergovernmental conference .
But it is impossible that Article 228 ( 3 ) ( 1 ) referring to ' important budgetary implications ' should never have any substantial legislative consequences for us .
This matter should be referred to the European Court of Justice .
Bellerè report ( A4-0333 / 96 )
First , we should thank the European Commission for having stood by its commitment and provided us , as an annex to its proposal , with a report on the application of summer time in the European Union .
This clearly shows us how difficult the exercise is .
The ratio of advantages to disadvantages , whether based on economic or social aspects , supports the idea that we should apply the principle of subsidiarity in full .
It was therefore logical for our proposals to be based on harmonization , on reconciliation , rather than on standardization .
So I emphasize the efforts of our rapporteur to keep to the harmonization of the period when summer time applies , with , as a safeguard to the European Commission 's credit , a supervisory role in ensuring that time differences between contiguous Member States should not exceed one hour .
Christodoulou report ( A4-0371 / 96 )
Mr President , I would simply like to place on the record the political view of the Liberal Group .
We abstained on the two Christodoulou reports and we did so in order to signal our political differences with other colleagues on one central issue .
We believed Parliament 's amendments unnecessarily watered down something which is a deeply sensitive political issue on the road towards EMU .
Indeed , whereas we feared the Ecofin Council under some duress may unnecessarily want to toughen what has been suggested by the Commission , which we hope will not happen , we believe Parliament has just voted a set of amendments which unnecessarily go in precisely the opposite direction .
Hence our abstention on the two reports .
As we believe that Economic and Monetary Union should not happen we have chosen to abstain in the vote on this report .
Certainly the report qualifies the Commission 's statements on stability programmes for the Member States but we believe that a ' stability pact ' will so harm the economy that we cannot support any proposal , qualified or not , which is based on such a pact .
We are against a pact of adhesion and recession .
It is both socially and economically inconceivable to conduct , simultaneously , an excessively strict monetary and foreign exchange policy and excessively strict budgetary policies .
The result would be an area of depression which would be hostile to activity and hence to the situation - in terms both of income and of employment - of the least well off among us .
The workers must not be used as an adjustable variable , whether in the form of excessive wage restraint or in the form of unemployment .
Yet the severity of the mechanism of budgetary sanctions envisaged by the stability pact would lead to these undesirable results .
Furthermore , while stigmatizing the national authorities , the stability pact will give the European Central Bank ( ECB ) an alibi for penalizing , by raising the European interest rate , an accidental drift by one or more Member States .
This will increase the overvaluation of our currencies against the dollar , which is already of the order of 40 % in terms of parity of purchasing power .
Furthermore , imposing financial penalties on a State in deficit may be illogical or even dangerous : rather than a financial penalty which will make that deficit even worse and denounce it to the international financial community , the ' delinquent ' State needs assistance programmes .
On the other hand , it is essential to set up a European government as a genuine ' political ' counterweight to the technocratic pole represented by the single monetary authority .
Bearing in mind the ' orthodox culture ' of the economics and finance ministers , can we really believe that the Ecofin Council will represent a political counterweight to the ECB ?
Are central bankers and finance ministers not redundant ?
We reject the restrictive concept of a stability pact which would deprive the governments of the European Union of their budgetary freedom of action .
We are in favour of a pact of solidarity and growth , sustained by a policy in favour of employment , progress and social cohesion .
The Christodoulou report is along what we believe to be the right lines .
It emphasizes points that are overlooked in the Commission 's proposals for Regulations : growth , employment and the need for public investment .
This report emphasizes that subordinating the budgetary instrument to the sole and exclusive objective of monetary stability restricts the possibilities of the growth policy .
It is essential , then , to make it clear in the second recital that national budgetary policies must also be defined in a manner such as to permit sufficient public investment to help sustain growth and employment .
Moreover , this report provides a better definition of the concept of an ' exceptional and temporary deficit ' , referred to in Article 104c ( 2 ) , indent a , of the Treaty , which is too restrictive in the Commission 's definition .
Such a definition must take account of the fundamental constitutional obligations upon the Member States in the context of schemes designed to confront situations of rising unemployment or to safeguard their territorial integrity .
The Christodoulou report also , and legitimately , tends to link the national parliaments more closely to the procedure for the adoption of stability programmes by the Member States , and to allow the European Parliament to be better informed .
Finally , it pays greater attention to the situation of the Member States which are not participating in the EMU but will eventually do so .
The stability pact which we are being asked to approve , in the form of two Council proposals for Regulations , would serve to guarantee that the budgetary convergence of the euro States will be sustainable even after the single currency has come into force .
To achieve this object , we are offered - under the euphemism of a ' pact ' - a whole arsenal full of bureaucratic , repressive mechanisms , enabling the Commission and Council to discipline the Member States , like naughty children , when their budgetary performance fails to comply with the ' stability programmes ' laid down in advance , and with the criteria set by the Treaty .
This procedure , in our view , raises serious problems of both substance and form .
First , the very concept of a ' stability pact ' betrays the absence of the necessary structural conditions in Europe for the establishment of a single currency .
In the United States , for example , there is no such thing as a ' federal stability pact ' .
If our federalists feel the need of one in Europe , it is because they are well aware that they are going to have to organize rigorous and accelerated convergence in order to try to close the gaps between the Member States as soon as possible and prevent spontaneous divergence .
In other words , the stability pact is a gamble that political will can close the gaps caused by different national identities and different economic and social structures ; it is a gamble that the single currency can be created politically even if the real conditions do not exist .
This position , adopted by self-styled responsible governments , appears to us totally unrealistic .
In any case , where are we going to get this ' political will ' , which will supposedly allow the single currency to be created when the substantive conditions for it do not exist ?
Not from the European nations which , even though they did approve Maastricht , are now voicing doubts about the continuation of the process .
In reality , that will is the will of governments - the prisoners of reckless undertakings that they now propose to honour without the support of the people , and if necessary against the wishes of the people .
As well as these questions of substance , which are not insignificant , there are also legal doubts about the soundness of the legal basis of the proposed procedures .
For example , it is hard to see how Article 103 ( 5 ) could provide a basis for an obligation to present ' stability programmes ' , which can be imposed on States participating in the euro ; it is hard to see how Article 104c ( 14 ) ( 2 ) could enable ' supplementary provisions ' to be added to Protocol 5 ; and it is hard to see what text might authorize the Community to toughen and expedite penalty procedures which are already adequately described by the Treaties .

These examples - and , sadly , I could quote others - show the difficulty of reconciling the letter of the Treaty with the stability pact , quite simply because the latter was not originally envisaged .
And the reason it was not envisaged is that the Maastricht draft was drawn up in total ignorance of the real conditions in which a single currency would be introduced .
This finding obviously casts doubt on the legal soundness of the current process of unification .
In France , in particular , the Constitutional Council ruled in 1992 that the single currency might cast doubt on the essential conditions for the exercise of national sovereignty , so that it was necessary to change the constitution in order to introduce the new monetary provisions .
But , of course , those provisions have to be regarded as limitative , since they create exceptions to the constitution .
So by what sleight of hand is an attempt now being made to impose upon us an extensive conception of those provisions , deriving a repressive stability pact from texts which made no express provision for it ?
As far as the single currency is concerned , the best is the enemy of the good .
Although there are twelve States out of fifteen qualified to enter the system , it would be absurd to scupper the entire project in the interests of an ideological , doctrinaire and economically deflationist conception of the application of the Maastricht Treaty criteria .
All the candidates for the single currency have now brought inflation under control , at the price of persistent structural unemployment .
We need to preserve the means for an economic revival campaign and not help to put an end to it .
Adding a restrictive interpretation to the Maastricht Treaty would be a social , economic and political nonsense .
We accept the need for a rigorous economic policy , and indeed have been pursuing one for 10 years . We accept it in the awareness of the need to put our finances , our economies , in order , so as to provide the basis for sustainable development .
To pursue , simultaneously , an ill-timed austerity policy would not merely be absurd - it would be virtually suicidal for the economic and monetary union that we want to institute .
The report contains amendments to the Council Regulation on the strengthening of the surveillance and coordination of budgetary positions and the Council Regulation on speeding up and clarifying the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure .
As we are against the implementation of EMU and this report deals with technical aspects of monetary union we are unable to vote for any part of the report .
The Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of the Christodoulou report .
The report expresses our wish that the whole construction of European Monetary Union should be more balanced and carefully thought through .
This applies in several areas .
It is important to us , as Danes , that respect be shown for the conditions which the Danish people have stipulated with respect to the introduction of phase 3 of EMU .
The report allows for no staggering in this area .
It is quite clear that countries with reservations must be respected , but they must be treated on a completely equal footing with the others if they are later in favour of adoption .
As Social Democrats we are pleased to see that social factors are taken into consideration when economic policy is being drawn up at European level .
Strong economies are not only economies with low inflation ; they are also economies with growth , a high employment level and resources for a decent , well functioning public sector .
The report is therefore a step along the road towards an EU which takes its people 's wishes seriously .
Herman report ( A4-0375 / 96 )
As we consider that Sweden should not participate in Economic and Monetary Union we are refraining from taking part in the vote on the technical aspects of the euro .
The report 's sixth amendment is worded as if the entire EMU project had already been decided on and finalised by the EU 's Member States and citizens .
It states that ' Member States shall take appropriate action in conjunction with relevant trade , professional and consumer organisations to inform , advise and prepare for the introduction of the euro . '
We would like to point out in this connection that in our view there are at least three Member States which regard themselves as having the right of decision as regards the introduction of the euro .
There are also many more Member States where the preparatory decisions were taken over the heads of the general public but where the people certainly do not want to be faced with a fait accompli before the issue has been decided by a referendum or parliamentary elections .
The proposals for Regulations relating to the introduction of the euro give rise to two kinds of manipulation - one , alas , is all too common while the other is novel and outrageous .
The first comprising using Article 235 - a scandalous provision , allowing the Council to take action even when the Treaty has made no provision for it - as the legal basis for one of the two Regulations , instead of Article 109l ( 4 ) , dealing with the entry into force of Stage three , as would have been natural .
The Commission blithely explains to us that this latter provision cannot be used until Stage three begins , and that in the meantime some other legal basis had to be found .
This reply does not overcome our objections to Article 235 , and it also highlights the unbelievable defects in wording which afflict the monetary part of the Treaty .

If , then , we add this lack of legal basis to those we have already pointed out in connection with the Christodoulou report , regarding the stability programmes , the additions to the excessive deficit procedure , the non-reciprocal sanctions and the tougher procedures , it all adds up to a lot ; and one ends up wondering , as the rapporteur Fernand Herman quite rightly suggested in connection with the name of the single currency , whether it might not be better simply to refer everything back to the national parliaments in an attempt to clarify all these obscurities .
The second kind of manipulation is the attempt to change the name of the single currency from ECU to euro - which is legally equivalent to amending the Treaty - once again through the device of Article 235 .
However , the Court of Justice of the Communities , in its opinion of 28 March 1996 , clearly specified that this article could not be used to bring about ' an amendment to the Treaty outside the procedure laid down for that purpose by the Treaty ' .
The Council and the Commission are thus in a cleft stick , and indeed the consequences of this go beyond the limited scope of what to call the currency , with ramifications extending to the qualification of the future rights of debtors who owe debts in ECUs .
To combat this trickery , I myself , as a French citizen , brought an action for annulment , registered by the Court of Justice on 4 November last year , opposing the change of name of the European currency .
No doubt there will be more and more reactions .
If the Council wants to avoid fearsome difficulties , both in this matter and elsewhere , I once again advise it to go back to the national parliaments .
Then we shall see what they think of it .
As we do not believe that Economic and Monetary Union is a particularly good idea for Europe we are refraining from participation in the vote .
We nevertheless approve of the fact that the report wants fulfilment of the convergence criteria to be interpreted generously .
We would , however , like to point out that besides Denmark and Great Britain having derogations from participation in EMU , Sweden has also declared that the decision on Sweden 's participation in EMU will be taken by the Swedes themselves .
In our view this can most appropriately be done through a referendum .
On the pretext of approving the recommendation of the Council , which must find that , at the end of 1996 , there is still not a majority of Member States complying with the necessary conditions for adopting the single currency , the Metten report provides the European Parliament with an opportunity to pass on another and much more political message : the Council should not confine itself to a ' pure arithmetical application ' of the convergence criteria but should , rather , ' make full use ' of the assessment margins contained in the Treaty .
Well , ultimately those margins are very numerous .
The stated objective of Parliament , then , is to enable a ' majority of Member States ' to become members of the third stage of EMU from 1 January 1999 .
So this House is taking sides in a quarrel which regularly makes front page headlines but is nevertheless a bogus one .
On the one hand , Germany and the strictest administrators argue in favour of a rigorous interpretation of the criteria , at the risk of confining the euro to a restricted geographical region where , ultimately , it will contribute very little except , perhaps , greater rigidity .
On the other hand , the majority of the Member States seem to prefer a more flexible interpretation , allowing a broadly based European currency to be introduced , at the obvious risk ( but do they see it as a risk ? ) that it may stand up less well on the international foreign exchange markets .
As far as we are concerned , this is a bogus controversy , because the criteria at issue - interesting though they may be - only touch the surface of the essential question , the only valid question , and yet a question that is never mentioned by the Treaty : do the countries in question represent an optimum monetary area ?
The key features of such an area are homogeneity of structures , mobility of the production factors and especially of labour , the capacity for inter-regional redistribution , and the attachment of the population to shared values and objectives which result in their reacting consistently when problems arise .
In a word , are the inhabitants of these countries a single people ?
As far as today 's Europe is concerned , the answer is no .
In those circumstances , it is somewhat futile to wrangle endlessly about whether , for example , a deficit which comes ' close to 3 % ' ( according to Article 104c ( 2 ) ) may amount to 3.2 or 3.6 % .
The report refers to the problems of interpreting the convergence criteria and proposes a somewhat more flexible interpretation than the previous one , to enable as many countries as possible to take part in EMU from the beginning .
As we consider EMU to be a project involving considerable political and economic risks which will give rise to social exclusion , unemployment and unrest in society and which should therefore not be implemented , we will not be voting for the report .
With regard to the national commitment and the Edinburgh Agreement , the Danish Social Democrats are naturally unable to endorse this report which is counter to Danish reservations in this area .
Quite simply it violates the right of national selfdetermination when an attempt is made to tell Member States with reservations concerning EMU how they should handle it .
Hoppenstedt report ( A4-0352 / 96 )
We do not support the interpretation of the convergence criterium given in the report as regards the requirement that countries must have participated in the EMS exchange rate mechanism for two years without devaluation .
We believe that the only possible interpretation of Article 109j is that in order to take part in the third stage of the introduction of EMU it is required that Member States should not have devalued against the currency of any other Member State , the normal fluctuation margins being observed .
Nowhere is it written , either in the Treaty or in the accompanying Protocol , that there is any requirement of formal participation in the EMS .
As I said in my explanations of vote regarding the various reports on the single currency that have been presented during this part-session , those who want to go through with this project are now being confronted by a great many difficulties : some legal ( inappropriateness of the legal basis for numerous implementing measures which , however , are necessary ) and some substantive ( precise nature of the monetary system adopted at Maastricht , uniform or differentiated , egalitarian or inegalitarian ) .
If the voice of wisdom counts for anything , these difficulties should result in the matter being referred back to the national parliaments for reconsideration of the provisions on monetary union .
But I suppose the answer to that will be that there is not enough time left between now and January 1998 , at which point the Council will have to select the Member States which will be participating in Stage three from 1 January 1999 onwards .
This assertion seems incorrect .
Articles 109j ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) of the Treaty do not say , as they are often alleged to say , that Stage three will begin automatically on 1 January 1999 if it has not begun on 1 January 1997 .
Instead , they leave an additional margin for manoeuvre : if the Council , meeting in the composition of Heads of State or Government , has not recognized , before 31 December 1996 ( meaning the Dublin Council , therefore ) , that a majority of Member States satisfy the conditions for joining the single currency , and if it has not decided that it is right to embark upon Stage three , then according to paragraph 4 it still has the entire year 1997 to set a date for entry into force .
And it is only if it has done nothing to that effect by 31 December 1997 that the entry into force is automatically set for 1 January 1999 .
We therefore call upon the Dublin Council to show clear-headedness , in the interests of the Union , and to refrain from confirming the date of 1 January 1999 , as was incautiously done by the Florence and Madrid Councils .
Then we would have time to put the real problems before the national parliaments .
Harrison report ( A4-0374 / 96 )
We welcome the initiative in the report to the effect that monetary policy should also be linked to the level of unemployment and not only to price stability .
We are nevertheless opposed to this report , mainly for two reasons : paragraph 5 refers to increasing the Union 's budget .
This is a move towards federalism which we cannot support .
The main reason why we cannot vote for the report , however , is that its thrust throughout is that EMU should form the basis of a common financial policy .
We consider that both monetary policy and financial policy can best be decided at national level .
The report considers that a common monetary policy should be followed by increasingly close coordination of the Member States ' economic policies .
By means of this explanation of vote we should like to point out that this must not involve a common financial policy at European level or the harmonisation of tax policies .
However , monetary policy needs to be balanced by greater coordination in the field of employment policies .
The Swedish employment initiative proposed to the IGC concerning a special chapter in the Treaty was designed precisely to achieve such coordination .
One point which we directly oppose is paragraph 5 , which considers that the battle against unemployment requires the Community budget to be increased .
We believe rather that such measures must wherever possible be financed through redistribution within the budgetary margins which apply today .
The Harrison report which the European Parliament has just adopted on the impact of monetary policies on the real economy provides very , and no doubt deliberately , contradictory indications behind which it is possible to discern a very clear intent : to change the centre of gravity of the monetary union , and indeed of the Union as such , by giving greater powers to the Community institutions , and especially to the European Parliament .
Among the conflicting orientations , I would point out the following :
the dual statement that , in monetary union , the fiscal policies have to be decentralized but that there is a ' need to create the instruments for implementing a proper public spending policy for the Union ' ; -recognizes the justification for the independence of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) , but at the same time calls for that same bank to be made subject to ' democratic accountability ' ; -without questioning the primary tasks of the ECB ( maintenance of price stability , the emergence of various indicators ( investment , wages , unemployment , etc . ) ) , of which account would have to be taken by ' the monetary policies of the Member States during the process of convergence ' .In the time available , I shall not analyse these contradictions in detail - they are clear enough anyway .
On the other hand , I will emphasize that - as is too often the case in European affairs - deliberate confusion is being used to mask the progress of ideas whose extent it is considered inappropriate to unveil too soon .
In the present case , ideas which are still inappropriate are those concerning the political and institutional additions which would be necessary for the functioning of monetary union but were not clearly envisaged in the Maastricht Treaty ; ideas which no one dares mention too openly for fear of compromising the process : a more extensive Community budget ; European coordination of all economic policies ; more severe multilateral monitoring ; strengthening the democratic accountability of the central banks at European level ( something we were told was a heresy at national level ) .
And so we begin to see the uncontrolled consequences of the single currency , which they told us would bring nothing but benefits , though the public is now coming to realize , gradually , the disadvantages and the enormous constraints it involves .
We have voted against the report because we do not share the view that EMU must be achieved according to schedule or that EMU would in any case foster development or employment in the Union .
Nor do we believe that there should be greater coordination of economic policy or that additional resources should be appropriated for the Union 's budget .
We also believe that the proposed structure of the central bank is highly undemocratic and that the proposal in the report that the central bank should report regularly to Parliament will provide nothing more than ' a veneer of democracy ' .
Metten report ( A4-0379 / 96 ) , Christodoulou report ( A4-0371 / 96 ) , Herman report ( A4-0375 / 96 ) , Hoppenstedt report ( A4-0352 / 96 ) , Harrison report ( A4-0374 / 96 )
I have voted against the five reports on EMU .
All of them assume , as if it were self-evident , that Economic and Monetary Union , EMU , will automatically result in improvements in the form of increased employment etc. for the individual citizens of the EU 's Member States .
The policy which has been pursued in order to adjust to EMU since the Maastricht Treaty came into being at the end of 1991 has unfortunately demonstrated the contrary .
In many Member States and in the EU as a whole unemployment has increased and now totals between 18 and 20 million .
In Sweden too unemployment has increased drastically since we began adjusting to the EU and EMU .
When Sweden applied for Membership of the EU in July 1991 unemployment stood at 2.1 percent .
It was said at the time that Membership of the EU would reduce unemployment still further from the low level it stood at then .
This proved not to be the case .
Instead it has risen constantly .
Today unemployment is 10.7 percent or 13-14 percent if one includes those who are employed through various kinds of labour market measures .
Now it is EMU which is to put employment to rights .
If only we will participate in EMU unemployment will fall .
It is not possible to believe in this .
Obviously it is important that countries have a sound economy .
One of the fundamental mistakes with EMU , however , is that fifteen countries in Europe are making cuts in their budgets and thus in the public sector and in employment .
This is being done irrespective of the economic situation and irrespective of the economic policies being pursued or which have been pursued in the respective countries .
A continuation of this policy through EMU , with low inflation and price stability taking precedence over reducing unemployment , will only exacerbate further the situation on the labour market .
EMU is a highly centralised project which moves decision-making powers from the individual Member States ' democratic assemblies to bank directors in the central bank in Frankfurt who cannot be dismissed and who are immune to scrutiny and democratic influences .
There is an obvious risk , as the reports - the Hoppenstedt report for example - demonstrate , that financial and tax policies will also be harmonised and with them the size and structure of the public sector .
Decisions on such matters will then be taken by the central bank in Frankfurt on the basis of the rules in the Maastricht Treaty without there being any possibility of national democratic debate .
Killilea report ( A4-0292 / 96 )
We have here a document which extends the principle of the free provision of services into the field of road passenger transport between the States of the European Union .
This is one of the four fundamental freedoms of the Treaty of Rome , freedoms which we cannot call into question .
So , with reservations , I welcome our rapporteur 's conclusions ; or rather I will enter a social reservation .
We in France are experiencing considerable social unrest on the part of the professional drivers : demands on driving hours , training , minimum wage , etc .
These same demands will be on the agenda for the passenger transport drivers , because our report fails to put sufficient emphasis on the social provisions .
I regret that there was no common approach .
von Wogau recommendations ( A4-0372 / 96 and A4-0373 / 96 )
I am voting for the recommendation that W.F. Duisenberg be appointed President of the EMI .
I have serious misgivings , however , about his nomination because in his previous position and at the hearing in the economic affairs committee he expressed his belief in an anti-inflationary and low taxation policy which I believe will increase unemployment in the Member States of the European Union .
Wijsenbeek report ( A4-0289 / 96 )
As a whole this is a very good report .
I must however register my strong reservations about paragraph 32 , which states that the best way of promoting efficiency is to contract out local public transport to private entrepreneurs .
Studies which have been conducted do not bear out this statement .
On the contrary , transport services operated as public services are just as efficient as private ones .
Wolf report ( A4-0369 / 96 )
We share the view expressed in the report that it is necessary to elaborate a common strategy among the Member States to solve the growing problem of high unemployment and social exclusion and that the relevant objectives should be incorporated in the Treaty .
Such coordination and common efforts to promote employment , solidarity and social cohesion should not , on the other hand , lead in the long term to a common labour market policy or harmonisation of social policies .
We do not share the view that the Member States should be urged to pursue the objectives of Article 2 of the Treaty and to put into practice a high degree of economic convergence .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament vote in favour of Mr Wolf 's report on the Commission 's employment policy initiatives .
We believe the Commission needs the challenge expressed by the report .
The Commission has its eyes constantly fixed on a future in which European employment policy is focused on fighting inflation in the belief that unemployment will then disappear .
We now realise that unemployment needs to be fought actively on all fronts - and this also applies at a European level .
Our goal with respect to European cooperat